baruch.blumberg

American research physician Baruch Blumberg (1925-2011) was co-recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1976 along with D Carleton Gajdusek for their work on the origins and spread of infectious viral diseases that led to the discovery of the hepatitis B virus. Blumberg’s work covered many areas including clinical research, epidemiology, virology, genetics and anthropology.

I was born in 1925 in New York City in Brooklyn and actually born in our own house. In those days it was fashionable to be born at home, so my older sister and I were born at home. My younger brother... the fashion had passed by that time, so he was born in a hospital. I think I can actually remember when he was brought home, although he's only three years younger than I am and I... I went to school there. It was… Brooklyn in those days was quite a, I don't know how to put it, sort of village-like place. It was very residential, you know, tree-lined streets and walked to all the shops and sort of knew the shopkeepers, it... it was quite a you know comfortable, safe-appearing environment. Then I went to elementary school at a Jewish parochial school, where we learned Hebrew and studied the Bible and the other parts of the canon of the... and I was there for elementary school. And it had very high academic standards; essentially all the kids that went on to high school of course, and I’d say that 100% of them went on for university training. I and it was quite a small school; there couldn't have been more than two or three hundred students when I was there, but I know of at least two Nobel laureates who went to that small elementary school. 
[Q] That's amazing.
So we, then I went to high school in Brooklyn initially, at James Madison High School is the name of it, and again that was an extremely high academic standard. It was during the Depression and many of our teachers would have, in other times, taught at university, so quite a few of them had PhDs in math and science. My chemistry teacher in high school had a doctoral degree and had done research and was really a wonderful teacher as well.
And so the second high school I went to when our family moved was at Far Rockaway High School. These were both New York City high schools and it also  was a very high academic standard and there are three Nobel laureates who graduated from that relatively small New York City high school, including Richard Feynman who... there’s a very good book about him called Genius, and there is a chapter about Far Rockaway. And actually I met Richard Feynman, only once, and that was in Far Rockaway and the reason I met him is I had taken his sister to the movies and when I came, when he played a kind of practical joke and he... when I came to take her to the movies, I had been talking about my interest in math and science, she was carrying a textbook on quantum mechanics that he'd given her. So we met briefly then, and I think he was teaching at Cornell at that time. She went on by the way, to be a NASA scientist and up until recently was working at the jet propulsion lab.

Well, the thing that dominated our early, well late childhood I suppose and our teenage, was the Second World War and essentially… and I was 16 I guess when the war started, 15 or 16, 15 when the war in Europe started, but, and they were… and people were being drafted when they were  at that, at 18 - the draft age dropped to 17 later in the war - but there was, and everyone… and everybody was talking about not how they could get out of being in the army because there was sort of essentially no way of doing that, or very few ways of doing it, but everybody was talking about what they were going to do. Well, it turns out that in the navy at that time, if you volunteered, you could sort of pick what you wanted to do, to some extent. And the navy, and also the army, had started a rather remarkable program where they decided that they, that it was going to be a long war; the predictions were that the war would extend at least to 1948, and of course it stopped in ’45 after the nuclear weapons were dropped. But in any case, they had a program where they gave a test, a national test, several hundred, more than a hundred, two hundred high school seniors took the test and if you got above a certain level, you were admitted to this college training program from… then you were destined to go to midshipman school briefly. But they also had a provision if in your first year of college, which I was, then you could, if your grades were a high standard and you were physically okay, you could go in the program.
So when I was 17, I went into the navy and went into this college program and then eventually went to midshipman school, and then I was commissioned as a line officer and I was assigned to several amphibious ships, but I did nothing heroic. And as a matter of fact when I was watching this, the television program that’s on nightly now, Ken Burns' program on the war, I’m... you know, it's sort of all very familiar. I can name all the guns, the airplanes, you know, and  I knew what the divisions… the military divisions where doing. But there is, I think, people like myself who got into, you know, who went into the military and didn't see that kind of action, there's always a funny kind of regret which I still have, you know, it's what, 60 years or so later on. And… but in any case, so, it did have the advantage that I didn't get killed or wounded or traumatized very much, but I must say I… I enjoyed… I liked the navy. I liked going to sea, I liked the equipment, you know, we had, I ended up... I was the executive officer, that's the second in command, of one ship and I was captain of another one for a short time. You just suddenly realize, I've got this big yacht with a bunch of people who, you know, mostly do what I tell them to, and you can order all the equipment you need. You can only go where they tell you, but, and standing top deck watches, that, you know, the way ships are handled, and I think still now, there is an officer on the bridge, that's the… called top watch, if you're in charge. Now the officer on the bridge may be a junior officer, but he's in command during the period that he is on the bridge and there's a… great sense of what’s, well, confidence you know when you… I was… good, I was not a bad navigator and I was pretty good on piloting, you know, that's navigating when you're near shore. I wasn't a very good ship handler, you know, that is bringing a dock along… a ship along dock and so forth, but the kinds of ships that I were on were very difficult to handle. They were very underpowered, single screw in some cases, and that were really hard to— and that's another one of my regrets, by the way, that I was never a very good boat hand. I'm still not, with my own motorboat. So that was, and I had, I made many of my friends that I still have who - well had, they're beginning to die now - who I met when I was in the navy. They were were really a wonderful bunch of friends and very good people.
Well, you know, it’s something very topical now, they're talking about the GI Bill. So, well the GI Bill at that time changed my generation and it, I think, made a big contribution to the prosperity of the country. Because you had your full tuition paid, and you could then pay for your books and you got a stipend and pay for your lodging and all. And it was, so, people who would never have thought of being able to go to university, college, or for their… also you could do job training, did that. It made our generation and that’s… and now they're talking about doing… about doing something similar but nothing like as… as generous, but a lot more generous than there’s been before. I hope that… I hope that passes, it would make a big difference in our economy in years to come.

I had studied physics and math as an undergraduate and I  also had a… a lot of bio… chemistry, not much biochemistry; biochemistry wasn't a major subject in the 1940s. I’d… I had… done physics and then when I… then I went into the navy and had about a year or so when I wasn't doing anything academic, which was pretty nice in a way. Very often in contemporary education, particularly medical education, you know, you get on this road and… and you… don't get off, you know, until the end, and then you don't get off because you're immersed in, you know, the life of medicine and the hospital. But that year being away from it, particularly being at sea some of the time, and… and kind of living a… a non-academic life, I think it was a very reflective time. Because you were busy doing other things and you had occasional times to think about what you were going to do, but at that age, everybody, you know, I’d sort of forgotten what it's like, but I can see my grandchildren now,  beginning to go through this torment, you know, how they're going to spend their lives. What are they, you know, what… are they going to take the right course, do the right thing? So I didn't know quite what to do after I got out of the navy. I… I had this feeling I really wasn't all that good at physics or math, it took me a long time to work it out. I think part of the reason I did it is… is I had an uncle who was a very prominent mathematician, Uncle Henry, and he… he had… his thesis in 1911 was on partial differential equations. Now that's about when partial differential equations begin. But then he… he went on to, his work was in the theory of real numbers and I was amazed recently when I typed his name into the web, and his papers are still referred to, and there's a… there’s a Blumberg space and a Blumberg equation and these are papers in the, you know, 2004, 2005 so although he died 50 years ago, he still sort of lives on in… in his… the papers that he wrote. I had a fair amount of math, and so did my son. I got into about the first three lines and that's about as far as I could go, it was very abstract stuff. But in any case, although he was a kind of model, that turns out that that wasn't what I was supposed to do. So I went through actually a lot of kind of emotional turmoil, I was out of the navy and didn't quite know what, you know, you didn’t quite know where you were going, but I had decided that I would do a year, another year, of graduate work, but this time at Columbia University in math and physics. Then one evening, apparently just out of the blue, I spoke to… my father spoke to me. We, I would say, we… we communicated reasonably well but I was a… I’m a child of the Depression, you know, we… we were, you know, fairly well off back in the 1920s, early '30s, but then the Depression really hit us as… as it did everyone and there was a marked change in the prosperity of the family. And my father had a, you know, as many parents did at that time, had a difficult time just keeping the family intact and feeling safe. I must say, in retrospect, we always... I always felt very secure, but that was probably a delusion. Now he was… he was a lawyer and practiced business law of various kinds, but there was much, much and much... there was less business and less work for him. But it was a great… it was hard, economically difficult and I think that was part of the reason that he was distracted and did not spend as much time, I think, as he might have otherwise. But in any case, I think he knew me pretty well because, as I said, out of the blue he suggested, he said, ‘Well, I think you should go to medical school’. Now I… I really hadn't given much thought to that, or perhaps any, and I said, ‘Okay’. So I applied to medical school which was very difficult to enter at medical school at that time; the… a lot of people coming back from the military, they'd sort of finished high school or college or whatever, and… and they were applying to go medical school. There was a limited number of medical schools, they hadn't increased at all in… in 10 years or so, so there was…it was very competitive. Well, I remember I went to my first interview, you know, still wearing my uniform and, because you… you were allowed to wear uniform for a month or two months after you were discharged, and, you know, I… I had this sense of confidence. So I was admitted to a small medical school upstate New York that was connected with the college I had gone to, to Union College. But then… but then I… I had a friend, a girlfriend actually, who was going to Columbia University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, which was a real kind of research medical school, research university, and she convinced me that I should apply there. So I did, and... but I didn't know anything about medicine, you know, I had… I had only been in… in a hospital once and that was I had some injury and had to get something sewn up. Oh, I had been in the hospital -  I had my appendix out when I was in the navy, that was not an emergency appendectomy. And the… so I had never... I didn't know anything about hospitals, or know… know very much about doctors either. So I got a job as a orderly in the operating room at… at Pennsylvania, no, sorry at Columbia University, at Presbyterian Hospital it was. And that was great fun, I remember it sort of opened up my eyes to what was going on and I kind of liked the excitement of it, you know, there was, surgery is something that's pretty dynamic, something is happening all the time. Surgeons don't just, well they do think of course, but they also have to act, and you know things in the operating’s bustling... operating room is bustling, and people come and they go and the anesthesiologist is nattering away, you know, talking to the surgeons, conversation in the operating rooms is usually, how should I put it, not exciting, you know, usually kind of mundane. But… but I really enjoyed that. Well I finally was admitted... I was possibly the last student admitted to our class, as, you know, I was admitted just a few weeks before term started and started medical school in 1947.

I loved medical school. It was… it was hard work, you know, intense, but first of all I was quite accustomed to hard academic work, because the elementary school that I had gone to had real demands, and we… we went to school like six hours, eight hours a day, I think, seven hours a day; and then the high schools were very intense, and then midshipman school was… was really intense. That's… that’s probably the most intense learning experience I ever had, because in four months we were supposed to master the stuff that they learned at Annapolis in four years, plus it was on…  hands-on experience. So I, well, you know, the hard work wasn't… wasn’t an issue. I found it difficult to focus on things sometimes because my mind was very often wandering to other stuff, but I… but I enjoyed it and I did… I did, you know pretty well in medical school: top third maybe, top quarter possibly. In a… in a medical school there are some really bright cats, very smart bunch and a good part of my class went into academic medicine: places like Columbia University, Yale, Harvard, Western Reserve, New York University. They, at that time, they supplied a very large percentage of the educators to the newly expanding medical school and to newly formed medical schools, so that was a… that was a rich experience. Then I… then you have to have a house staff training and I elected to have my two years of my house staff training at… at Bellevue Hospital in New York City. Now again, that is one bustling place. I… I remember when I was there, some of the people, you know,  sort of old… old boys or pupils that had been there in the past, would come back and were sitting around telling about what a wonderful experience it was, and I couldn't understand what they were talking about! Because we worked, I mean, the… when you worked… when you worked half day, that was 12 hours, you know, a full day was 24 hours, and that often meant that you were actually awake and doing things for 24 hours. Not a great idea. But there weren't, if we didn't do it, you know, if the doctors weren't there, there… there wouldn't have been anybody in a sense, because the city wasn't, they didn't have the funds to hire many more physicians. So it was a… it was a pretty intense experience, but I liked it. We had… we had great kind of morale. Our hospital was never closed, even if all the beds, all the official beds were filled, we were required to take any sick person in the City of New York who showed… who showed up there. We would actually put beds in the hallways. We had in some cases, I'm… I’m not even sure I believe this,  I think we had double-decker beds! But it was… it was always very crowded, very active, and you had a great deal of responsibility. And very often if there was a case  came in that was pretty desperate, and if you decided that you were going to make that your case and take the responsibility for it, you very often had to do… you had to do all the blood tests, we had to cross-match the blood for transfusions, we… we had to take the patients down to X-ray to be… to be X-rayed, we had to do the… the blood work in the morning, do the blood counts and all that. It was… it was an intense amount of work, but it was… it was a very good experience. And one of the things I learned in, both in medical school and… and during this house staff training, was that… was history taking. That was… that was — about 75 -- 80 percent of a medical diagnosis is based on a history; you can… a good part of the time you can make a decision based on what to do next, based on the history. And we were drilled into that. In a funny way I still use that a lot. You know if I  meet somebody casually, I… I find myself slipping into this history-taking format, you know, I kind of get a chronological picture about, you know, about what they've done and… and people of course, are always interested in talking about themselves, this interview being a good example of that. So that was… that was, and then the other thing you learned in medical school, in medicine, that I think’s been very valuable, and that is that you… you can make decisions with incomplete knowledge. You never know everything and you have to know when you’ve had enough knowledge to do something. Because medicine is… is an applied science, you know, it's an applied science, an applied art, and there has to be action, you can't just think about something. After you've thought about something, you actually have to do something. Even if the decision is, you say, okay we're not going to do anything now, that's a decision. But… so thought is always followed… is always followed by action.

There was an interesting kind of thought process that I… that I learned in the navy as well, that I… that I found very… I found very valuable, particularly when I was doing fieldwork later on. In… in the military there is… there’s a lot of built-in redundancy. For example, when you are on the bridge and you have to communicate with the helmsman and, well there were like five methods, even in those primitive 50 years ago, days of… 50… much more primitive equipment: you had a speaking tube, you had a sound-powered telephone, you had an actual electric telephone, you had an engine room telegraph, you had a courier you could send somebody down to give messages, so there were all these kinds of standby things. And also there was a lot of planning beforehand. So if you, for example, if you had were going to go someplace you had to plot the route; you had a pretty good idea where you were going, it wasn't ad hoc, you know, and you… you would also think of alternatives. So you would have plan A, plan B, plan C, with a automatic transition. You know if things didn't go on plan A, plan B was all ready. Now one thing I learned later on is making plans is extremely important. Following the plans is much less important. You always... this wasn't quite true when you were handling a ship, but… but it is true with in other endeavors. You want to have a really well formulated, well designed plan, but know you're not going to follow it exactly. And if opportunities come up, things that you could possibly, not possibly have anticipated at the start, you have to be ready to diverge from the plan. By the way, one of the problems with things like, you know, tactical planning and business plans, they have a lot of… they have real inherent disadvantages because that means that if something, an opportunity arises, and you've got a business plan or… or, you know, organizational plan, you say, oh no, we can't do that because we have a plan. And it's… it’s very good to kind of have plans with the expectation you're not going to follow them. And that… that certainly was very helpful in my medical, in my scientific research. We… we had very rigorous plan formulation, but we knew darned well we weren't going to follow it. When something came up we hadn't anticipated, we sort of expected that in a sense. But planning was essential.

I’d liked going to sea, you know, enjoyed the… the small amount I had in the navy, and I was… I was pretty good on the ship, not great, but not bad either. Well, the first year I was at medical school, I met a… a Dutch doctor who had… had spent the war in Indonesia, in what was then the Netherlands's East Indies and then in Holland he was a, you might even call him a romantic figure. He'd been captured during the German invasion of the Netherlands, escaped from the train that was taking him to a POW camp, it was bombed and he escaped, went back, joined the underground; was a main… he was a radio amateur and he was sending messages to the British. He was at the… the unsuccessful paratroop landing at Arnhem, you know. He… there was the advance through Holland and… and Belgium, they wanted to kind of skip ahead of the frontline and they dropped paratroopers in a… in a place called Arnhem in Holland and… and they were decimated. Well, my friend went there, cared for the British wounded and was… wasn't captured by the Germans. So he was a really interesting man. Then he went back in the army and he was… he was in the… fighting in Indonesia during this really chaotic period. But in any case, he had a big sailing yacht in… in Holland. It was in Amsterdam. I think it belonged to his wife actually, and he wanted to sail it to the United States. They were going to emmigrate and he wanted to bring this ocean-going racer actually to the United States. So he advertised that, or he already told some of the students, he said if you want to help me crew the ship back across the Atlantic, you're welcome. So I decided I would do that without explaining that to my parents who I knew would be very concerned if I did. So I went over there and we… the ship, the yacht - The Green Lion it was called, Groene Leeuw - was really ill-prepared for an Atlantic trip, we subsequently learned. It had been, during the war it had been holed up some place, they tried to hide it from the Germans, and it really wasn't in great repair. But in any case, we started off, sprung a leak sailing from Amsterdam to Rotterdam, that was nearly the end of the trip, we were bloody awash by the time we got into Rotterdam. Well, we… that was patched up and then we started off across the English Channel. It took us five days to cross the Channel, because, you know, what happens in the Channel sometimes, particularly in the summer, you get… you get south-west winds and you are literally beating against them the whole way. So… it was… then we got into the Bay of Biscay, and we were beset by calms for 10 days, it took us 10 days to get there, usually you can sail across there in a couple of days, you know. Then we get to… to Galicia, you know, Northern Spain, and - it's the piece just before Portugal - and we put into a little small port there to wait for some weather, you know, so we could sail. And we did get it. We… we took off into the teeth of a really big storm.

Now, you tend to exaggerate these things, but the winds, you know, there are ways you can calculate wind speed by the nature of the waves and so forth, and you get blown spume. That means the tops of the waves are blowing free. Well that’s… that is a storm, you know, that would be 55 miles an hour or something, that's a lot of wind, and there… and there were huge waves. Now again, you exaggerate, but I think those… they were 30-foot waves, 30, 35-foot waves. Well, the ship wasn't in an awfully good shape, sadly, and… and we were running before it. You know when you get caught in a big storm, you have to make a decision: are you going to heave-to, that is face into the wind and the weather, you know, so you're perpendicular to the waves, throw out, you can throw out a sea anchor, a kind of a canvas that you… that you can…  you are sort of held behind that, you can do that, or you can run before it. That is, put on a small amount of sail and then… and then run ahead of it, keep ahead of the waves and the wind. But you have to decide you’re going to do one or the other, because it's very hard to change your mind once you've… once you’ve, well it's hard if you're running before it, it's hard to heave-to if it's really… so we decided to run before it. Well, that was about three, four, five days, I think the storm lasted about a week, and we ran before this for several days. Well that meant you're sitting at the tiller and... you have a very small freeboard, there's only, you know, a couple of feet, two feet, three, maybe three feet, above the waterline and you're really... you're close to the elements there and you look over your shoulder and you see this freaking enormous wall of water, and the question is… is… are you going to… is the rear stern going to rise up above it, you know, or, and then you have to… you have to kind of calculate, so you… you don't get caught between the waves. That was, I mean, but  it was a real... I mean I found it exhilarating and strangely… I'm… I’m a fairly fearful guy, but I didn't find that, at the time, I didn't find it so fearful, partly because we were so involved, you know, in keeping the ship afloat. Well, I was... and we… we only had a crew of five or six and you had to have two persons on a watch, so that meant you had, ordinarily on… at sea you do four on, eight off, so you can sleep for eight hours, but we had to do four on and four off. Now you can't maintain that for a very long time, you know, you never really get to sleep. I was down below and I hear a bunch of screaming and yelling on deck and I had been through this before, and I didn't move out of bed until somebody came and called me. They said, ‘Come on board, we've got problems, come on deck’. And sure enough, the tiller had broken free from the rudder and we had to jury-rig, one of my crewmates was sitting on it, you know, to try to keep it intact. Well, fortunately by that time the storm had abated a little bit. We had lost two of our sails, we had to take them down and put up another, and we… we didn't come back, we went off on… on broad reach and sailed into Portugal, into Lisbon. It was 200 plus miles away so it took us... and we were going fast, but it took a day plus, that's… that’s fast going. You know, going more than 100 miles in a day is… is a lot in a sailing ship. And suddenly we were behind, we'd come behind the breakwater in… at the opening of the… the Tagus River — sunny, calm, no waves — it was like going to heaven, you know. And then of course, this was in 1947, shortly after the war, and Portugal hadn't been in the war so it was still a kind of luxurious place. Well we landed after having not slept for an awful long time, and… and we… we tied up at a kind of resort right near the mouth of the… well, all these ships, you know, these… these women in bathing suits, were coming… swimming out and coming out in boats, and they invited us to shore and so we had like two or three days of parties!  Getting off the ship. Oh, I'm digressing badly. But that was a… that was a rich experience. And I did, I used to crew, I suppose you’d call it semi-professionally, you know, people, when I was in medical school, they had these big sailing ships and they very often, had one paid captain and if they wanted to go on a cruise they’d try and get somebody to come and help, because they, you know, wanted to have a crew of four or five people. So I would... I did that a fair amount.
 

So we were kind of, quotation marks ‘shipwrecked’ and  we sailed into Lisbon and I had to return, and it was going to be months before they got back, and I’d miss the next year of medical school, so I… I went ashore. However, I didn't have a visa, now I had a passport, but I didn't have… I didn’t have my seaman's papers, and Portugal was a closed place then. They had a very strict dictatorship, there was strict control on immigration, and very little movement and there was no tourism. So I get ashore and I stayed with a friend I'd made there for a while, I had enough money, I had about 30, 40 dollars left, so I got a room at a pensione for a dollar a day, that was… you had a room and three meals including wine and an evening snack as well, and so I… sort of figured out what to do next. So I went to the American consulate and I told them that I had landed, I had a passport, but I didn't have a visa. He said, ‘You know, that's a problem, we've got a guy in jail now, who is there under the same circumstances, and I… we're trying to get him out of jail, and I go and bring him cigarettes every so often and see him’.  I said, ‘I don't smoke’. So, I went to a shipping agent and I said, ‘Look, I’d  like to ship out, you know, on an American ship’. And the ship… you know, it's amazing how people will sort of extend themselves for no, I mean, no possible gain to themselves, you know. The Portuguese were really, I mean, they were a delightful, nice bunch. And this fellow really put himself…  he said, ‘Okay, there's an… there’s an American export line ship coming in… in about a month, about three weeks or a month, three weeks maybe, and they always… they always lose somebody, particularly in Seville, a lot of the guys just get off there. So why don't you kind of hang out, try not to get arrested, you know, by the police and we'll see if we can book you on that’. So I used to get up in the morning, you know, and try and get out of town or go somewhere place, you know, where I would be inconspicuous, so I would take a tram, I saw a lot of Lisbon, a lot of the environs because you can take the public transport to most places. But I did get into trouble. I was on a… on a tram and suddenly a whole bunch of people started screaming and grabbed hold of me and pulled me off the tram and… and take me to the police. Well, apparently one of the riders had his wallet stolen and I was… I was kind of disreputable looking, I sort of, you know you don't wear shorts in port... I still had shorts on, I had a beard and had hair that was sort of uncombed, I really didn't look all that savory. So I get hauled into the police station, roughly, and I didn't speak Portuguese but I spoke, my French was better in those days. So I said, ‘I insist on seeing the Chief of Police’, so they brought me in to see him. He was a… I mean, pleasant, literate, spoke French very well, and I said, you know,  ‘I’m very disturbed that I’ve been brought in this way and I would like to be released, and if you wouldn't mind, an apology’. In any case, so he was very good about it, I didn't have the wallet. I explained to him who I was and so I, but that… fortunately I did not have my passport with me, because if he had seen that, he would have seen that I didn't have a visa. Well, finally the ship came in, and the captain was a really difficult, nasty sort of fellow and he wouldn't really be very helpful, but this shipping agent… you have to sign on in front of an American consul when you sign on an American ship in a foreign port, well, the consul wouldn't go to the ship, you know, he wouldn't do that. So the shipping agent got the… got the ship's documents, which he shouldn't have done, and we took it to the consul and, you know, I got signed on. And I said, ‘Well, how come I was able to…’ sort of, I spoke to the consul, to our consul later, he said you know, ‘I was having a lot of trouble getting your presence here kind of validated, but people couldn't quite understand your name’, you know, but the American ambassador in Lisbon at that time was a man named Herman Baruch, B-A-R-U-C-H. Now he was the older brother of Bernard Baruch. Bernard Baruch was a very famous… he was in finance,  they founded Baruch Brothers, which doesn't exist any more, and he was a kind of an advisor of presidents. So… so the international police, you know, there was an enquiry about my status, and he said, ‘Well how do you spell this guy's name?’ And he says, ‘Well it's spelled B-A-R-U-C-H, the same as the ambassador's’, who was a kind of well known figure, so he said, ‘Ah, the son of the ambassador. We'll take care of this immediately’. So after I got back home, you know, I wrote to Bernard Baruch and told him about it and he wrote back and he introduced me to his brother, Herman. And I went… I went to see him. He lived in this enormous estate out in the island, it’s one of these things where you drive a quarter of a mile before you get to the eight-car garage. And he tried to interest me in going down to Brazil to work on electric eels, because he had the feeling that electricity would rejuvenate, he was in his 70s and had a very young wife, and he was looking for some sort of elixir! I decided not to do that.

His name was Reijnders, Hendrick Reijnders. He did, he influenced me a lot. I'm glad you asked that question. I remember once we... we pulled into... to Vigo and... and there had been a fairly big storm but not as much as when we... Vigo is... is a town in Galicia, city actually, Galicia is just north of Portugal, in... in Spain, in Galicia in Spain, and there was another British ship there on some kind of mysterious sailing trip, and they’d lost the mast in the same storm. And one of the crew, the wife of the owner of the ship, came over to talk to Henry and she said, ‘Should I go on, should we continue on?’ They were going... on their way to Mombasa, East Africa. So Henry says, ‘Press on, always press on’. So he had this thing, if you have a goal, you don't stop. You just... you just keep going. He was an indomitable fellow and I think that saw him through all the adventures he'd had in early life and he was... he was a very good leader. I mean, he was, he led by screaming and yelling and cursing. I was the only non-Dutch speaking guy on board and the only American, so that I... it... was a target of a certain amount of insults, based on that. It was a funny crew, there was a guy, Henry was in the underground and one of the other crew had been a policeman who had, you know, was jobless, and he had a kind of... his wife was on board as well, and there was a lot of friction but nothing serious happened until there was a knifing later on. Nobody got seriously hurt. In any case, so that, yes, I did... I did learn a lot about... and the... and the idea of, you know, if you've got a goal, you stick with it. There are going to be lots of hazards but of course it's important if you have a worthwhile goal. But when you are on a ship, the goal’s to get, you know, to land some place, to get some... some place. Yeah he did. I saw him... I saw him and, you know, we kept in touch for years afterwards too.

Another important experience I had in medical school was, I had always, I had never been in the tropics, and I... the literal of my imagination, you know, the coastline of my imagination, the shore was based on all the books that I read. I'm a... I’m a sort of a son of the Carnegie Library system, I used to, you know, go in, withdraw six books, and come back a week later and get another six, and that's what many of my friends did too. So I read a lot and then I... I went to the movies, and I was a theatre usher, that meant I saw... they used to have theatre ushers, you know, people who took you to your seat. And I’d  see the same movie, you know, ten, fifteen times, I could recite the whole text, you know, the whole script. But the movies of that period were very kind of moral, very uplifting, very, you know, they were filled with adventure, discovery and... and the good guys were really good guys, you know. There was a much... there’s a much different ethical or moral tone, you know, to the contemp... where you have heroes who are not righteous, you know, in a lot of ways. So I wanted...  I’d read a lot of books about the... about the tropics and... and about explorations, I'd read a lot of books on travel exploration and decided that I'd like to go and work in the tropics, so I spoke to our professor of parasitology there; we had a very good course in tropical medicine. When I went to medical school many of our teachers had been in the military and a lot of them had been in the South Pacific, some in Africa, and they knew a lot about tropical medicine. So we had a very good course on that and a pretty good course on public health. So I asked him if he had some suggestions and he right way said, ‘Well, I have been consulting on the treatment of... of filariasis in... in Suriname’. Now Suriname is a... is a country in northern South America; it's between Guyana and French Guiana and at that time is a Dutch colony in 19... that would have been 1949 or thereabouts. And there was a... it was one of the main suppliers of bauxite ore during the war and actually in... in '49 it was a major supplier as well. They had a big open-pit mine in several locations, but the one that I went to was in a place called Moengo, M-O-E-N-G-O,  and that was on the Cottica River so it... it was about a day's journey by... by launch. They had this beautiful, you know, motor launch with a canopy, with fringe on it, you know,  a fairly good-sized ship. There were no roads, there were no railroads, and there was no airstrip and there were no helicopters in... in those days, so if you wanted to get there, you either paddled in a canoe, or went on one of these launches. But it was also an ocean-going port; they can take 7000 ton war boats right up a hundred plus miles up the Cottica River. So I worked there for about... for two months...  about two months, three months maybe, and it was a... it was a great experience. First of all, I mean, it was... it was high bush, it was impenetrable jungle. There were very few walking paths actually and if you did, you always, you know, you had to cut... carry a machete and cut your way through, or better yet, have somebody else with a machete. It was... they have... they have these horrendous poisonous snakes, they have big ones like anacondas, you know, and boa constrictors, pythons, big... and crocodiles, caimans.
 

So we worked there and the plan was we were going to do public health surveys. So we did a survey of intestinal bacteria and amoebae and so forth, and then we did a study of filariasis, that's Wuchereria bancrofti and that causes elephantiasis, the disease elephantiasis, very common in Suriname, still is. And there’d just been... there wasn’t a... there was a kind of preventative, hetrazine, that you could use to treat the carrier state. Now there’s some interesting features. There is a carrier state for filariasis, and a very large percentage of the population actually carry the microfilaria, that are part of their kind of reproductive process and... and some of these people go on to get diseased, but not all and it's usually caused by the lodging of the... of these filaria, I mean they are just submicroscopic, in the lymph nodes and you get terrible swelling of the legs and of the genitalia sometime and it... it's pretty...  pretty disfiguring and scary. It’s still very common by the way. So we did a survey there - the first survey that had ever been done - and then we did a... a trip down into the interior of the country, down one of these rivers. And that was really exciting. Before we went, we... we had to get a... a canoe, you know. Now the canoes they have there are made from a single log and they’re...   there they’re called corrials, and there are similar names elsewhere, and so we went down and picked out the log that would be big enough and we came back four or five weeks later, three weeks later, and they'd dug it out. And you put water in it and put rocks, hot rocks and then you can push it out and you can bend it, you put some boards alongside to increase, you know, the waterline, the free board, and we had... we had a crew of four paddlers, we had an outboard motor we could use in the flat parts and then there was myself and a classmate of mine who joined me later, and... Jack McGiff and then the doctor there, was... his name was Guicherit, he was a Suriname-trained physician, trained in the sort of Dutch school, a very able guy. He was the only doctor in the hospital. So we became really good friends as you might imagine and then we paddled up the... up the river. And you have to go through, there are big rapids there, there's a kind of a, what's the right term? A... well there are... all the north-south flowing rivers have an... you have to go over an escarpment, so it's pretty fast-flowing and pretty rocky, and the only people who could negotiate those rapids were the boatmen who were... who were Djukas, D-J-U-K-A-S, so Djukas were the descendants of rebelled slaves. And there was a... there were big sugar plantations in Suriname that go back to the 17th century. As a matter of fact, some of the earliest sugar growing in the... in the Americas started in Suriname. And a lot of, you know, colonists came there and they set up these plantations and imported slaves. They initially tried to use the Indians, the local South American Indians, but they, many of them died, of course. And then they imported large numbers of slaves from Africa, and... but they had a slave rebellion - the first successful, it was a successful one. You know, during the slave period, in the colonial period in the United States and elsewhere, there was always this fear of slave rebellions, and the Suriname slave rebellion was always... it entered into political discussions in the United States by the way, at the time of the writing of the Constitution... all these issues about banning slave trade, which they didn't do, banning slavery, which didn't happen and the insurrection in Suriname, and of course the one in Haiti, made a big impact. But, so these Djukas had... had won the war against the Dutch and against the mercenaries the Dutch had hired, and they had kingdoms. There were five kingdoms. So we were going down to the capital of the Paramaccans and we... it took us four or five days to go through the rapids and... and get up to this capital city of Langatabbetje, which means Long Island, and had a big powwow with them, I mean, it’s one of many I've had since then. You’d...you’d have a kind of an appointment to get there, you know, sometime, you're sort of [unclear] and an hour or two after that, and everybody is sitting on stools and they offer something to drink and it ends up long conversation, and they... finally, you know, they... we had an agreement that we would be able to collect blood from them. And we provided... and we set up a clinic and so on, they had never seen a... a western doctor. We did a lot of teeth pulling by the way; that was one of the major problems there, they had terrible abscessed teeth and that was really bad news.

What I learned there, what was really impressive was how differently people responded to... to exposure to disease. So, we were studying filariasis, both there and back in the main town, in Moengo. And we found a big difference in the prevalence of the filaria in the... in the blood, this... this asymptomatic carrier state, between the people of African descent, who had come as slaves and... and moved into the... into the towns, and then the Indonesians, the people from what was... from Java mostly, and also there was a few Chinese, very few, and four or five... there were only about half a dozen Europeans in the community. And that really sort of... it bore... it bore a strange similarity to the hepatitis business, where you had this carrier state, big differences dependent on, you know, huge geographic differences and in this little town of Moengo we had people living in more or less the same environment but came from totally different ethnic backgrounds and maintained a lot of their ethnic practices, food and all that. So it was a really kind of test tube. But that... that hit me, this idea that people, that were such big differences in response. And even within a population, you know, some of them got infected and others didn't. So that was a... that was... that got into the back part of my mind someplace and...
[Q] And how did the difference manifest, you know, the blood samples?
The difference was obvious from the per cent of people of African origin who were carriers, compared to those of Indonesian or Chinese or White or European. And so there would be a difference between 15% and 2%, of multi, you know, many-fold differences and they were living in the same place, mind you. They had difference practices, but they lived in company... in company accommodation and they all had medical exams before they came up, they...all their entire medical care was provided, so it was something we could study, and they were very co-operative, very helpful bunch. So that was, that really impressed me.

I sort of took in viscerally this idea of variation and the... and again, you know, it... it was the kind of, it’s not just this experiment, but the vast variety that you see in a tropical jungle and... and you may recall, you know,  in... in the last paragraph of The Origin of Species, Darwin speaks of ‘the tangled bank’. He uses that as a kind of metaphor. Now, what he was referring to was what a sunken road in... in England, you know, but when you look at it, there are the kind of the roots and leaves and weeds and... and insects and the occasional animal, everything all kind of scurrying around, moving in with each other, and the idea of the... of the complexity, the interacting, interweaving complexity, each dependant on the... on the other, is... is... it's a sort of an anti-reductionist statement in a big way, you know, you have to look at the whole kind of picture. Well, that...  the... in the tropics, things get written in a big bold way and things happen dramatically and this kind of variation where you, you know, in a plot, and... and probably in the jungle there in Suriname, there would be several thousand species of, you know,  of insects and plants and grasses, trees and probably, you know, a couple of hundred trees, species of trees in a square mile. So that, I think, had a... had a major impression. Now this was reinforced later on when I did my hospital training at... at Bellevue Hospital, because again, we... we could see the variation in disease susceptibility and response to treatment in this very heterogeneous population in New York. We, in... in those days, in the 19... it would have been 1951, tuberculosis was still a very serious disease and... and widespread. The... the new antibiotics hadn't yet been introduced and we had a large acute tuberculosis ward there. There... there were big differences in susceptibility. Some populations, some ethnic groups, were highly susceptible; if they came in, you knew they were going to have a hard time with treatment. Whereas others were less common, less... they... not proportionate to their numbers in the population, and they... you could expect they were going to respond well to treatment. So again, this... this concept of variation and how people are different from each other. And also the... the effect of fieldwork is you see things in context. They’re not... it's not a, you know, you get a container from the drug supplier, you know, from the laboratory supply company and work on that for the next few years, you know, it’s ... and you were interested in the details, well now the molecular biology. In a funny way you forget everything else that ever, you know, the... the model of that is you take... take a mouse, grind it up, extract the DNA, throw away the rest of the mouse and then expect to know everything about the mouse from the DNA. It's not going to work. That's not the way to do it.
 

I was married while in my last part of my hospital training. I didn't even think of getting married prior to that because the time that I spent was... would have been unfair, I think to... I think unwise to get married. But I had met Jean; she worked at Bellevue, in a laboratory there, in a research lab, and we met and we had sort of a Bellevue romance, you know, I’d take her out to dinner at the... at the hospital cafeteria. She was sort of shocked to learn later on that during my internship and residency, I actually saved money, you know. The thought was I should have spent more of it on her, probably true. But I was a... a Depression baby. So, but then we... we both thought we’d...  I wanted to do more, I pretty much knew by that time that I wanted to do research, clinical research, I... I think was always the... once you've had that experience of medicine, the possibilities of application are so much in your mind, you know. So I went to... we decided we'd do laboratory research. Well, I did some research the last year or so of my hospital training and I worked with Dr Karl Meyer who was... who was a pioneer in... in the study of long-chain polysaccharides actually, and he... he did much of the early work on hyaluronic acid and chondroitin sulfate - I think he named that - and he was a brilliant chemist, and also I did clinical work in arthritis with Charles Ragan who was a Professor of Medicine at Columbia. And then I wanted to continue the work on the hyaluronic acid and one of the great experts in the field that was pretty limited, there weren't a lot of people working in it, was Alexander Ogston, Sandy Ogston, who was at Oxford in the Department of Biochemistry. Well, that kind of suited our plans. We thought after our first year of marriage in New York, which was fun, you know, we used to walk, go all over the city; it was an exciting place in those days, still is, and... so I wrote to him and he invited me to come to his lab. But when we got there, he suggested, you know, while I was there I should go towards a degree, the equivalent of a PhD degree, a DPhil, so I kind of reoriented the research to make it that kind of an academic exercise. And I worked on hyaluronic acid. Now that was the exact opposite you might say of... of this kind of fieldwork that I’d... that I had enjoyed so much.

We went down to the slaughterhouse in Oxford - they had one then - and we extracted joint fluid from a... a steer about to be made edible, and I worked on that for the next two years, two plus years and I ended up with... you know, most of the things I did... didn't consume a lot of the material, it was non-destructive, you know, optical techniques. So, you start off with a few cc of this icy clear liquid and you end up with maybe, you know, half a cc, and a bunch of numbers, but nothing much has happened to the... to the clear fluid itself. But nevertheless, that was a really good experience and one of the... one of the things I learned from... it was... it was a big contribution to my understanding of the science. First of all, Sandy had this idea that you do science in a way for its own sake. He was very interested in applications and had a very practical turn of mind. But he also had an appreciation for this, I... I think it's a kind of British style, in how you go about it. And also this idea of a lot of thinking before you design an experiment and a lot of talk about scientific process. Much of it wasn't formal in any sense, but it kind of... it kind of was part of the atmosphere in the lab and then kind of an attachment to the past in biology, you know, the big debate between Wilberforce and Darwin took place at the university museum right there. Polymorphisms, which I became interested in when I was there, sort of started, the contemporary view and looking at polymorphic phenotypes in those days, began in the Department of... or in a way began, in the Department of Zoology there, by Dr... with Dr Ford, Professor Ford.
But in any case, so I worked on this hyaluronic acid stuff for a long time and the thesis worked out pretty well. But one of the things that I learned is... is that enzymes, proteins and then subsequently genes, have multiple functions and they're just not the one that it was named after. There’s... there’s a funny phenomenon, you know, you have an enzyme, and you named after its substrate, which turns out to be the first substrate you work on, it turns out it's not the only one. And the... and the study that I was doing was based on the notion that if we used papain that it would only attack protein in this carbohydrate protein molecule and the issue was, was the protein essential for the physical characteristics, the non-linear viscosity and so forth of the hyaluronic acid protein complex? So we used papain and the argument was, okay, you take papain, get rid of the protein and see what happens. Well, what happens is it changes its physical characteristics considerably. Later, it was determined that papain actually has an affect on the carbohydrate chain as well, and that was, how shall I put it, negated the argument for the experiment. Well, it turns out despite the fact that it could have attacked the... the  carbohydrate, it did not. And the protein is essential for the... but now it's a... it’s a big field, hyaluronic acid, it's a major medication.

Towards the end of the time I was at Oxford, I met Tony Allison, Anthony C Allison, who was a... a research fellow at the Department of Biochemistry, also a 1925-er, born in the same year as I,  totally different background than I. He grew up in... grew up in the... in the White Highlands, so called, of... of Kenya during the colonial... his father was a planter and he'd raised in Africa and in a funny way, always thought of himself as an African, as many white-born Africans are. And he... but in any case, Tony had done a lot of fieldwork in natural history when he was younger. He’d seriously thought of becoming a lepidopterist and he had done a lot of important collecting in... in Kenya. But then he went to medical school in the Witwatersrand, that's the university in... in Johannesburg, and then came to Oxford to do a PhD, DPhil degree and that's when I... I met him, shortly afterwards. Well, he introduced me to the concept of polymorphisms, and polymorphisms are, as you know, the... the study of variation in the products of a gene, in which you can have multiple alleles at the same locus, which may differ by a single amino acid, all very small differences, but they have major functional differences based on that. And also the notion that these... if these alleles, you know,why do these alleles exist in the population, why isn't everybody the same? Again, getting back to this idea of variation, and the, I suppose the overall answer, is you have to make compromises. If you can  arrive at a kind of perfect genome, everybody would be the same, and it's exactly the opposite, because anything that's... that’s perfect is by definition not perfect, because that means it's not ready for the next change in the environment. So variation, lack of perfection, is the kind of hallmark of successful, of all species, in a sense, somehow more than others. Well, that was... that was kind of theoretical but what Tony was interested in, and what I became interested in was the relation of these polymorphisms to disease. And Tony Allison had done some of the very early epidemiologic studies and also lab studies on the relation of the heterozygote form of sickle cell; that is if you have one normal adult hemoglobin gene and one sickle cell gene, that protected you in a certain period of childhood against fatal infection with falciparum malaria, and as a consequence, the polymorphism was retained in the population. So that general principle: if you have that kind of variation, there has to be advantages and disadvantages, and I've carried that concept through to my understanding of viruses. You know, any virus, like hepatitis B, that infects a third of the world's population, a third of the people in the world have been infected with it, and it's lasted since pre-human times, almost certainly because there are similar viruses in lower species, of the species; it's got to have some advantages, it's got to have some non-pathological effects and actually I’ve, you know, you don’t... people tend, you know, we’re medical microbiologists, right? We don't think of positive effects. Microbiology started off with disease, so we’ve got a kind of dim view of what bacteria do, and viruses.

Tony and I, it really got me interested in that, and just about that time, Oliver Smithies had developed the... the gel method of electrophoresis and it started off with using potato starch to make the gel. Well, Oliver was a student of Sandy Ogston's. He was... he’s got to have been Sandy's most brilliant student; the man is a theoretical biochemist, a... a... very good with his hands. We had one of... water... we had a constant temperature bath that he had invented, an amazing piece of machinery. He was... he's a... an award-winning pilot, you know, he's flown across the Atlantic, I think, solo, you know, several times and has... amazing fellow. In any case, Sandy had been there before me, not Sandy, Oliver Smithies, and he had invested this starch gel technique and Tony and I were among the first people to use it. And of course they went onto cyanagum gels and other kinds of gels subsequently. But that's the whole kind of whole basis of these gels that you look at in molecular biology now. But in those days, of course, you couldn't look at the genes, but you could look at the phenotypes. So we decided on a kind of program of... of looking at variation, but not variation in general, but variation that you could measure quite accurately and that would be in serum protein phenotypes and other things in the urine and other characteristics too, but primarily looking at these phenotypes... using this gel technique that had just been introduced. Because you got a lot more variation, a lot more separation with that because the separation was dependent on charge and size, and then as the techniques improved, and you... there were... there were buffers, you can get even much more separation than the then two-dimensional, three, two-dimensional techniques. We started off with a fairly simple plan, and the plan was we were going to go around the world, collect blood specimens from people and look at variations in proteins. We also studied red blood cell antigens; that was... techniques were fairly well established for that. So, the first trip we took was to Spain, to the Basque Country and then the plan was to go to West Africa. And...  and then I did... so my last year in graduate school, I took off for... for... it must have been a month or six weeks, and went to Nigeria. No, mind you, first of all, my last year as a graduate student, Sandy let me go on this, he knew I was interested, our daughter had just been born, right, so that started a rather bad pattern of going away at crucial times, which my wife supported - I think with difficulty, but did.

Nigeria was still a colony. It... unfortunately, you know, there has been a lot of unrest in... in the last what, 20, 30 years, and they were kind of getting ready for independence then, but the actual transition from the colonial period to independence was... was fairly smooth, there wasn't much violence, or I think any violence to speak of. But when I was there, it was a pretty, you know, kind of quiet, peaceful place, lots of humor and energy. I mean I was enormously impressed with the people I met there. And, what I did  was go to place to place with a... I had a... I was at the University of Ibadan, at the medical school; it had just started a year or two before I got there. It was a great place, very... they had very high standards, and there’s a lot of well-educated Nigerians - even now, well I shouldn't say even now, but now as well because the universities have continued to grow. And, so I had this long wheelbase landrover, and then they assigned a driver, who had been in the West African Frontier Force in Burma, that was the... he was in the Nigeria Regiment. He was a competent driver, but kind of crusty guy. And then I had a student who was sort of my assistant, and then before we took off on this trip, we were going to go up north from Ibadan, my... there was a kind of a... a servant in the... in the room where I was staying in the university, he was a... he was a butler or a valet. So, he had family up north and he really wanted to go, so I said, ‘Okay, you can come too’, and I said, ‘Well you don't have to worry about looking after my clothes, but you know, we can have, you know, there’s a lot to do’. So the day we were ready to go he shows up, and then he... and then his brother decided to come too, and he had a kid. So the back of the... I mean, there was this mass of people every place I went. And every... every time we'd go somewhere, you know, the... the truck would break down out in the middle of the bush someplace and you’d sort of hang around for a while and a bunch of people would sort of come out and give you a hand, and one person in my party was related to somebody, so we knew we’d go and get something to eat and come back and the car would be fixed.
Well,  it was a... it was... we travelled the north-south length of Nigeria, collected bloods in different parts of the country, and did some medical surveys and we ended up in the far north, in Kano actually, where I was at the Trypanosomiasis Research Station in a place called Vom which is up in the... in the... there’s a kind of high plateau in northern Nigeria; much of Nigeria is fairly low, and it... was a beautiful part. But again, the people, the human energy there was just great, it was just fun. Going to parties was a... was a big deal, you know. People had a great time, this sort of, I  don’t know if you’d call it informality, but sort of openness, you know. So again, we collected a lot of blood, collected blood from animals, from domestic cattle, which was quite an experience. They had, there were these kind of semi-wild cattle and the herdsman would go out and catch one and put a big rope around its neck and then we had a kind of balloon at the end of a needle and you could throw it like a dart without getting too close to the steer. And, any case, so we got all that stuff and... but you often had to get it back real fast because the red cells were fairly fragile. And I remember once we were in... we had to get the blood back to London and it was going to go on British West African Air... no it was West African Airways it was called, it was associated with what's now British Airways. And I found out where the pilot was staying, what hotel, and I invited him to breakfast and gave him a box of stuff, and I said, ‘Would you mind taking these up to London and a friend of mine will come and pick them up?’ He said, ‘No, fine, no problem’. So it was sort of shipped, now of course it's a big deal, you have to have customs clearance and all that.

That was the beginning of this kind of search, we were... we were... it was sort of stamp collecting, you know, we were looking for accumulation of data and it’s... that is part of... of the inductive form of research. If you think of research as being inductive and deductive and kind of simply put, is that in inductive research you collect the data first, then you make the hypothesis. In deductive, you have to start off with the hypothesis, and then you collect data to test it, you know, formally to try to reject it. And then if you don't reject it after multiple tries, then you say, okay this may or may not be, it... it may or not be true, but what I can tell you is that it wasn't rejected on... on the basis of several studies. That's a kind of Popperian view, you know, formal Popperian view of... of how you do science. Well, the thing about... about inductive research is that’s where you get new ideas. You know, if you have a hypothesis, you already have that idea. If you're collecting data and making new ones, that's new ideas. It's very difficult to fund inductive research and the... they... everyone wants hypothesis-driven research. In other words, you start of with something you think you know and then you test it. All, you know, these things fit in. Sometimes they're actually going on at the same time, very often in research, a particular experiment can be both deductive and inductive, because you produce a lot of data from which you can make new hypotheses. But it’s always been a big issue, you know, getting funding for inductive research and I... and I recently set up a... a fund in effect to do inductive research. It’s... perhaps talk about that a bit later, this fund is going extremely well, we've got... collected quite a lot of money for it. But in any case, so the plan was that I was going to carry on doing this, you know, just collecting data, with the expectation that something interesting is going to happen, a certainty that something interesting is going to happen, faith that something is going to happen.

After my completion of my graduate work and birth of my daughter, Anne, my eldest daughter, we went back on the SS France, I think it was, across the Atlantic and on October... in... early in October, we saw Sputnik, in one of its first revolutions actually, one of its earlier revolutions, and, you know, we could see it out… out in the clear sky over the ocean, and I... I remember that well. Then we came back and I worked at the National Institutes of Health, which was a great place. It was during a period when the... it was expanding greatly. It was a time, you know, what, 10 years after the war, there were still not so many scientists but a big... but a government that was anxious to fund research and fund basic research, which it’s continued to do. And so there was always... there was plenty of money. And I remember I… I didn't really understand what a budget was; what do you mean by a budget? If you needed something, you ordered it although there was limited space and you couldn't hire, you know, there was a limitation to what you could hire and all that, but... but budgets weren't an issue.
So, I did some work on the hyaluronic acid because I’d been hired by the... the arthritis division there, and that was a big interest in arthritis. But I was much more interested in studying polymorphisms in different populations and it was kind of, there was a certain amount of bureaucratic complexity in... in getting travel funds and everything, but travel is... is fairly inexpensive, you know, I mean, of course you're not, you know, spending $200 a night for a hotel room, you know, you're usually in very modest places in that sort of fieldwork. So I was able to get funding most of the time and we did studies in the Central Pacific and Alaska. It was in contrast to the study in, in down South America and in elsewhere in the Pacific, in Asia, in Japan, and… I didn't go to Japan until later. But we kind of continued this process and... and then we introduced a… a new method. We'd mostly been using this electrophoresis method to separate the proteins by their phenotypes and we found a good deal of variation that way. But more than that, we found the distribution of the genes in different populations and we could see sort of latitudinal lines and longitudinal lines sometimes and there was some, we... we suspected some disease associations in some cases. But then we decided on a new technique. This again was when Tony Allison came to visit me in... in... at Bethesda.
So we looked at the serum of transfused patients. Now, the argument was that if there’s these polymorphic differences, then some of them may be antigenic and we knew that generally what the distribution of... of the different alleles were and for most of them if you receive five or ten transfusions, for the ones we knew about, you’d… there was a high probability that you would... you’d receive a different protein. Please, stop me from time to time I think, because I forget things, you know, pull me back to other points.
[Q] Sure.
So we didn’t… you know, we thought well maybe some of the polymorphisms that are already known might by antigenic, or there may be ones that you couldn't identify by electrophoresis, but you could by this technique. So that was the hypothesis we were testing. Well, we tested, ten, twelve, you know, I collected a lot of antiserum, and we had a panel against which we tested the transfused serum which we presumed would have the antiserum. And, so we collected a whole bunch of normal populations, people with disease, and sure enough we found an antibody, precipitant antibody, and in time we found out it reacted with the low-density lipoprotein, and it revealed a complex polymorphic system with linked alleles, there were kind of groups of alleles… groups of loci that had very complex interrelation with them and the more we did, the more complicated it got, and the more difficult it was to arrive at any conclusions. What we did find some disease associations actually, you know, along the lines of what's being done now with Snips. This was the equivalent of Snips, but at the proteomics level, in other words, we skipped the whole...  a whole period of understanding of the genes. And… and then subsequently, a colleague of mine in Norway, developed a kind of much more standardized reagent that was related to the system that we've found, we called it the Ag System and with that reagent he was able to standardize the reagents that were available and he found various associations. Now this went on to some really interesting stuff like the relation of the apolipoprotein B alleles with Alzheimer’s, one of the first, no, we didn't do that of course, but it in a way was related.

We found this lipoprotein and we got all excited, because that meant that our hypothesis, if you use this transfuse serum, you could find polymorphisms. Well, if a hypothesis works once, it can… you can work again. And again you have to think about, you know, hypotheses have several meanings. One of them is you make a hypothesis and you test it and you support it and you say well, that's a kind of statement of what's going on, you've described what's happening, which is true for the time being, because most hypotheses eventually get rejected, so it's not exactly truth, you know, it's the truth for the time being. But the… the… some, you know, they remain in… in altered form. But another value is that it's a… it’s a generator of experiments, it's an engine of experimentation and that's… that’s often the case.
So we had evolved a kind of very simple technique and it used very simple equipment. These studies using the transfused serum were done on agar gel, and you could make a plate on a… on a, you know, small glass plate, and you can buy this agar gel for very little money; you could have all the equipment you need with an expenditure of under $100. So… and we could use it in the field, too. We developed, you know, methods so that we could… I could take them with you, you could work in a hotel room, or a train, or things like that. So, we continued looking for more antibodies and we found several, but one that really looked interesting was one… was one that was clearly different from the lipoprotein polymorphism it first reacted with it, and it was very rare. Instead of being a kind of polymorphic distribution of the kind that we had seen in the past, this… we only… initially only found one, a small group of people who reacted with this particular antiserum. So this was an antiserum from a transfused patient from New York City and the early studies were done on serum from an Australian which was this panel, you know if you are looking for variation, then you use different populations because the prevalence or the frequency of… of the gene would vary from population to population, we knew that from what we knew about polymorphisms. So here we had, there was this antibody from a patient in New York City reacting with a... antigen that was present in an Australian. Now as far as we knew, neither of those people were — well, the transfused patient had… had some illness that required it - he had hemophilia - but it didn't seem to be related to this antibody and the… the Australian who had the antigen, was a non-hospitalized person as far as we understood it, he or she wasn't receiving, it was he actually, wasn't… wasn’t ill. Well, the question was what was it? And… all right, so what do you do? You have to get more data; you start collecting more information from which to make the next hypothesis. So we collected a lot of... we did lots of studies, you can do them very quickly, you can do hundreds of experiments, you know, in the… in the course of a week, and we learnt a lot about distributions. So this antigen was rare in the United States; we… we… I think we tested a thousand people before we found somebody in the United States normal population, but it was quite common in Australian, some Australian groups, Australian Aborigines mostly and… and we found that it was in Japan and China and Korea, because we had serum from those locations. And… okay, so we knew that it had a strange geographic distribution; you find it... it seems to be more in Asia and the Tropics, but rare in the United States.
Well then, in a way by chance, we looked at serum from people with different illnesses. As a matter of fact we looked at the serum… we looked… we looked for reactions with the antibody in people who had been transfused and we found that there was a very high prevalence in patients with leukemia, certain forms of leukemia, and that was… we found it because we had been looking at many diseases, and that was a higher prevalence. So we said well, there’s… there’s… you can make several hypotheses: one is that the - we called it Australian antigen - that Australian antigen caused leukemia, A causes B; the other possibility was that if you have leukemia, then you get the Australian antigen, so B causes A; and a third possibility is that there’s some factor, an inherited factor, that makes it likely to get both leukemia and the Australian antigen. By the way, those are not mutually exclusive, all of… you know, A can cause B, B can cause A, and C can cause A and B. In general that can… that’s a… this cause and affect business is a bit, you know, you’ve got to be careful about people who can… cause and affect, what you want to understand is process, you know, what's happening, not what starts it first, you very often can't tell anyhow. But anyway, we started testing, researching all those hypotheses at the same time, which meant more fieldwork, and more clinical work. So we decided we'd look at… we'd test the third part, which you can do pretty fast. We said we would look at people who have, who have… who are likely to get leukemia. So that includes people who’ve had radiation, the people who were within a thousand meters of Ground Zero, at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, children with Down syndrome. There‘s a strange kind of leukemia that is very common, well, much more common, in Down syndrome kids than in other children and which… from which they often recover. And there are several… several other possibilities. So we systematically went about getting blood from those populations. And so we had our hypothesis and it proved true in some places but not in others. But the most interesting one was the patients with Down syndrome. Now in those days, Down syndrome kids were kept in large institutions and just about that time, they began to close the large institutions and that happened within the next few years. But we found a 20–30 percent prevalence of Australia antigen in Down syndrome children, much lower prevalence in children with other kinds of mental retardation. But again, see, we had made this hypothesis, we didn't find it in some of the other places, but we did find it there. So, great, you know, now that again is another engine to do more experiments and we were able to study the Down syndrome patients.

That was 1964. So when I was at the National Institutes for Health, I… I was in… I was in the US Public Health Service. Actually, after I got out of the Navy, I stayed in the Naval Reserve for about 14–15 years, and then I transferred to the... switched my commission in effect to the Public Health Service, and I stayed in that until I came here, essentially. The... well, I was very happy actually in NIH, we loved living in Maryland, we had a nice house in the middle of forest and had a lot of good neighbors and it was… there was a beer… a beer ad in Maryland in those days, it was called, you know, Maryland - the Land of Easy Living! Pictures of boating on the Chesapeake and drinking beer, having crab feasts, and so on. So it was a really nice place to live and I was just a few minutes from NIH, we had a very compatible neighborhood, but we decided to go. And I'm not quite sure why, because I wasn't unhappy there. But I think, in retrospect, it was, the Feds tried to make NIH as non-bureaucratic as they could, but it’s… but there was still this kind of heavy hand of a huge administration and great bureaucracy, and — but to give them credit, there was a great effort to mitigate that, and a successful one too. And also they were kind of limited by the categorical nature of the Institutes. You see, I was working on something that wasn't anything to do with arthritis. They probably didn’t quite know where to put me, and when we started the… they were very supportive when I started this program on Genetics and Geographic Medicine, I think I called it — it must have been one of the first programs like that — so they let me have my own section. And eventually I was incorporated into a kind of epidemiology group with Dr Dublin, Tom Dublin, who sadly died just this year at quite an advanced age. And he was a very good mentor and a very nice man and we stayed friends for decades afterwards. But they didn't quite know where I fit, you know, because if you're doing laboratory work, then you can be in the laboratory, if you're doing fieldwork or epidemiology, you had to be off in some place where you didn't have all that lab, and I was saying, but, you know, I’m doing both those things. So it was kind of hard to get... they tried, you know, but I always felt that I was… they were trying to fit me into some slot. It was funny, years later when I was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1976, the… the Director of Research at the institute that I was at, DeWitt Stetton was his name, he was a very prominent intermediary metabolism biochemist but the director of our research. He… he called me up and he said, ‘Barry, congratulations, you know when you were here, we had no idea what the hell you were doing!’. I thought… I thought I was a kind of golden boy and that I was really doing well there! But they didn't, I mean it sort of came as a revelation to me, that that wasn't understood. And I think part of it was this idea that you… you work in an environment, you know, you work in a context, and you don't isolate yourself from what's going on. And going on those fieldtrips, you'd always see things on a fieldtrip you couldn't possibly see when you end up just with the stuff in your lab, you know. How did you collect it? What were the people like? What was around it? What was happening? What did you hear when you sat and spoke to people at dinner that night? So… so I wasn't… and my… and my division just disappeared. But one of the good things that happened was that Tom London was there and he came here shortly after, a year or so after I did, and I've worked with Tom since then, essentially.
But okay, so I came here and I was attracted by the kind of atmosphere of the place. I don't think I really articulated, I couldn't, but I… I suppose I must have sensed it, but there was… there was a notion, you know, Tim Talbot was the director then, and I think of all the research directors that I've had anything to do with, he's got to have been the best. He… he didn’t… he'd never done much research; he'd done some. He was trained in, his initial training was an engineer, it's one of the reasons, by the way, why these... the level of maintenance, the engineering in this place is extremely good, you know, it's very hard to find a place that maintains itself quite so well. But also he had this idea that you… the major… activity of a research director is to get out of the way, you know, not to be an impediment. And, but to be there when you need he or she, and Tim understood that. And you always knew Tim's motivations, why he was doing something, at least I thought I did, and what they were was he wanted to do the right thing. You know, Tim was a man of, you know, great principles, a man with great integrity, strong, could be harsh at times; he built this place, to my mind, we are very much a product of Tim's understanding of what science is. At NIH, some of my researchers, they didn't really understand what you could do with science. I mean, it's like not knowing how to use a hammer. Well, and then I had this, when I had been here for a while, I suddenly had this kind of sense of freedom, you know, I wasn’t… there wasn't this big bureaucratic stuff. And another thing that made a big impact; they had just added a little bit to the initial building and you'll see there's a big stone wall of the old building, you know, facing Jean's hospital essentially, and that was the signature of our constructions, we always had, you know, nice masonry, stone. So, you know, the… Jay McKay comes into my office one day and he said, ‘Barry, we have to plant some trees, what should we plant?’ I said, ‘Dawn redwood, Sequoia metasequoia, and also Franklinia alatamaha’, those were my two selections. You know Franklinia alatamaha, named after? No. It's a genus with one species, and you can buy it in nurseries, but the original, the source of it was down at the opening of the Altamaha River in Southern Georgia. I went to look for it once. But in any case, so they planted this, well, it must have been about five feet tall or something in that spring; it's over 60 feet tall now, that gives you an idea how long I have been here!

Then I was able to form a research group. Because I was the Associate Director for Clinical Research, I had... Tim had a big grant. He'd gotten a grant from the National Cancer Institute that was, in effect, open-ended. They gave him a grant and they said, okay do clinical research. But they didn’t… he didn't specify what it was going to be. It was a seven-year grant. It would have been… in today's money it would be like, I don’t know, three, four, five million a year — seven years with no specification about what I had to do. Well, that was great. I didn't have to, you know, first of all apply for it, and secondly sort of justify what I originally said. No, mind you, I… they got annual reports and then we subsequently had an ancillary grant on doing this polymorphism work, so there was tacit approval. And it was more money than I could spend, I mean I often turned… turned money back to the NIH, not often, but a few times. And I was able to build up a research team here and… and when they first came, they came with certain skills: Tom was interested in endocrinology and in thyroid disease and so forth, and Al Sutnick in respiratory illnesses related to cancer, and… and they started working on that. But eventually, we all started working on the hepatitis stuff, or what we eventually knew as hepatitis. And we didn't… we didn’t start off with a team with some sort of set goal, we started off with a bunch of people who were working here on stuff, but they gradually became interested. I don't think I coerced them; it was just the… the demands, I mean Al continued his other research and so did Tom. But then, but, so we formed a team, and we did work together, and we had a very good kind of working relationship. We’d have, one of the things we had were called protocol sessions, but they were nothing to do with protocol, but we would design experiments jointly and… and we would, you know, decide and talk about them quite a lot and then we would formulate them, we would actually write down the hypothesis we were going to test. And then we were very, you might say, rigorous in monitoring to see exactly where we were, but with the understanding that we were a discovery operation. We weren't looking for a product, although Lord knows, we found several, you know, without looking. But again, there was… but I always had this confidence, as I said before, faith, you know, that it's going to lead to something.

We found this antigen in an Australian and... and that react with an antibody in a hemophilia patient from New York City so the question is what it was and we decided the next step is do another inductive stage, that is, collect more data and sort of make hypotheses based on that. So we did, we indentified the Down syndrome patients in the way that I told you before, looking at people that are high risk of leukemia, and then we were able to observe these patients and others, and one of the things we discovered was that there was a… there was a consistent characteristic. If the… if the individual had Australia antigen, as we called it, on the first test and you tested them two months later or three months, a year later, they still had it so it seemed to be a persistent characteristic which is what you would expect of… of a phenotype of… of an expression of a gene, that it stayed more or less consistent. But then we found an exception to that in one of the Down syndrome patients who we'd been caring for here at Fox Chase Cancer Center and taking and examining his blood every month or so. Initially when we first saw him, he did not have the antigen and then he subsequently developed it. Well, the question is what had happened? Well, we were able to… we looked at a whole bunch of characteristics, you know, physiological, pathological tests that could be done and what we found is that between the time we detected the Australia antigen and… and the time that it had not been present, that he had developed a form of hepatitis and it wasn't… he didn't have symptoms but there were changes in his chemistry, in his liver, that measured liver function, that indicated that he had had a very mild — as a matter of fact imperceptible to the person — but it was definitely hepatitis. Well, that observation sort of generated the hypothesis that the Australia antigen was associated with hepatitis. And then we went on to test that hypothesis by collecting blood from people who had hepatitis and then from controls, people who didn't have hepatitis and we did this in a variety of ways, and in each case, the hypothesis was not rejected: we found a higher prevalence. And that… then we made the next hypothesis, that the Australia antigen was part of the virus and the paper that we published that information came out 40 years ago, just about this time it was published.
[Q] Were there forms of the... were there specific patients with hepatitis that didn't have the antigen? Were you able to differentiate among hepatitis forms?
Yes. Not every person with hepatitis reacted, but it was already known, prior to our work, that there were at least two kinds of hepatitis. We now know there're probably half a dozen, but three or four common ones, and so it was not surprising that they didn't all have it but we thought we'd recognize one form and, based on the prior kind of theoretical nomenclature, this one, what had been referred to as hepatitis B, and so, and that's the kind that's transferred by blood, by transfusion or needle injection and as we now know, by transmissions. But, so that observation we made on our patient here, that's what stuck in our mind as being the clue that made us test the hypothesis, but actually we had some other clues prior to that.

I had taken part in a… in a medical study on the people who had been exposed to radiation on the island of the Atoll of Rongelap in the… in the Marshall Islands and that was about 120 miles downwind of Bikini and the… they exploded a… a nuclear device as part of a test program, a nuclear test program that was done in the... what was the US [sic] Trust Territory, the Pacific Islands, and this bomb was far bigger than they anticipated and also they didn't predict the weather patterns and they should have known because that's the prevailing wind. But in any case about 60 or 70 Marshall Islanders were subject to this fallout, and they were removed from the island and put in temporary accommodation, very difficult. The whole business was a sort of a scandal — don’t know if that’s really the right word, certainly very unfortunate — but from then on, they did medical examinations of them each year so I went on the fifth medical exam, which… they'd been returned to the, to the atoll, Rongelap Atoll by then, so I spent a few weeks with a… an examining party. Well, over the… they collected blood essentially every year and so I tested those for this Australia antigen, and in one case there was a person who didn't have it, then he developed the antigen and then developed the antibody and we learned that he'd had a transfusion.  So that was another indicator and added to that was this observation of the Down syndrome patient. So what happens, you know, you… you get an idea, a kind of concept, but often it's… it's kind of built on a sort of background of information. You know, there's a bunch of things that kind of add up and then suddenly there's a sort of realization and it's a realization that makes you act and makes you do something and I… I think in retrospect that observing that one of our own patients, somebody we knew quite well, and as a matter of fact we kept in touch with him for years afterwards, and his… and his mother who died a few years ago; that had a big psychological impact. Okay, so we tested that, we found that — well, then we thought one of the best, one of the most important things to do now, was to confirm, you know, to have people confirm it and it doesn't do any good or it doesn't do as much good for us to do it over and over again. In the meanwhile, a colleague of mine in… in Japan had made very similar observations to ours. I'd been to Japan in the 1960s, 1964, 1965 possibly. We'd spoken about this work about the Australia antigen. He sent his reagents to us, we exchanged them and it turned out it was the same thing, so that was an immediate confirmation from Professor Okochi.

We decided one of the best things we could do to move this forward was to distribute the reagents to everybody who would… who could use them, and once you had the antibody from a transfused person and the antigen, you could find your own antigens and antibodies very easily. So we decided, we hired a… a person to package the stuff and send it off when people wanted it and within a very short time, many people had done the study. You essentially didn't need any equipment, just the, you know, glass plate and some agar and a… and a dye, you know, to cut the patterns in the agar, and as a consequence, within a very short time there was... there was much confirmation of it, so the, the concept was accepted, you know, fairly reasonably quickly. Given how... well, there was initially a lot of skepticism about our finding and… and one of the first papers we published, in which we in effect made the claim that, or we supported the hypothesis, it was rejected by the journal. Well, what we didn't do was get mad because that wouldn't, you know, and start some kind of fuss about it, because we sort of, we'd learned that somebody doesn't agree with you, there's no point arguing about it. What you do is collect more data until there's not much of an argument.
Well, we had one interesting experience. We had not worked at the hepatitis field and there was, you know, a substantial number of senior and experienced investigators who had been using, I suppose what you'd call conventional virological methods to identify the virus and of course we weren't doing that at all, this was a finding that we hadn't anticipated but when… when we saw it we were prepared to accept, you know, to study it. But in any case, so we had a meeting once and Dr Sutnik, Al Sutnik, who was in our team was talking to one of the experts and the fellow said, ‘You know, I have to say that we in the kind of hepatitis community are pretty irritated with you’, or words to that effect and he said, 'You know, we have been working on this thing for a long time and suddenly you come in from nowhere and you make this, looks like substantiated claim, you've found the hepatitis virus’. So Al's response was, ‘You'll get over it’. Which is what happened. But what we decided not to do was make any kind of controversy. And what, that… that was one of the, you know, of all people, Darwin was — who started some of the greatest controversies in biology — did not personally get into controversies because his mentor, you know, was the geologist, Lyle and Lyle had written to him once and he said, look, don't get into arguments, you'll only spend... waste a lot of energy. It really doesn't do much good. Good piece of advice.

Right away we realized that we had a diagnostic test and the diagnostic test at that time was fairly insensitive, but it was the beginning of other much more sensitive tests and we actually developed a radioimmunoassay using sort of standard radioimmunoassay methods and we patented that and that was the beginning of a huge industry. Within a few years it was a billion dollar assay measurement. The... I remember I talked to some people in Abbott, and we'd given them this reagents and they established the test and I met with them a few years after that started and one of their executives said, ‘You know we didn't have a diagnostic division until we got that test’. And that started what's now one of the major big pharm diagnostic companies. And I remember a colleague of mine was… was at Stanford and he started using the test very early and he pointed out something which in a funny way I hadn't realized; you know, prior to this test there wasn't a direct method of attempt to find a virus. When I was in, doing clinical work, if you thought somebody had a viral disease, you collected an… an acute sample and then a convalescent sample some months later — weeks later or months later sometimes—and then you could see if there was an increase in titer, of a particular antibody. So you… you could diagnose he had it, but you couldn't actually do it at the time. This you can do, well, subsequently in hours, but certainly overnight at that time, so it was a big step forward in… in the direct testing of viruses and it had a big impact. In a funny way I didn't realize that at the time, primarily because we were on to other stuff.

So we continued, you know, doing a lot of work but again this kind of recognizing we'd started this off because of our interest in polymorphisms’ susceptibility to disease, but again recognizing that when application is possible, you should do that, and I think the fact that we were medically trained made a… made a big difference. You know, we… we… the fact that it was associated, you know, we knew all of us, Tom, Al Sutnik, Betty Jane Gerstley, myself, you know, we'd had medical experience and so we were aware of what it could be and that was very helpful in our moving forward and then I started thinking about a vaccine. Well, in an odd way the thing that precipitated it, in my recollection, is that we had a meeting with Tim Talbot once. We had a sort of staff council. There were senior and some junior scientists that would advise Tim, Tim Talbot, and he said that the government had said they were going to decrease research funding and they expected research places like universities and the Institute to find some other source of funding, implying that we ought to start getting commercially valuable products. Well, it turns out that didn't happen. You know, I mean it has happened since then but it didn't happen then, but nevertheless Tim said, ‘Well, we're going to start thinking about stuff’. So after the meeting I went back and spoke to Irvine Millman who was one of, part of our group and I said, ‘Irv, we have to make a vaccine’. Well, by that time we knew enough about the biology of the hepatitis virus to realize that, in addition to the virus, there were these huge amounts of surface antigen. We estimated once that about one percent of the serum protein in people who were carriers was made up of the surface antigen in the virus. Well, that couldn't be whole virus because anybody with that viral load would be long dead and, you know, Irv recognized that right away. He'd been, he was one, the only one of us who was trained in microbiology by the way and he had mostly worked on bacteria. So I said, ‘Irv, you know, that's got to be extra antigen in the virus, there's probably a virus in there’. And we had made observations on populations that indicated to us that we could, we knew what the protective antibody was. We had a good... we didn't know but we had a good, high probability that it was that, well, the observation was a very simple-minded one. In all the studies that we've done, we initially never, and then rarely, saw the same person who had both the antigen, i.e. something on… on the virus itself and the antibody against it at the same time. Now that is consistent with the antibody being protective and then again Kazuo Okochi, my colleague in - he was then in Tokyo, he went to Fukuoko later - Kazuo had made a… an observation in transfused people, that the ones who had antibody and evolved it were less likely to get hepatitis and again, the data weren’t overwhelming, but they were significant, so I said, ‘Irv, we can make a vaccine from the surface antigen’, so we adapted a simple method for isolating viruses from serum proteins essentially and by centrifugation column, separations, some chemical procedures, we isolated this massive amount of surface antigen from the whole virus. They… because the whole virus kind of DNA had a higher intensity and you were able to separate it pretty cleanly.
[Q] And was it that surface antigen that was represented on the diagnostic band, on your original..?
Yes, well, there probably was virus there as well but most of it would have been the surface antigen. The fact you could see it was the surface antigen, so we had some rough idea of quantities, what the ratio was. Well, then we did some simple animal experiments. We showed that if you took the whole serum and transmitted it to an experimental animal, it would become infected. If you separated what we thought was the virus with the different density from the Australia antigen, the surface antigen without the virus, it did not transmit and then we brought a patent for that in 1969.

Well, this was the unique kind of vaccine of course because nobody's made a vaccine like that in the past and my guess is nobody ever will because not… very few viruses have this characteristic. It's quite rare actually. There's a equine encephalitis virus that has a similar, cauliflower mosaic virus — strange connections, but it was quite rare and people now… just about a few years later is when the Aids epidemic started... and people were very reluctant to use blood products. They still continued to do so but in any case, so we… we patented it and that was in '69 and, you know, I spoke about it in talks and published some information on it but we… there was no interest in it and with… it wasn't surprising and in a way we didn't kind of push it because — not that it wasn't important and you might say, well, you had an obligation to push it — well, I… I think it's fair to say we wanted more evidence, too. You know in order to… to enthusiastically put… you have to have something other than what we said. We needed confirmation as… as did the… the producing companies, the pharmaceutical companies. So we continued working. We did a lot of stuff and then other people got involved fortunately and there was a series of animal-related studies that were done in the mid 70s and I went to the meeting at which that was presented in 1975, before that, in ’72, '73 and I came back and I said, ‘Irv, this data is very convincing. It supports what our view is and from another group, not us, let's really push patent’. Well, I won't go into the complications but the Fox Chase did not… was not granted the domestic rights to the patent by, but by a set of unusual circumstances, we were given the foreign rights so that meant we could patent it abroad. So Irv and I in the middle of the winter, you know, flew over to Europe and we talked to some of the big pharmaceutical firms in… in Britain who we had contact with, Belgium firm and we met people in Paris and the… the French company was… was quite interested but I thought, look, let's go back home, we'll take one more stab at… at domestic manufacture.
Well, we'd actually had negotiations with the Merck company, which is where you work now in West Point and… and they expressed an interest in it as early as 1971, I think it was the first correspondence I had from them, but nothing much, I mean we couldn't sort of push it. They, you know, the drug companies have their own agenda. They don't like… they prefer to… it's got to be their own stuff, you know, and all that and we didn't have much convincing data but we did if we came back from France because we could then say we're going to go ahead with this and we want to, well, part of it is we thought it would be good to manufacture it domestically. We could keep, you know, we would have the better view of it and it was also in Pennsylvania, you know, we were funded by Pennsylvania institution, by… by the state, partially funded. So we went and saw him again, but this time I went with Wing Pepper. I think you knew G Willing Pepper, wonderful man. He was the chairman of our board of trustees and, by the way, a naval hero. You know, he… his ship was sunk in the naval engagement of… during the battle of Guadalcanal. He was in the water for a day, finally rescued. He nearly… nearly died and then went on to continue, you know, an outstanding career in the navy and he was a very successful businessman and a very good one, and a very decent man. So Wing and I drove to Rahway to talk to the CEO, I guess, of… of Merck and I went in there and, well, Wing knew him, you know, because, you know, they were kind of, CEOs sort of know each other. They were sort of sitting there, chatting, you know, talking about mutual friends and golf and sort of making jokes, occasionally referring to the vaccine. There was sort of banter back and forth, which I sort of... I got sort of distracted, I'm not sure I really followed it all, but we went out, you know, with… left in, we were in the anteroom and I said, ‘Well, Wing, what happened? I… I got the impression that they are not very interested’, and he said, ‘On the contrary, they want to go ahead’.
[Q] I can identify with that ‘guess what I'm thinking’ attitude!
So… so we did… we had… we had a very successful… and they… they… we consulted with them to some extent but not much. You know, they were quite happy to develop it on their own, but from what I can make out, from what I know is they pretty much followed the methods given in our… in our patent and they produced large quantities under very high standards and then they fortunately selected Dr Wolf Szmuness who was then at the New York Blood Center to do the field trials.

Now Wolf had an interesting career. He was born in Poland before the war and as a young man he and his family fled eastward. They ended up in Siberia and Wolf went to medical school there and so on, and then he… then he eventually came back to Poland after the war. He was a… a secretary, or a minister of health in a province and there, he was… he was in charge of public health in a Polish province, but then he and his family departed again in the ‘60s when there was another upswing of anti, you know, pogroms, of anti-Semitic activity for a period then. So he fled, came here. I would say, you know, they departed and, and looked around for a job, came here and spoke to us and I think we would have offered him a job, but he had to… he had another job offer in New York City and he took that and I think in retrospect I, I mean I would have loved working with him, he was a fine guy, but he did very well there. In any case so they… they obtained the vaccine from Merck and he designed one of the, I think one of the best vaccine field trials that had ever been done. It involved virtually... he had to do some screening, but he looked around for a community group population that was highly susceptible to hepatitis B and, initially, they looked at the Down syndrome patients, but, for a variety of reasons, that was not a good choice. First of all, they were hospitalized, mentally-retarded children, not… secondly Down syndrome patients have a very altered immune response so you wouldn't expect them to respond to vaccines in general. That was... the immunology was fairly well known, but there was a… a group in New York City and elsewhere, that was the male gay community, who had an incredibly high attack rate for hepatitis B and they had like a 30% annual attack rate. That means the probability of not getting hepatitis over the course of several years of being part of that community, the probability of getting hepatitis was very high, 80–90% maybe, and they were very, they were well educated, well informed, health-oriented population, very cooperative, and he enlisted about, eventually about a thousand and there was a… there was a… a coded test. That is, some of the participants were given the vaccine and some were given a placebo, an injected one so it was very similar. The subjects didn't know if they got the vaccine and the people who were administering and who — the vaccine — and who'd initially looked at the data also weren't aware of it until the code was broken. Well, they followed them for, well, eventually for a couple of years but initially for about a year or so and by that time, you know, when they… they broke the code, and did find the people with vaccine and those with the… not with vaccine; the results were… were amazing. I mean the attack rate was well over 30% and maybe 30–40% in two years and… and the people who had been vaccinated, a very small number developed evidence of hepatitis, serological or clinical and those, the probability is they had been infected before they had the vaccine, so… so the… the protection rate was over 90%. Well, there are very few vaccines that have a 90%... that works on 90% of the people. So he did that study and it was published in the early 1980s and based on that study it was approved by the FDA. Now, that's got to be the smallest study which led to... can you guess how many people were involved in the polio vaccine?
[Q] Oh, must be 10,000. 
One point two million people were involved in the childhood polio vaccine and they're now preparing for a vaccine for Aids, for testing. They're actually setting up test programs for a vaccine that doesn't exist yet. That's going to be tens of thousands at a cost of millions, tens of millions. I don't think it cost more than a few hundred thousand dollars to do that study.
[Q] That must have been incredibly gratifying for you to see… to see that.
It was great. It was terrific. You know, we always thought it would be good but, you know, there's nothing like proof. There were studies since then, but that study of Wolf Szmuness was so… was so good. He had a tragic end. He… he developed cancer of the lung and the first manifestation was metastasis on the brain, which often happens and he became in a way, deranged, you know, briefly. And he was in… he was on a travel in Brazil at the time and he was actually jailed because of his behavior so it was... and imagine, you know, having come through this experience, but in any case he... I went up to see him after his treatment, you know, decreased the size of the tumor and all but… but he… he did a lot, you know, for that.

The vaccine was approved. In the meanwhile we had been working on the relation between hepatitis B and cancer of the liver. Now, first of all it's kind of logical, you know, if you get chronic infection of the liver the possibility that that would lead to... to cancer is kind of high but there... nobody had ever really been able to study it, you know, because... study it carefully because what are... what are you going to measure, you know? You couldn't identify the virus, you know, so... so getting a relationship was going to be hard.
[Q] Was the epidemiology done already between symptomatic hepatitis and liver cancer? 
There was... you see, actually the people who get acute hepatitis very often aren't the ones who go on to get primary cancer of the liver. They can be, you know, they can have periods, but people who get acute hepatitis and recover totally have a much lower probability of getting cancer of the liver than people who become chronically infected. Well, there'd been studies done in Africa by my... who has become my colleague, Professor Payette who was... who was a... the dean of the medical school in... in Dakar in... in Senegal and... and there... there were one or two others who were involved and they... they were, they did pathology and they were able to show that people who subsequently died of primary cancer of the liver — quite common in Senegal — were... had chronic liver disease and it looked like... due to viral chronic so there was that connection, you know, based on... but I was in Oxford again - I'd gone there for a year's sabbatical - and Professor Payette said one of his younger scientists flew over to England and came to see me and he, on behalf of Professor Payette, asked if... if I would collaborate with him on a study of the relation between hepatitis B and primary cancer of the liver in Senegal. Professor Payette had retired from the medical school in Dakar by that time but he was still there quite a lot, quite active, so that started a collaboration we had with a bunch of Senegalese physicians and... and the French, and Tom London went there several times. I was there a few times and we established about a five-, six-year collaboration, which was really pretty good because, you know, they were flitting back and forth to Paris and Senegal and they were coming here and they were in residence. We made some, you know, very good colleagues and friends then. It was... it was kind of exciting.
So we set up a sort of field station in Dakar, and I remember we had a... we had to buy a Land Rover, you know. We had to get the Land Rover from France to Senegal. Then we had to find a place to keep it where nobody would take it, so, you know, I was... I was having a time with the purchasing agency here at Fox Chase trying to figure out, what do you want? A Land Rover? In Senegal? But we... it was... it was a very difficult study to do because they were long range, you know. They take several years but we, and then others, established a very clear relation. But the possibility of this connection had been investigated prior to that by one of... one of our young scientists who worked with us, Bruce Smith, who was with us for several years. And Bruce and I looked at this connection and the... the initial study we did not find a correlation, but in the paper we postulated that the technique we were using was quite insensitive and that if we had earlier cases and more sensitive methods, we predicted that you might find... we gave a... so that was I think the first mention of the association between hepatitis B as measured serologically and cancer and there was subsequently... subsequently substantiated. And that was... and what really got me focused on that was a meeting that I went to in Uganda, in Kampala.

I was, I'd never liked to kind of go any place without doing some field work and one of the things that really got... I was interested about was insect transmission. You know, I'd worked in the tropics a lot, or some, and the importance of the viruses, that is viruses... are the viruses that are carried by mosquitoes or by insects. I was always fascinated by that because that's a strange, you know, very terrible method of transmission. So we... so I, in Senegal I was collecting mosquitoes. I had, you know, the... the medical entomologist from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania came and trained me in using mosquito traps. It's kind of...
[Q] It must have been unpleasant. 
It, well, turns out it was and he actually, that was William Wills who subsequently came to work for us and so I, he gave me a bunch of, he loaned me a bunch of traps. It was kind of complicated because to collect mosquitoes, you... you have this trap, you know, it has a little fan that when the mosquitoes get into the trap they... the current of air prevents them from exiting and then you have a small incandescent light, you know, searchlight... light bulb, a small one, and then also you usually use CO2, dry ice, because many mosquitoes are attracted to CO2 that... put out by humans, mammals. So I collected all these things and then I decided when I had a kind of cheap method of transport to get around Uganda and so I went on a... a game park tour. So, they... they put you on, on a van and they took you all over the country sort of thing, you know, to see about half... four or five game parks. So we'd get into these usually tented camps and everybody else was having dinner and I'd rush off and hang my traps. Well, we were in a game park and they didn't... it was not a good idea to be out at night, you know, without some guide or gun or something and there were a lot of... we were right near the, some of the places right near the Nile, you know, where the hippopotamus are kind of really... so I used to, you know... you know, wait until—and the batteries only lasted about 10-11 hours and the, you know, it's dark for a long time in the tropics, so I had to put them out there just before it got dark. So I'd sort of rush out just at twilight, you know, hang it next to some, you know, places where there were people and then run back, then I'd have a kind of a sleepless night and as soon as it was the crack of dawn I'd go out and look for hippopotamuses and then rush off and bring the trap in, and we found a lot of mosquitoes and...
[Q] Did you ever find a hippopotamus?
Oh yeah, I saw plenty of hippopotamus, and some of them close. I mean you... you can or at least I could, I did have a guide sometimes and he... he assured me they were close. They come out at night to... to eat and then go back to the river in the morning. So... but the important thing about that Uganda meeting was that there were several people reported this, in effect confirmed, the connection that... that Bruce Smith and I had inferred from our study. I came back and said, ‘That's what we're working on now, hepatitis B and primary cancer of the liver’, and we focused on that for a long time.
I also had a rather unfortunate run-in with the police there also. It, well, not so unfortunate, but we were there just as Idi Amin came into power. His predecessor, Milton Obode was off at a meeting I think in the United States and while he was there — Amin was in the military — he took over but it wasn't recognized at that time, how savage his administration was. But at one point I was in a village kind of just walking around. I wasn't doing anything, I was just looking there and I had a camera and I passed a police station and a policeman came out and told me to come in, a plain-clothes policeman, and he said, ‘What are you doing with that camera?’ I said, ‘Well, you know, I'm just taking pictures around here’. He said, ‘Did you take a picture of this police station?’ I said, ‘No, no’. I said, ‘Well look, take the camera, take the film’. Well, I was, you know, he took it and he let me go but it was, they were very unusually for, you know, African people are usually pretty friendly, you know, pretty welcoming, these guys were... were hostile. When I got back home, I... it was all over the newspapers, a couple of newspaper reporters—from Philadelphia by the way—had been murdered; right, not exactly the town I was in but... but nearby. But in any case at the time... but...
[Q] What was the connection with the police station not wanting pictures taken? 
I think just the high level of suspicion. You know, they were... they were defensive. You know, afraid people were going to... because there was a lot of commotion when we were there; quite a few people were killed. But any case, from the point of view of the hepatitis, that charged us to move ahead with the... with the association with cancer of the liver. Well, we... we got very involved in that. Much of our work in Senegal was directed to that; the Senegal work came after that Uganda meeting and I... and then a lot of other people, of course, became involved and it was in time appreciated that a... that a great deal of primary cancer of the liver was due to hepatitis B.
 

The best epidemiologic study was done on the island of Taiwan by Dr Palmer Beasley who was working in Taiwan. He was from the University of Washington, but he had been in Taiwan for quite a long time. And he selected a bunch of government workers in Taiwan who were carriers and then a group of controls who weren't, followed them for several years and the number who developed primary cancer of the liver among the carriers was very much greater, and he determined a relevant risk of about 200. In other words there was a 200-fold greater probability. Now that figure wasn't upheld in some subsequent studies, you know, it probably varies from place to place but it's always been of that, you know, very high multiple and therefore a very important risk factor. So that meant we had a cancer vaccine. We had a... not a therapeutic vaccine, which had never worked as far as I could make out, but this was a preventive vaccine. People that were working on therapeutic vaccines still are but I don't think any of them, and certainly none in general use, as far as I know. But this was a really good preventative. Well, actually I spent a lot of time after that, trying to sort of move this idea forward and I spoke about it in many places and tried to get governments interested in it and I... I'm not sure that was such good use of my time but I... I wouldn't say I was, you know, I spent a lot of time talking to people.
[Q] Was it that they weren't interested in the concept of cancer prevention in general or did they not believe that this specific vaccine would happen?
You know things move kind of slowly, you know, the acceptance of the... of the technique takes time and I realized that based on our prior experience but I decided to spend a lot of my own time doing that, and... and which I... I kind of enjoyed, you know, when I felt it was — I wouldn't say enjoy, I thought it was important — but I, there was, I could have been doing other things. I got... I got a little too wrapped up in... in a way but it did have... it did, I think my moving on that did have... did have a positive effect.

I was invited to go to India to spend three months as the Raman visiting professor at the Indian Institute of Science. It was sponsored by the Indian Academy of Science. Now the Indian Institute of Science, the IISC as it's called, is probably the primary technical university, engineering science university, in India. It's an amazing place. There's a national exam to enter. Imagine in a country as large as India with so many bright people, they only... they select the best people nationally for it. It's one... it was one of the real elite universities, at a par, perhaps even above, the Indian Institutes of the IITs, Indian Institutes of Technology, of which there are several and many IISC graduates of... of the west coast start, would start up, you know, now well established by the way, but it was a wonderful experience there. And we... we lived on the campus there, we lived in the guest house and Bangalore, as Indian cities go, is quite nice. It's at an elevation of a thousand meters so, you know, it's cool. In summer it gets pretty hot but, you know, we were there in... in the winter and it was very pleasant. It's like Southern Californian climate. The people are fascinating. They really... I've never met so many bright people in one place. And then I travelled around India a lot. I mean I got to be a frequent passenger on... on Indian Airways which is the inland airways, and I went around looking at the hepatitis problem, giving lectures, but I spent a lot of time looking at sewage and, you know, disposal of waste and... and practises of blood transfusion and I... I eventually, you know, I spoke with the minister of health and so forth and then I met the prime minister, Rajid [sic] Ghandi, who was subsequently assassinated a year or so afterwards and I wrote a big report to the... to... back to the prime minister and to the technology ministry and in it I made several recommendations. One of them was to establish schools of public health. In a country which at that time was approaching a billion people, there was one school of public health. There were many medical schools, one school of public health. So I recommended the establishment of schools of public health associated with these lead institutions, because collecting, you know, dealing with things like waste and sewage, is not a high status occupation, particularly in India. It's a low — there may be a social element connected with it, but it had to be given a kind of high status. Then I recommended a total overhaul of the water supply system. The water, I... you know, haven't been back to India for 10 years but the situation there in terms of water supply in big city was deplorable. Much of the sewage and... and the water supply were dated from colonial times, you know, from the time they were still part of the empire and the water works, the, you know, the public works department would often dig a single ditch, then you put the water pipe and the... and the sewage pipe in the same ditch. You don't have to build two ditches. Well, a whole bunch of things, you know... and they paved roads, they didn't pave the whole road, they only paved the sort of center, making driving in India quite hazardous and... and people, you know, and then you started having heavy lorries, you know, and they're driving over that ditch, breaking the pipes, so there was a direct entry of broken pipes of sewage into the water pipes. Now a lot of places in India, you don't get water all day, so there's a partial vacuum. It was horrible, so I said...
[Q] What year was this? 
This would have been 19... gee, ‘84, ‘85. I couldn't tell you exactly. Well, I said, the best thing you could do to change the country, you know, spend a few million dollars at that time, dig up all the roads and bury the pipes again and put new ones in. Well, that's not a very politically attractive thing to do, you know. You get a lot of money, you end up you don't see anything, and... and people don't necessarily associate their good health with the clean water.
[Q] Right. Ten years later.
Yes, and... and one of the... one of the great advantages and the reason we have a healthy society as we do, is we have these clean water acts. That's the single best thing you can do is to make sure, you know, ensure you have good water supply and clean food. But in any case, so... but I think I did have an impact. I — actually I'm thinking of writing back and asking them! But they did put in — I don't know what influence I had — they did put in the medical schools and finally, just in the last four or five years, they have had an intense vaccination—of course I recommended vaccination and I recommended... I, at that time they still had to have surveys to find out, well, there's a big interest in... in vaccination in India now. Not universally, there's some objection to it as there often is, but what happened was sort of amusing. About four or five years ago I got a letter from a professor of gastroenterology in... in a small city, probably a million and a half, called Cuttack in the... in the eastern central part of India, to say that, on my birthday they were going to have a hepatitis B eradication. So, and he invited me but, you know, we were up Maine then and... and going, and I didn't feel, I try not to go away during the summer and going into central India in July, it's pretty hot but he... they... I am invited each year, but I always write, they ask me to write a little message, and the last time he told me that it was going to be a national day. Well that was... but they're going... they're going forward as far as I can make out. But that was a very productive visit. First of all, India's an absolutely fascinating place to be, one of the most interesting places I've ever been, and then... then, you know, that was part of this movement to try and, my... my program you might say to sort of help with the application, you know, to get it done at a national level, I... I went to China.

Back in 1973, ‘74 maybe, the... the Chinese were still pretty isolated and they didn't come to meetings very often but occasionally did, and I saw a paper at a cancer meeting and, that held... was held in Italy—I didn't attend the meeting but I read the abstracts—and they reported on hundreds of thousands of cases of cancer of the liver. Well, based on studies we'd done on... on Chinese here that we'd collected in the United States actually, from Chinese living here, we knew there was a very high prevalence in China, one of the highest in the world, and it didn't take, you know, a lot of thinking to put those two things together, and I recognized that the most important thing I could do in terms of public health was to go to China. Actually I was kind of, you know, I was very interested in going there anyhow, you know, just that it was a place that was kind of covert then. They were... they had visitors but they were sort of hand-picked, you know. So I wrote to the, well, there was a... there was a sort of semi-government organization here. It was the committee for encouraging academic connections with China and the United States. It was a kind of low-key operation and that sent academics, medical people from time to time, so I contacted them and they were encouraging. They said, well, you know, keep trying and see what happens. Well, you know, I'd get a response, but no... no invitation to come. Well, then in 1976, I was awarded the Nobel prize. A month later I get, I received an invitation to come to China with my wife actually, and to, you know, visit various places as a guest of the Chinese Medical Association, ostensibly a non-governmental organization. Well, I did go but Jean decided not to come because it was going to be a long time and I was afraid they might... travel might be uncomfortable, and so forth. It wasn't actually. It was pretty comfortable. So I went there and I spent a month, spoke to several thousand people and I still will see Chinese colleagues. They say, I remember you spoke in Beijing and you spoke about the hepatitis stuff, and you... they’d... my host would say, ‘You only spoke three hours, two hours’. People would sit there for three hours, listening to a talk.
Well, it was... it was, I had a... a, I had escorts, you know, I... I had a scientific colleague who was a very bright chap, Dr Sun was his name, who had worked on hepatitis and he'd been a victim of the Cultural Revolution. He'd been a academic professor in Beijing, was working on nuclear magnetic resonance, you know, pretty highfalutin stuff. Cultural Revolution comes along, he's out of there. He's out in Qilan province, you know, this kind of somewhat wild place in the western part of the country chasing snake bites, as he said. And the other... the other escort I had was a political escort who'd been in the Red Guard, who’d, you know, victimized people like Professor Sun.
[Q] Yes, that must have been an interesting threesome there. 
Oh, it was, yes. But... but I, before I left, you know, I... I read Chairman Mao's, you know, had The Red Book, it was... you know, college kids here read and I had a couple of his other publications that I got from the state department on, you know, Chairman Mao on war, Chairman Mao's hundred sayings, you know, and I kind of read through those before I got there, so when this escort was telling me various things, I would say, ‘Well, as Chairman Mao said on the occasion of the meeting of the 23rd Soviet...’. 
[Q] Wonderful diplomacy.
But... so, you know, I told you we were interested in insects and the other insect we studied was bed bugs. We had the only African bed bug colony in America. We... we thought that it was better to work with than mosquitoes. The reason I decided on that was I went to visit Bill Wills once in... in the insectarium in... in Harrisburg and they had kind of multiple screens, you know, to keep the mosquitoes confined into the cage and... and they were in a sort of conventional room but there were these several layers of screens and we walked into the, you know, from the hall into the room outside the screens, and I noticed some mosquitoes. I said, ‘Bill, what are those?’ He said, ‘Oh they get out occasionally’, so I said, ‘Wait a minute...’. So we decided to work with bed bugs because bed bugs you can put a little moat around them and they... and they're high... high infectious rates.
[Q] Really? 
Oh yeah, you collect bed bugs from the beds of, who's usual occupant is a... is a carrier of hepatitis B; half of them are infected. At least by the measures we use. Nobody... nobody's followed up on this. At least I haven't followed the field, but as far as I know I don't think it's been followed up on but that's an incredible infection rate. The... the mosquito infection rate... they had a field infection rate of one in a hundred. A hundred mosquitoes, one of them was infected. That's like in north of East Gambia, which are from malaria. It's... it's horrible. But as far as... nobody knows whether they really transmit it. I... I still think they may. But in any case, we went into this village and it was one of these barefoot doctor clinics and they had a kind of poster up there with different insects that spread things and I'd been talking to Dr Sun about the work we'd done in bed bugs and mosquitoes and he was a little skeptical—with good reason, you know, we're the only ones that worked on it as far as I know. No, I think my colleague, Fred Prince did, too. But in any case, so they had a poster there and it showed, you know, mosquitoes and flies and mice and rats and... and rats and... and then bed bugs, so I asked the person in charge of the clinic, I said, ‘Well, what do those insects spread?’. She said, ‘Well, the rats, you know, spread plague and the flies spread, you know, salmonella and bacterial infections,  and mosquitoes spread dengue and they spread filaria and they spread malaria and the bed bugs spread hepatitis’. So I turned to my escort, ‘See, you go to the people and they give you the answer’.
[Q] That’s right. That's a great story. 
But in any case that was... that was a terrific and... and it really had an impact on... on the progress of the work. I mean I, how do you know about that but it's just that people have told me that and then... and then I... I put them in touch with Merck. You know, it took a little time, but they finally worked out a technology exchange program with China and they built factories. Merck built factories there, or helped them build. You know, that was when they had... they had a very far-seeing president at that time.

I thought, well, okay, we've got the diagnostic, we've... you know, the vaccine, it looks like it's pretty good and now what's needed is the therapy. And... I mean I didn't know... I mean I had never worked in sort of therapeutics but, you know, this was a case of overconfidence; you know, one of these things if you, you know, you can do one thing, you can do another—which isn't necessarily true. So, I wanted to take a somewhat novel approach to it — not exactly novel, but at least in the context of the time it was somewhat novel — and if you look at the history of therapeutics, certainly up until fairly recently, practically all the therapeutics we use come from plants or animals, you know, or molluscs or something and... and a lot of them — a surprising number — come from indigenous medical systems, you know, from folk medicine and very often you... if... we’re not using the same material, but the idea for the chemical moiety, you know, that it was actually derives from plant material and from... and kind of you got a clue from... from folk medication, folk treatments, indigenous treatments. So I said, well, make a list of all the plants that are used for treating hepatitis... jaundice, all the plants that are used for treating jaundice. Now, jaundice is caused by a lot of things, but most of the jaundice in the world would be hepatitis, so I made a big list. I went through a whole bunch of folk pharmacopoeias, of which there are many - hundreds, thousands maybe - and we must have gone through four or five hundred, and I made a huge list of all the stuff that was used to treat jaundice and then I put them in a database and I sorted them alphabetically, and I also had the place where they were used, you know, the farming and where we got it from - the country or region. And then I looked through the list and I picked out plants in which the same genus, not the same species necessarily, but the same genus had been used in three or four continents, you know, Africa, South America, Europe, whatever. And I made a list of all those.
[Q] Did you cross-reference it to your knowledge of what geographies had... had antigen or not? 
The... we didn't quite do that because it was... I think there wasn't enough definite... definite... this was just to kind of give us a clue as to where to start looking. Well, we had a list of a hundred or more plants and genuses, on the genera on that, and I knew where they were and I started collecting them. Not very often, you know, you have the same genus you can find in the United States or some place, but I was still travelling quite a lot so wherever I went I'd bring my plant collecting equipment along, you know, plant press and... and usually try to get a local botanist to help because I didn't know much about botany. And... and I spent weeks, months, years collecting plants, which I enjoyed. You see, you know, most of the fieldwork I’d done, you go indoors when you're doing medical, you know, but this, you know, you're out in the... out in the forest or some place or out in the fields so that was... I mean the plant collecting was quite... was good fun. I learned a little bit about botany. But in the meanwhile, we decided to go ahead with the plant that was on this list and that the chemist in our laboratory, Dr Venkateswaran, who we had... when we started this project, he came to work with us. He was a... he went to the Indian Institute of Science at Bangalore and had been trained in natural products, chemistry. It's... it's pretty... it was a popular subject in... in India, and... but he had had experience with this... this growing up in Tamil Nadu. He'd actually used it as a gel, as a treatment for... it was used as a treatment for liver disease. So he said, it's on the list, why don't we work on this, so, you know, it's hard to... to say, so we spent years working on phyllanthus. Now, phyllanthus is described as an inconspicuous weed and it tends to grow in places where other things don't grow.

So Venkat started working on this stuff and then... and he did a lot of isolations and... and then we had to get an experimental animal to test it. Well, there isn't really an experimental animal for... for hepatitis B because — well, there are, but they're non-human primates. Well, they're... I, number one, didn't like working with primates and first of all, you know, it's hopelessly expensive, you know, to even begin to think of doing that, but there's the strange business about woodchuck hepatitis virus and I’d... you know, since I was interested in kind of the evolution of the virus, very early on we started looking for... we started looking for the virus that would react with the antibody, looked for... in other animals, and we also wanted to find an animal we could use to... to inoculate, you know. We wanted to get an experimental animal, so we surveyed 25–30 species of animals. A lot of them was serum that I collected up in Alaska, you know, seals in the Aleutians and... and stuff from West Africa and... and material I got from the zoo. Tested a lot of chimpanzees — the blood not the animals themselves. Well, it turns out you do find in... in higher apes and in vervets and squirrel monkeys, but it's in chimpanzees and gorillas and orangutans and... but we weren't going to use those experimentally. But I kept looking in other places and there were some clues but... but about that time Jesse Summers came here. You remember Jesse of course? And Jesse had been working - he's a virologist, a molecular virologist - so he was looking for, he wanted to find an animal that he could use for inoculation studies. So he got it in his head that he wanted to work with fish. Well, I think one of the reasons was he likes fishing, but fish wasn't a good choice. At about that time we had been visiting the zoo quite often because we'd been given a... a gibbon by one of the pharmaceutical companies who, they found it had hepatitis B virus and they didn't want to retain it so they thought we might use it and we couldn't keep it here obviously so we, it was kept in a... in the... in a sort of separated primate place in... at the zoo. It was very well looked after. But we never did, you know, we collected blood from it occasionally but I didn't... it was a beautiful animal. But in any case I used to go down and see him every so often to see how things were going and then I got to know Dr Snyder who was in charge of the pathology and research lab in the zoo, and I told him we were working, you know, on cancer of the liver. He said, ‘Cancer of the liver? Oh, I see plenty of that in woodchucks’.  And he had done his thesis on gender ratio in woodchucks by the way, and he had a colony of woodchucks. And he found that a very large percent of them, if they lived five years or more and didn't die for other reasons, most of them died through cancer of the liver. And then he studied them in the wild as well where you don't see cancer of the liver so much but... but animals that live in, woodchucks live in the wild don't live as long — anything like as long — as woodchucks that live in the zoo but if you corrected it for age, then the prevalence in the wild was... was about the same, as in the zoo. So that meant here was an animal with this incredible high prevalence of primary cancer of the liver which pathologically looked an awful lot like the cancer of the liver in humans.
[Q] And were they infected? 
Well, we couldn't find any using the serological techniques but we brought back... Tom got some and gave it to Jesse and that's where he found woodchuck hepatitis virus and they... and they...
[Q] So it didn’t just cross-react with the human...? 
It... it did in fact partially but you couldn't... initially you couldn't detect it that way but you could detect it using... it would affect molecular too, a much more sensitive method and then... then, well, I went to China, that was another important trip that I told you about and when I was there, Dr Sun, my colleague, who was interested in hepatitis — we were chatting, you know, we used to go for walks in the evening — and we started chatting and he said, ‘You know, there... the domestic ducks in a part of the country where we have a lot of cancer of the liver, they have a lot of cancer of the liver’. So I got some of the blood from the ducks and brought it back to Jesse. In the meanwhile, Dr Sun went ahead. He... he identified the virus in the ducks and in time Jesse did too and he actually found it in domestic ducks here in so-called... in a breed of ducks called Peking ducks that were originally imported from China. So then he did a lot of, you know, a lot of the molecular biology, the replication studies were done on the ducks and the woodchucks as well. So that's how that, you know, Jesse being here interested in the sort of availability of these... these kind of strange species that we... we had about them, you know. It... it shows you how you kind of get an idea, then you test it, you know, but you have to make the observation. If I hadn't been, you know, doing fieldwork in China, I probably, I wouldn't have heard that.
[Q] And did you go on to use the woodchucks in your therapeutic studies?
Yes, and we had a woodchuck colony over here but, you know, I soon... I soon realized that we really weren't equipped to do this kind of therapeutic research. Now, I... I was... I arrived at that conclusion reluctantly but in a funny way I should have perceived it early on.
Well, actually a lot of work's been done with phyllanthus. It's... the plant is widely used independent of any findings we had. The initial studies we did were very suggestive that it was effective, but they weren't confirmed, you know, and in science if you can't confirm it, it's the equivalent of it not having happened, even... even though the initial observations may have been correct. And we spent a lot of time trying to get drug companies interested, which is tiresome work you know, and... and not very gratifying, but in any case, I spent... I spent several years working on this, probably the... the least ‘successful’, quotation marks, research I've done, but people are still working on it, and there were leads, you know, in the laboratory level it has, it does have an effect, and it's conceivable that some use may come of it some time in the future. These things often take a long time. But the plant collecting was interesting. I'm just... I have a herbarium, you know, with the plants, I'm about to donate it to the Academy of Natural Sciences.
[Q] Oh, that's wonderful.
Well, you know, we don't need it here of course and otherwise I'm afraid it would get... but they may be able to make some use of it.

It was quite unexpected. It's not that it was unexpected, I hadn't thought about it. It was neither expected or unexpected, but a few years prior to the award of the prize, a colleague of mine called and told me that he'd... he'd put my name forward for the prize. Well, I knew that, you know, lots of names are put forward, and I must say I remembered that he'd said that but I didn't give it a lot of... of thought. Well, then — the prize is usually announced about now, by the way, you know, next month — and we were sitting in our, you know, we had a little conference room where we had our so-called protocol meetings and my friend, French colleague, Bernard Larouze, he called up and he said, ‘Barry the science correspondent of La Monde has asked me to speak to you about writing a essay on your work because she has heard through sources in Stockholm that you were selected for the prize’.
[Q] This was prior to the announcement?
Prior to the announcement. Well, the fact is you can't know who the prize winner is because they... you don't know until they actually vote, until the faculty of the... of the Karoline... the Karolinska Institute actually votes on it, so... so there's a committee that reviews various candidates and then they... they make a selection which they're meant to keep very secret and then... then they go to the committee as a whole, you know the professors at the... and then they tell their decision and then the committee, the whole faculty votes on it, whether they agree or not. Well, occasionally they haven't voted, so in a way, you can't really know, and I've heard of at least one of my colleagues who had prior information that he'd won the Nobel prize and then... and then bought the champagne — I mean the guy, I can assure you, fully deserved it, he was a brilliant scientist — but it was a terrible disappointment, you know, when that happened. So I... so I said, ‘Bernard, thanks very much, you know, of course, you know, if anything happens I'll help you with the essay but, you know, I don't think you can really base...’ So I put the phone down and, you know, everybody was kind of listening, said, ‘What did Bernard say?’ I said, ‘Bernard who?’ So I told them what he'd said. And the reason he thought he knew is because he had a friend, the correspondent from La Monde, she was a friend of one of the members of the committee and La Monde is a kind of very respected paper, you know, in France. It's kind of The New York Times as well. It's a paper of record note and... so, but in any case, that was a kind of... but I mean I was happy to hear that but, you know, I wasn't, you know—however Jay McKay, he, you know, called and asked me and asked whether he should buy champagne. And I said, ‘Jay...’
[Q] Had he heard it independently? 
Well, you know, Tom or somebody else or one of the others had told him. So I said, ‘If you can use it for something else!’ But... but, yes, they... it was announced some time in October. Actually I was out running. I was getting ready for the... wouldn't have been the... no, it was the middle of winter, so there wasn't any big race coming up, I was just, you know, running and when I got home, my sister called and she'd heard it. On the radio or television so she told me that there was a whole series of events, you know. We had a big party when... when I came here and they took the kids — two... two of the children were in school here... three... three were in school — so they were called out of school. They came up to the... we had a wonderful party in Fox Chase on the occasion.
[Q] Oh, that's great. What was it like going to the ceremony?
Well, to begin with, they... they sent us kind of instructions on... on the process. You know, they're really good at organizing parties, and they said you can invite your guests and they can come to the events but they’ll have to pay their own way and everything and you're allowed to invite your immediate family, you know, so they, you know, paid for that. They didn't expect four children I don't think and the... so... so I invited a lot of people, you know, and the Swedes never said anything about it but subsequently they put a limit. We actually chartered a piece of an airplane so Tim Talbot came and Wing Pepper and, you know, and Irv Millman and Ann O'Connel and... and my secretary, Ann Dortort and a whole, you know, we... it was, the party was enormous. And the guy, the chap who won the prize with me, Carleton Gajdusek, he also was operating under the same rules. I... I mean it was, you know, they didn't say anything; if they'd said invite five people, I would have done that. So Carleton had a sort of unusual domestic life. He'd... he had adopted about 20 or 30 children. He... he... his work, we never actually worked together, we knew each other at NIH, but his work was very similar to mine in the sense he did a lot of field work, lots of field work, more than me and he was, you know, trained in... he was a microbiologist and clinician and... and did a lot of anthropology. He later on published a lot in the anthropological literature as well, so there was a kind of parallel. He was a field work-based guy as well as laboratory, brilliant fellow. And he... so he had all these adopted kids and he adopted them in Marshall Islands, in Malaysia and in Micronesia and he established a kind of a dynasty with all these adopted children and he brought all of them. You know, and his... he had his secretary and he had somebody to help with the kids so we had the biggest, between us, we had the biggest number of guests. Well, there are a whole series of very lovely events and very... Milton Friedman won the prize the same year, you know, who was the just— he died last year in his 90s, pretty spunky guy but he was, you know, major right wing economist, the... the boss of the right wing economists. Yes, it was a... it was a,very exciting time and people often say that, well, you know, I got the prize and I just continued doing what I — I think it's totally life changing. I mean the... the very fact that I was invited to China, right? And it gave me a lot of opportunity to do things I would never have done. So that was a... you know, it was a... it was a, there's no question it was a kind of change, very gratifying, you know. You always like to think your work is good but to get the recognition of your fellow scientists in that... in that, in a really dramatic way, that's very reassuring.

I'd like to say one more thing about the… the Nobel prize itself. It… it… the short statement in the prize did not specifically refer to the hepatitis B, the longer explanation did, but it was given to Carleton Gajdusek and myself, although we had never worked together but our… our sort of style of… of doing research was very similar and that was noted by the Nobel committee, that we didn't work just on the virus, which is frequently the case in… in microbiological research, but it was the virus, the host, different responses of the host, the environmental factors that interacted with the virus and the host, the… the community, the population in which the host was and the effect of the virus on the population, not just on the individual host, and its interaction with behavior. And both Carleton and I had done, I think I pointed out before, we'd published papers in Anthropology and in Population Biology and Population Genetics, and I think that was… that was something that pleased me very much because the… the committee kind of saw the… the approach that we'd used and, as a matter of fact, that's one of the reasons I felt somewhat — as it turned out — uncomfortable at NIH, because they wanted to separate those ways of approaching science, whereas when I came here to Fox Chase, there was this kind of liberation, you know, I could work on… work on… I didn't have to work on some kind of category — there wasn't a restriction, there was less confinement into the style and the science. So that was very encouraging, of course, to… to get that validation, you might say, of what we… the way we'd approached the problems.

I think a large part of the consequences of winning the prize is that I... I was offered these unusual jobs. Well, let me see, I was, I guess I was about 64 or something... 63... 63 years old, and more or less out of the blue, I was asked if I would stand as a candidate to be the Master of Balliol College in Oxford. Well, I'd been a student there and I talked about that earlier in the... in the conversation, sort of conversation, you know, that we're having, and... and I always liked... liked it, we went back, Jean and I were there, I was a... was a Visiting Fellow at Oxford on two occasions for a... for a  year, both times on sabbaticals, you know, kids had part of their education there. And... and then the... the Master was retiring earlier than had been anticipated and I was asked if I'd... if my name could be put forward and I agreed to do so. Then I was elected as the Master. Now, that is a total transformation from what I was doing. So we, you know, moved all... put all the furniture in a 40-foot trailer, shipped it over to England, and we were there for about five years. It's hard to think of a bigger or greater contrast.
Now, actually, I was able to maintain some scientific work when I was there and I... I collaborated, or associated myself, with the Department of Biochemistry and particularly... in particular with Raymond Dwek who was the director of the Institute of Glycobiology, or the Glycobiology Institute at Oxford, which he had founded, which he... he made... invented the name glycobiology, and I... we’ve retained a close friendship and scientific collaboration, we published I don't know how many papers together, and that started when I was there. But my main function was... was running the college, you know, and it had some... some interesting consequences in things that I did. Well, first of all, the college is probably the oldest college in Oxford — although that's debated — and we date our origins from 1263 and we... the... and we... our founders were John Balliol and his wife, Dervorguilla of Galloway, who — Galloway, Scotland... Calloway, Scotland — and she... she was related to the Scottish royal family. She was related to Alexander III and her son became a King of Scotland. He also had the same name as John and he was John Balliol too. So there was, back in the Middle Ages, there's confusion that the King of Scotland had actually been the founder, but as a connection we have very strong Scottish... as a consequence, we have strong Scottish connections. And the college, you know, had some real estate on the corner of Broad Street in Oxford where it still is, you know, at the same place, none of the original buildings. And so the job description was that I was responsible for the academic... academic, educational and religious life of... of the students and... and the faculty.

Now, in fact, the... the Master had very little power. Over the course of 700 years, any power he may have had had been gradually extracted by the Fellows. So, the governing body of the college was the Fellows of the college and as far as I can make out, we actually owned the college. I mean... I don't know if we didn't own it, it's hard to know who did, and we never, for example, all the time I was the Master, I never got a order from the government, you know, all universities in Britain are funded by the — to a large extent — by the government, in that... in that they pay the students' tuition and they give them a subsistence. That's changed somewhat recently, but nevertheless I never got directives from them and also we didn't get, directly, we did get requests from the university administration but the colleges were quite autonomous and there was... always was, and still is, a conflict between loyalty to the college and loyalty to the university. It wasn’t... I never had an issue with that. But in any case, so, we... we had a great deal of, you know, we'd have these discussions at college meeting and in effect everything had to be decided there. For example, if you wanted to buy a new rug for the library, we'd talk about that, and, you know, obviously we dealt with educational issues, that was our primary concern, and they... and we didn't have much of an administration, the Fellows actually ran things, that gradually changed. But, and then we had, in effect, everything was decided by a vote, well, and I had one vote, so the Master didn't have many more, but I don't... there's... for a small group, voting on everything is not a great idea and at Fox Chase here actually in its origins had kind of a Quaker attitude towards governance, although Tim wasn't a Quaker and I'm not sure any of our senior Fellows were either, but nevertheless there was this idea that you were run by kind of consensus and you can do that in a small organization, and there's big advantages to that because that means if you vote on something you have to polarize it, you have to get yes-no, answers. Well, that rules out all kinds of other answers. Now, if you arrive at a consensus, then, in effect, any combination of things is possible, as I say, you hit on one that, you know, has, you know, obvious merit over others, and... and it has a big advantage, you don't have a minority. You know, very often, if there's a vote and... and the minority, you know, doesn't really... they're not really crazy about the outcome and you have a kind of built-in antagonism. Well, I tried to... I tried to run things that way, with a fair amount of success. I mean it wasn't innovative, I think, the college ran that way in the past, and we'd occasionally have to vote on things, sometimes a Fellow would insist I had a vote but mostly I kind of avoided that and despite all these, you know, these books about these terrible rivalries and political shenanigans going on in Oxford colleges, there either wasn't any or, if there was, I didn't perceive it and part of the reason I didn't perceive it is I didn't look for it, you know, I just ran ahead blindly, naively, that, you know, things were... if somebody said something, that's what they meant, that it wasn't some sort of deception. So I found that's actually an easier way that you get along in life, you know, if... if you believe what people tell you, you're going to be wrong some of the time. If you don't believe what people tell you, you're also going to be wrong some of the time, so the easiest thing is actually believe them and then if they're wrong then, okay, you find out in time and that leads to some hazards but not always. So, the governance was actually — I learned a lot. I learned how to govern without power and that's a very good, even when you have a lot of influence, you know. When I ran my research group, a head of a research group has quite a lot of power, you know, we had one grant that... that went to me, initially to Tim and then to me. So that meant you held, but that's... that's not a good way to run a research group. You know, you can't order scientists to be creative, that's... that’s not the right... so it's a very good lesson and later on I found that useful. But there was... it was just a delightful time being there. Oxford, despite the... a lot of rain and overcast skies, is in a beautiful part of the world. The students were really good, they were interesting, very bright. We... we attracted some of the smartest students in the university, in Britain. They have a great sense of being in an elite institution, but it's not elite in the sense that we have, you know, you have to have money or you have to be wealthy. A lot of them... a lot of them, on the contrary, when people think... a lot of British education is pretty income-independent, you know, people are... can go based on their capabilities and in that sense a meritocracy. I found, I certainly found that to be the case and we at Balliol, we said if we admit a person and they're doing... they're doing their work well and they don't have sufficient money to stay there, we'll... we would support them, and I don't ever recall having to ask somebody to leave because they couldn't... they couldn’t pay for things, and, in fact, we sometimes, you know, had developed kind of scholarship funds when it was needed on an ad hoc basis. So we just had a grand time there and we had a wonderful house and I had... I had a butler, you know, who was meant to sort of look after... and when I'd invite guests for lunch he'd serve them and so forth. When he... he was... he had been a professional bicycle... bicyclist in Spain, and he used to take care of my bike, you know, small repairs and all, great. He even tried to clean it occasionally, and a very nice man.

A lot of what I did was go to dinners. I was probably out three or four nights a week, partly or usually, and very often, in black tie, and there's a... there's a kind of ritual in the way you behave. You... you're meant to talk about what the other person's interested in, and then you kind of alternately talk to the person on your right and your left, and as the Master I always felt, when many of the Fellows would have guests, so I always felt like I was kind of the host, so I’d make a point of, you know... Well, as a consequence of that, you know, I've learned an awful lot about many subjects because Balliol was not primarily a science college. We had a lot of people in politics, I mean, a lot, who went on to take, you know, big government positions. Then when I’d travel, we — oh, one of the things I’d evolved there was the development program, you know, raising money for the college because the government threatened, and finally followed through, that they weren't going to provide this financial support they had in the past, and so I started a professional program. I think it was one of the first at... among the colleges, and now all of them have them, and to my great surprise, they kept it up after I left, you know, it's now... it's now extremely good, they have very able people running that and we, you know, we built up the endowment and then we... we were also responsible for our investments. So we'd have these meetings which I actually enjoyed where we talked about, you know, what we're investing in and whether we should buy another shopping center, and actually we... we did pretty well. That was a period when the stock market went up, I think, every year there, you know, just generally it would have... so that meant there were lots of aspects.
Oh, and another funny thing is that... is that back in the few hundred years, you know, when the college was still young and up until the 19th century, the... the Fellows were not allowed to marry. Now, very often they were married clandestinely or unmarried and living in a domestic, effectively, with a wife, but if they... if they wanted to marry, then they had to leave, they could no longer be Fellows, but they were still interested in academic studies. So if they got a job as a... in a country parish, as a vicar, they very often had a lot of time on their hands and they... and their salary was paid by the government, you know, it’s an established church, and so that was a kind of good job for a Fellow. So over time, we inherited the gift of, or acquired, or were given, the gift of about 35 small churches in villages around Oxford and one or two in London. Well, back in the 60s, you know, everybody thought this was kind of nonsense and the... these livings, as they were called, the ability to appoint the vicar, was transferred back to them, but a lot of the places didn't want to do it. They wanted to retain this arrangement, it gave them a kind of protection against the central authorities, I guess. So we still had the right to... to appoint these people and one or two of them were in the gift of the Master. In other words, it wasn't the college who decided, it was the Master. Well, obviously I... I wasn't going to have any role in that, you know, I wasn't a Christian. So... so we had a committee and the chaplain was a very close friend and he was an American, one of the Americans in our Fellowship, and we remain very good friends. So, generally speaking, he would do it, but they insisted on my sort of sitting in and, you know, on an interview, you know, speak to the candidates but never say anything that had a deciding vote. And then... and then we... we had a very active chapel and the... and the... our college chaplain asked me to kind of encourage that, so both Jean and I would go to chapel. I'd sit there, you know, quietly, we had our own pew, but I did give a couple of sermons; one on cynicism, which is common in, more common, in Europe than it used to be in America — we get pretty cynical these days, and the other on... on the sense of order and... and its relation to the testaments, you know, how the concept of order became... comes from having... having a creation story in other words, things happened in an orderly fashion. Therefore, you know, if you don't have order in nature, you can't understand it. So all science is based on the idea that there's... there's a predictable... order, it’s the basis of scientific enquiry.
Well, there were a bunch of other things that happened. I used to travel a lot then, both for scientific reasons and for the college, and we had... we have old members, as they were called, all over and so I, as... as part of my program to kind of reach out to the old members, we set up a series of Master seminars which were extremely good; we brought old members back and students and some of the Fellows that would come would select a topic and the old members would spend, you know, a... the weekend with us. We had them in... and we had several ones in Canada and Hong Kong. The... the governor, the then governor of Hong Kong, was a Balliol alumnus and very devoted to the college, so we had dinner with him once; in Singapore and Tokyo, New York, San Francisco, I think. So it was a very happy... it was a very... but by the end of five years, it was... I was... that was about right. Also, there's compulsory retirement in... in British academics, and the retirement age for our college was 60... was 67. So I was 64 when I took the job and Jean said I'm not going for three years only, I'm not moving all the furniture for three years, so the... and the college wanted me to stay longer so they had to petition the Privy Council. The Privy Council is like the Supreme Court, and they granted us the charter initially, so we had to petition them to extend it to 69. By some convoluted wording, it could only apply to me, so anybody afterwards would have to retire at 67. So I stayed on until I was 69 and I was kind of ready to get back to... although I enjoyed life in Britain immensely, I, you know, I missed American life, I, you know, I like living in America.

I think that was when I was spending a fair amount of time doing that... trying to encourage people to start a vaccination program and to look into the cancer prevention vaccine and so I... but there were other aspects of… of hepatitis virus that... that we were interested in... in and again going back to this concept of the polymorphisms, what we had found was that the susceptibility to becoming a chronic carrier of hepatitis B virus, there was a measure, it was an influence and it was a genetic influence, I wouldn't say control, but a genetic factor in the... in the way individuals responded and since our…  and the... the first research I did on… on Australian antigen was on its genetics, first studies we did were family studies and we showed a... a genetic relation to them. It was like a polymorphism. Nothing has happened to change my mind. It is a polymorphism, the ability to be carried. And since then, there've been ten loci, probably now that you have SNPs and everything, it will be 30, 40 loci that are related to susceptibility to hepatitis B. Okay, now we have a polymorphic trait. There're advantages and disadvantages. As I said before, and we talked about this a little bit in the beginning, you know, a third of the world's population's been affected. That's overwhelming. There are other viruses, that's true as well. It's got to have an impact and why… why did it last this long? How can you bare the... the killing factor? Which, by the way, hits people after the child-bearing age so presumably it would have little effect on the number of offspring. But as a consequence, I got very interested in the other aspects of hepatitis B, and probably the most interesting one we found was the relation to gender.
Right from the start we'd been looking, because we did a lot of family studies, we'd look at mothers and fathers and their offspring and we had a lot of family data. Well, we did a study, I wanted... we wanted to do a... a family population study in Greece, in… in a… in a highly endemic country, and we… there were some very good hepatitis scientists in… in Greece. There… there's quite a lot of it there, and they were, you know, very well-trained, outstanding people and I think we had a mutual decision that we'd do a study of a population there, but we wanted to find a kind of community, a... a community, a whole community where the prevalence was quite high and we... where the people would agree to participate in the study. And we... what had happened is that they had done a study of blood donors from different parts of the country and... and then also tested school children, national... nationwide and the highest prevalence they found was in the province of Imathia which is up in near Macedonia, you know, and... and one town had the highest prevalence in that place. It was a small community, a few, a couple of thousand people called Plati, so the... the capital of that province is Saloniki, so, you know, it's up in the north and there was a community that had been settled by refugees from Turkey. You know, you probably recall that after the Second World War, the... the Turks had… had these pogroms I think you have to call them or sort of attacks — although they deny it, by the way — there was a big political controversy, against Armenians and also against the Greek population. You know, on the basis of the treaty of Lausanne there was a huge exchange of populations, a very large number of... of Greeks who lived mostly in Cappadocia and... and I think in Anatolia too, went on down to the coast. One of the biggest at the time, it was the largest exchange of people anywhere and… and a large number of Turks but not so many, so that was like a third of the population of Greece and they had this campaign to build new towns and they built them up in this… in the… in that province in the north. It was… it was Macedonia province and Imathia district and the… which was quite diseased. It hadn't been settled, you know, because it wasn't very healthy. And so this community where people migrated from Turkey or had been required to migrate and their descendents, so 80,85 percent of them, their origins were in Cappadocia, a very interesting population, caused me to read a lot about them history of that sad time. They had an incredibly high prevalence. So we did a family, I had some of my anthropology students and my Greek colleagues stay, you know, stayed there. They were there for weeks, months and we got essentially a 90%, 80% of the entire population we tested and… and looked at the distribution in families. And one of the things that was looked at was the number of offspring and the gender of the offspring, and when you sorted them out that way and then looked at the response that the parents had had to infection with the hepatitis B virus. So the two polar responses you can have, if one would be chronically infected, then you have the surface antigen. The other has developed antibody against the surface, which gives you protection so that, when you… when you get infected, if one of those happens, if you become a carrier, you're at high risk of chronic liver disease, cancer. The other happens, you're protected. Big change in your fate depending on what happens to them. If the parents were carriers of the hepatitis B virus, there was a higher ratio of boys to girls among their offspring than if the parents had developed antibody. It was a little more complicated than that but broadly it’s that, and if the parents had not been infected or had no serological evidence, they were in between. That's an amazing finding. What do you do next when you find, when you do it again? So Tom London and others, we eventually did a study in... in the Philippines; Papua, New Guinea; place called Karkar, Greenland and then subsequently there were studies, another study done in France and another study… and another study done in Greece. They were all in the same direction. Now, there might have been a lot of studies that people did that didn't show but they weren't published, you know, that's the problem, you know, you get negative results, people don't publish them. But in any case I was convinced, I mean you do it five times. Well… well, there… there wasn't much more we could do, you know, we would have liked to have looked into the… the biochemistry of it or the immunology, you know, whatever, but we were really pretty much onto the vaccine and… and the phyllanthus by that time so it didn't do that and it... nobody noticed it, you know, and the effect by the way was very large. As far as I can make out, it was the biggest biological effect on gender.

I had a call from a young woman in... from, well, she was in Boston then, and she was a graduate student doing her degree in economics and her name was Emily Oster. And she said that she'd read about the stuff, about the gender ratio and she'd gotten very interested in… in that and she had spent the next year or more collecting data to test in effect the predictions that you'd make from that model. Well, one of the predictions were if you looked just at broad population data, you'd expect there'd be a direct correlation between gender ratio, that is, males and females and the prevalence of hepatitis B. You know, the higher... if you have high prevalence, you have high gender ratios. If you have low prevalence of hepatitis B, you have low gender ratios. Well, she collected all that data from the medical literature and from demographic data from WHO and so forth and sure enough, there's a very high correlation, including China, you know, where they have one of the highest prevalences of HBV and one of the highest gender ratios, male to female. Okay, so that was pretty convincing. Then she went on to do some other things. She's very mathematically-oriented and she made some really fascinating mathematical models for all this.
So then the next thing was there'd been a nearly universal vaccination program in Alaska because Inuits, Eskimos, have a very high prevalence of hepatitis B, strangely. Other Native Americans, Indians, don't and… and Europeans of… and… and Alaskans of European origin don't have particularly high frequency, but the vaccination program was in place for about 15 years. It had been highly effective. Among the Native Americans back before vaccinations, they had 200–300 cases of hepatitis a year, after 10 years, zero. It was acute hepatitis and the prevalence went down. So she looked at the vaccination data. So the model is, okay, you would expect that you would get a decrease in gender ratio in the Inuits and the Eskimos because they were under… they were influenced by the hepatitis infection but not the Indians or in people of European origin. That's exactly what she found and she did a similar but rather more sophisticated study in Taiwan and the results were complex but generally speaking...Okay so that, first of all that… that was a direct test of the model, right? And now that meant it's ideologic and it causes the germ because if you remove it, the gender ratio changes... That's not a disease, you know. Having a boy or a girl isn't a disease. That… effect, a profound effect on human populations. Now it's hard to tell what, you know, there're a lot of things that determine gender ratio. At an individual level, it might be hard for anybody to know, but at a demographic level, at a population level, in a place like China which is moving towards a universal vaccination and where they have one child, there's a one child rule, which is pretty strictly adhered to, except, with some exceptions by the way, foreign families, minorities, you know, can have more than one child. Now, there may be some effect, you know, may not influence single childs [sic] as much as it does whole communities. We never actually did a study in China but nevertheless this raises that… this raises that question about the demographic effect. Now as far as I know, nobody's ever looked in humans anyhow on viral effects on gender ratios. There… there are studies in other… in other species and I… and there… I'm sure there are other… there other factors that have maintained this in the population.
[Q] That's fascinating. And no idea what the mechanism is?
Well, we have a bunch of ideas but we haven't… we haven't tested, you know, I'm not… I don't have a lab any more and… but I think particularly since… since Emily's research, I think there'll be more… be more work on it and I continue to speak on it and people… but you see it's… it's not the sort of thing you would do, you know, if you’re trying to, you know, if they tell you, in your department… well, listen we got to develop drugs. Are you going to work on gender ratio? Well, the answer is yes, you should because among other things, if you can figure out what that... that is, you're not going to, I mean I hope it's never used for determining, you know, for influencing gender outcome in humans, but think of what it would do in cattle raising. You know, you… you have a herd where you… you want… you have really great cows and… and you… you want to increase them or you want to raise steers, you know, your beef production, you know, your... you know, dairy production and you want… you want to be able to affect, you know, gender ratio.

We started the… the story talking about the… our interest in polymorphisms and how they relate to disease susceptibility, and that was the initiation of the research and it's kind of characterized the research, our research, on hepatitis and I think those of others as well, and there's… there's a lot of… a kind of message from… from this approach that I think is very important now at… at a time when so much is… progress is being made in genomics and proteomics. A consequence of this view of things is that, you know, a gene, in a sense, never operates, or nearly never operates, on its own. There are some genes that are highly deterministic and although there's… if you have the gene, the probability of getting an associated phenomena, an associated disease is… is extremely high. But those… there are many of those but they tend to be rare, and the total sum they contribute to the disease load of humans is relatively small compared to things like heart disease, stroke, you know, diabetes, infections; they're a small part of the load. Now, the genetics that's involved with these really big diseases that kill a lot of people and the ones that most people are concerned about, they tend to be these sort of susceptibility genes which means they're not highly deterministic and that their interactions with other genes in the same environment, with environmental factors and with behavior, is extremely important and you have to understand the whole complex. So the bottom line is biology isn't destiny and you can change the effects of your genes and that's what doctors do all the time; you know, if you have diabetes and your insulin's not being processed properly, or you're not producing enough of it, they give you insulin. That's interfering with the effects of the genes. If you're… if you have genes that make you susceptible… susceptible to hepatitis B virus and we've identified, we and others, have identified multiple loci, well, you get the vaccine and you don't get hepatitis. So the effect of the genes is… is inconsequential there.
Now, the other interesting thing is that the very same genes that make you susceptible to hepatitis B virus also make you susceptible to specific other organisms and we developed a… a approach to that, in which we developed a classification of infectious agents based on the fact that each of the agents in this particular category, this… the classification, are related to the same susceptibility gene. Now, in some… in some cases, a allele that makes you susceptible to one of those agents will make you resistant to another, so you can't talk about good genes and bad genes. You have to talk about a good in what way, or bad in what way, and… and as a consequence, by the way, this notion of gene substitution therapy, the idea you get a bad gene, you get it out and put… or… or change its impact, and then put a big gene in, another gene, quotation marks, ‘good gene’, I think it's not… it's not going to work and it hasn't worked, you know, there's no substitutional gene therapy, because it goes ahead on the notion that the main function of the gene, which is usually the first one that's found, is the only function. Well, it's patent… you know, genes have multiple functions. Now, part of the reasons that they have multiple functions is that nature doesn't throw genes away. Nature tends to conserve them, and, you know,  that's very… that can be studied quantitatively by looking at the conservation parts of the gene or different genes and they come to us from… from species, you know, that are earlier on the evolutionary scale than humans, and I think one of the most amazing biological findings of the past century was that mammals share a third of their genes with archaea. Now, archaea are… are, it's thought, the… one of the organisms, a group of organisms, bacteria-like organisms that differ in their gene sequences and a variety of other ways from bacteria, that they are… they're very early in the scale of living matter and they may conceivably have been the first living things. And then there, by the way, there are viruses in archaea and I'll get to that later when we talk about space. So we share genes. Well, those genes still have… still contain the potential of the organisms from which they came, and in a way we… it's very hard to know what those are because they were expressed in very different environmental situations. Well, nobody knows… can foretell the future; we're actually… we are foretelling the future now we're considering climate change and it's going to, you know, which independent… well, climate change with human cause attached to it. Well how are we going to respond to that new environment? And one of my current interests, or a major current interest, is how earth-bound organisms respond to being in space. And as I said, I'll get to that later, but I… but I did want to make this point that we continue… we never gave up our interest in this inherited susceptibility to disease and… and the work on hepatitis really — subsequent work — really made that patently clear.

We've done lots of population studies on distribution of hepatitis B in populations and the distributions of the other serological markers, including antibody against the surface, the protective antibody. Well, there's some suggestion from some of the data that we collected in… in Bougainville and in the Solomon Islands years and years ago, but we had the appropriate kind of data and again the collections that Alison Evans and… and Tom London and their colleagues have made in Haimen City in the eastern part of China, that if you look at outcome... survival, well, people who are carriers of hepatitis B virus have a decreased survival compared to people who haven't been infected, and people who have antibody and… but the question is that, it was hinted at that in this data, that the people who developed antibody against the virus actually have a longer survival than the people who weren't infected. Now, the implication of that is it protects against things in addition to… in addition to hepatitis B virus. Now, that's a very… that's a very interesting observation and there was… these are all little hints, you know, this is… this is the kind of observations that could lead to subsequent research. There was great concern about seven or eight years ago, that there was some detrimental side effect to using the vaccine and it particularly had to do with demyelinating disease and there's still this… people are concerned that it may be related to autism, although there was just a study published yesterday that clearly showed there was no connection between the preservative thiomersal that was used in many vaccines and any of these diseases. Well, this concern arose in France and it — not based on any significant data but on much more anecdotal evidence — and as a consequence the French government stopped using the vaccine, probably led to the death of a few hundred people I would say. So, then they did a study and they found that contrary to what had been conjectured, there was actually… the people who’d been vaccinated, had a lower incidence of these demyelinating diseases than the ones that hadn't been vaccinated and I think the difference was actually significant. Now, the major purpose of the study was to allay the fears of the people who were concerned and they started using the vaccine again, but that's a very interesting observation if it's… and, again, it was, I think just to hint, you know, you can only see the kind of thin edge of… of an idea emerging from that kind of murky data, but that's something, I think, you know, it's kind of, how shall I put it, it's kind of… it is reasonable that… that an infectious agent that thrives in a population in which, you know, in western society such as ours, you know, survival has increased, continuously increased. When I was born, life expectancy for males was probably in the low 60s. It's now in the… in the high 70s. If you're born this year, the probability of… of males is — in females still a bit longer — is much… is much ahead of that. Sadly, I’m beyond that expectation, not sadly, I guess. Okay, so I… so a lot of this excitement about, you know, genes being the blueprint, well, they are kind of the blueprint but you look at a blueprint of a house, that's not a house. It just gives… and… and very often when people make the house, it's not like the blueprint either, and that is actually kind of a good metaphor, the good, you know, metaphor. So we have to be very cautious to attribute all this power to the genes. I… I taught at the University of Pennsylvania, taught anthropology and out at Stanford as well, a very similar course, and one of the… one of the assignments I gave the students was to see the movie Gattaca and that's about genetic determination, is that… and that genetics isn't destiny, that There isn't a gene for the human will, was the catch line for that movie. It was, actually, it was a pretty good movie, I think…  it was filmed in the… up in Marin County, in the… in the town hall, county hall in Marin County and I… I thought it was pretty good but it made that point very explicitly that… that that's not your fate.

While I was in Oxford I decided to close my lab. I kept it going for a year or two but it's just… it’s just not a great idea to be a… a absentee landlord and also I… although the work that I did in Oxford has actually turned into something fascinating because when I got there, Raymond Dwek, Professor Dwek, you know, he and I talked about what I'd work on, and I said, you know, there's not an awful lot known about the glycobiology of hepatitis B virus. Now, we knew the… there had been some work on attachment sites where the sugars tie on, and, as you know, a lot of infectious agents and virus, a lot of them have sugars on them, like HIV is… is loaded with sugar, it's kind of a sweet virus in the sense it's got lots of sugar attachments, and HBV, hepatitis B virus, has three attachments sites, I think that's still the current view and not much was known about it. But these… these sugars have an awful lot to do with the, what you might call the destiny of the… of… of a cell or a protein, protein in… it depends on the tropism, you know, and how it interacts, how it enters the cell, so it's really vital stuff. So I said, okay, we'll do a kind of systematic study of the glycobiology, and… and that was the kind of overall framework but then… but Raymond was working on, you know, the effect… synthetic sugars that would interfere with glycosylation, so the notion was if you could… and he was studying that in terms of the changes in rheumatoid arthritis and cancer and a whole bunch of other really fascinating stuff. I said, so the argument was, well, interfering with glycosylation may affect some aspects of hepatitis B virus. We started that work when I was there and it's continued ever since, there… there are several therapies that are in various stages of trial, none of them have been… I think there's... no wait, I think some of them are still at a stage two, I think, there's some going on, it's been taken up by more and more companies and, you know, it's promising and not here yet. But… but meanwhile a great deal was learned about the assembly of the virus, its tropism and how it, you know, how it… and how it interacts with stuff out… that's not produced by the gene. The… the interesting thing about glycosylation, it's a post-translation of event, and that greatly changes the character of the protein, so that means you can have the same proteins with different glycosylation so, again, that's a non-deterministic biochemical level character of genes, and it's not often taken into account that all… all proteins aren't created the same. They're created the same but they don't change, they don't end up the same because the post-translational events are affected by some… what you eat essentially or a whole bunch of other phenomenon.

Well, I got back and I… I got sort of restless, you know, I was… I was back in Philadelphia, I came back to Fox Chase, and I decided I'd never done much undergraduate teaching, so—I had taught graduate students at Penn pretty regularly and I had quite a few whom  had their PhD in our lab there, and I taught the medical school when I went on rounds and all that, but I hadn't done any undergraduate teaching and I thought, okay, at my age it's probably a good thing to take a stab at that and I had… I knew Stanford quite well because for years we used to go there in the summer and… and work at the… the Center for Advanced Study and the Behavioral Sciences, which is a kind of behavioral sciences think tank. They usually had a few scientists there and I went there and would write, or… or very often spend a month making plans for future research. I… I would design, in detail, potential studies which, when it came back, you know, there'd be a big discussion, but very often it would initiate research. But I used to go there, so I knew that area quite well and it's a… a nice place to be in the… in the summer, or in the winter for that matter. So I taught in the program in human biology which had been established some years prior to that and… and, you know, interacting with the undergraduates was fun and I liked living in… I've always liked living in California. When… when I was, let me see, about 25 or so, I spent a summer at the… at the… in Berkley at the… before, you know, Berkley was still a quiet university town before all the festivities of the 1960s, but I got to know the… the geography well and I did a lot of climbing up in the Sierras and the Cascades and coast range and I… I hiked miles and miles then.

During one of those times that I was at Stanford, I was… I taught in the Department of Medicine, I was a visiting… professor, in… in the human biology program. A friend of mine, Bill Hurlbut, invited me to go to a… a workshop that was taking place at NASA Ames Research Center. Now, NASA Ames Research Center is about I think seven miles south of… of Stanford, and it's a huge NASA base. It was an army base initially, then it was a navy airfield, they have a huge landing strip there, and then it became a federal airfield and then NASA took it over. They used to keep a lot of their aircraft, experimental aircraft, there but they… they had moved down to Dryden by the time I arrived. But, in any case, so I went to this workshop and it was a workshop to establish a program for astrobiology. Now, the term, the word astrobiology probably goes back to the 1930s. We did a little research on that to find out its initial use and the current definition, simple definition, that… that we use, and I think it's probably an adequate definition: it's the study of the origin, distribution… origin, distribution… I guess and future, of life on Earth and in the universe. Okay, so, essentially, it said, the question is, is there life some place else? Well, in order to… to know about that, you have to understand how life started here because there's plenty of evidence that, you know, based on some of the, I guess, some of the Jupiter missions, in that… that Mars — the best possibility for a place for life in our solar system — was a pretty arid place, there was no evidence of liquid water, and… and the astronomers had worked out the early history of… of our planetary system and there was reason to believe that in the early million, billion or so years, or hundreds of millions of years, that… that Earth and Mars had… had quite similar environments and they diverged greatly since then. So the notion was if we were going to recognize life on Mars, we should really know about life, origins of life, on Earth, what life was like in early days. Now, early days means— really early days is about 4.7, I think, billion years, that's the origin of the… of our solar system. Now, it was like a turmoil on… on Earth in… in the first billion years, less than that, a few hundred million; lots of volcanic eruptions and if there ever had been life to start with, the Earth was in effect totally sterilized, really upset, you can't get geology going, you know, for the first couple of million years because it's all been changed by these… by, you know, by lava flowing all over and, you know, good parts of South Africa and Siberia are just huge lava fields. So, and also there was a lot of impact activity in the so-called Late Heavy Bombardment, the… a lot of the asteroids that were in the asteroid belt between Jupiter and Mars, their situation was somewhat unstable, so a lot of them, you know, left orbit and eventually ended up on Earth and on the moon. Well, things that happen on Earth, impact on Earth, you can't see because we have weather, but the moon is… is a reflection of what happened to Earth. So you can… you can figure out the intensity of… of impact by looking at the moon and you can often tell late ones and early ones too, the way they're superimposed on each other, so you can kind of date the periods of great activity. Now, there is even more on Earth because… bigger cross section, and, but now there's about, I guess the last figure I heard is something under 200 known impact sites on Earth, a lot of them discovered from the space station or from the shuttle, because the astronauts are trained to look for interesting stuff and they're given a camera, they have multiple cameras, and when they have kind of free times they sit and look out there, you know, in the porch windows, so to speak, and photographing things they find interesting, but also they have a kind of program that's… we're going to look at the delta of the Nile, you know, for the next… for this mission or something. But they… but a lot of the impacts were found in that fashion. Nobody had recognized them, that we had impact craters, until the 1960s. I diverge a little bit. So I went to this... I was absolutely fascinated by it, and I, you know, and they had invited several hundred scientists from all, you know, from many fields, not just people who had been working with NASA and astrobiology, you know, geologists, medical people, even biologists, paleontologists, and I… we ended up with a kind of workshop, you know, a… a guidelines, in effect, boundaries, you might say, or programs, that weren't binding but they represented the content, the potential content, of the field. It was an elaborate document, there were multiple pages. Well, I got involved in that, you know, I asked a lot of questions and, you know, I got… I met my first NASA contacts which are still my best friends there, and… and I really was intrigued.

They asked me to chair a… another seminar that we had on… on… genomics in space with Richard Roberts, a prominent molecular biologist, a Nobel laureate from the East Coast, and that was a really interesting phenomenon and we subsequently did another seminar too. Well, when I… I had to kind of write up the… write up the report on this, you know the one Roberts and I had chaired, and I did most of it because he was back east and I was still in California. So there was an exchange back and forth, and, you know, I had met the director of the Ames Research Center and some of the senior administrators, so I had a call from… from the director of Ames and he said he'd like to talk to me and I thought, well, it’s going to, you know, he wanted to discuss maybe another conference. I said, ‘Sure, I'd be happy to come down and see you’. He said, ‘No, Scott Hubbard and I will come down to see you’, and so Henry McDonald who was the director then, and Scott Hubbard came — another Scot, by the way, Henry McDonald — and we… and I met them in my office at Stanford which was in the old quadrangle, that's the historic center of Stanford, wonderful old buildings. And he said that they'd recently formed the NASA Astrobiology Institute and there was a temporary director, sort of a managing director, that was Dr… Dr Scott Hubbard, but they were looking for, in effect, the first director, and so I said, ‘Well, you know, give me… give me a week or two, I think I can come up with some names that would be suitable’. So Hank said, ‘No, we are thinking of you’. Well, I said, ‘Yes!’. Well, I had to, you know, consult at Fox Chase and so forth but I think they were happy to see me do something else. So I… so I took that job and… and it was absolutely great.

Well, one of the big advantages, in retrospect, is I really didn't know much about astrobiology. Actually, I knew rather more than I thought I did because I, you know, I read Nature and Science fairly regularly, and I was always attracted to these stories because there was a lot of stuff in the press during those days. But I do… I knew that I didn't know as much as the people who had been working in the field so as a consequence I didn't have any concerns about listening to them, in effect, doing what they thought they should do. And also, I didn't have a bias towards any particular part of it. So the NASA Astrobiology… NASA Astrobiology Institute was a fascinating place. It had been, to my mind, you know, its organization had taken place prior to — the outlines of the organization — had taken place prior to my arrival, and I was expecting, my role, it was meant to be for, you know, a limited time, because I was in my mid-70s, I was going to, you know, put it on a kind of scientific direction they wanted it to be, and I took that message very clearly, that it was a basic science institution. There's always a big struggle at NASA. NASA's primarily an engineering operation. I have incredible respect for those engineers, it is amazing, the most complicated things humans have ever done, with incredible success, the level of success for really hazardous missions—I'm not talking about human hazardous, sadly, there are those as well, but, you know, you work ten years on a mission and it blows up on the… you know, before it takes off, or, you know, it gets into space and it doesn't do and it doesn't communicate. NASA has about an 85% success record on missions which is pretty good because, you know, if they just stayed doing safe stuff, they'd have 100%, but they're always, to my mind, moving forward and taking… and taking necessary risk. Again, you don't take risks with human missions, you know, well there's always some risk, obviously. So it's mostly… it's… it’s an engineering culture. So… but about 15% of the professional staff are scientists, only 15%, the rest are engineers and technicians but to my mind, and I think everybody else's mind, once you get up there, once you get those high platforms, you're going to do science, and, you know, people recognize that, but then if you get into an argument about who's going to get the money, the bottom line is, ‘Listen, if we don't get that missile up there, you're not going to see anything, right?’. (That satellite up there.) So there was that clash but… but actually it wasn't a big issue. It's become more so in recent years. So my directive was… was to… and I made it clear with Henry, but the person who… who finally hired me was the then administrator of NASA, Dan Goldin and Dan was very dynamic, you might say a colorful person in a lot of ways. I thought… I always thought he… he was a man with great vision, like Tim Talbot was a guy, you know, he and Tim were in the same class of vision. Well, when you have vision in space, we're talking about pretty big vision, you know. Looking back to the origins of the universe, you know, many of these things. There's a famous image, the… the Hubble Deep Field image; the director was allowed a certain amount of time on the… on the Hubble — the time on the Hubble was booked years in advance — and he… what he chose, the director of the Hubble, what… what he chose was to look in a kind of dark part of the sky and to take very long exposure, you know, so they could register this thing exactly, so, for I think about a week, you know, every revolution, they were taking… they were accumulating light. Well, the initial one, you can see back to about one and two or three million years from the Big Bang and the most recent one… the most recent, it's called the Ultra Deep Field, you can see back, you know, several hundred million years. Now, the physics is you can't see the origin. There's a kind of a shield against… against vision, much earlier, but when you're looking at that image, you're looking down a tunnel of time, a tunnel of distance and time, and those kind of… the stuff you see in the very early part are all these crazy kind of nebulae and so forth, and they're, you know, they're just forming. They're all young and odd colors and shapes and that light started off 14.2 billion years ago and you're looking down this tunnel.
[Q] That's amazing. 
So, vision is... is big and also there's a big time dimension. We just launched… we — well, I can say we — a mission to Pluto in the outer... in the outer... there's a whole bunch of kind of small planetoids. Pluto's now considered a planetoid because they're in that ring which Pluto orbits. There are several other bodies that are... that are bigger. Okay, it’s going to take eight years to get there, after a very successful launch.

Part of my mission was to… to figure out how to have a… how to have a virtual institute because the director didn't want to spend a lot of money building, you know, a $50 million building at NASA for a research center and then try to recruit, you know, several hundred scientists to come and live there. First of all, it's very expensive, you know, maintenance of the building and all that, you can put an awful lot of research funds in that. So the decision was there was going to be a kind of headquarters and what we eventually called NASA Astrobiology Institute, NAI Central, and then eventually there were 15, 16 teams, and they competed for really what, in this field, like geology, planetology, we had many disciplines; it's a lot of money, you know, at 1.2, 1.3 million a year, it was pretty good. You can support 30–40 people with it, and then the Institution was required to contribute money as well. So if we gave 1.2 million, on average there was nearly 1.8 or 1.7 million of money, it was pretty good, and it was for five years. So there was… it was highly competitive and there were like 50 teams competing and we selected initially 10, 11, and then we added another five later. And there are, I mean, very… I mean, the level of science was amazing, the… the field attracts very good scientists. Okay, so all these teams were spread around the country; several in California, Texas, the east coast, in Massachusetts, and there were several NASA centers; one did the jet propulsion, they had the NASA Ames, Johnson Space Center, and… so we had to figure out how we'd all work together. Well, first of all, you had to tell them you're… this isn't a grant, you know, you're part of an institute. That means you have to contribute to the institute in one way or another, and we had, you know, we… you have… we had to get together. Well, I didn't want… you can't have everybody travelling all over the place because you'd be in the air constantly. So we developed electronic means of communicating. Now, initially to do that, I had a computer chap who was meant to know about computer equipment and communication, this was still early in these days, but eventually I hired a anthropologist and she actually had got her degree here at University of Pennsylvania, and she had done her fieldwork in the highlands of Papua New Guinea but she was pretty good on — she'd done work in business afterwards too — she was good on… on developing what we eventually called a culture of collaboration. And we developed a lot of interesting techniques for doing that, and, in fact, we're now… Dr Faithorne and I are now writing this up as an instruction to other institutions like it. We really learned a lot. And our video conferencing got very good, but the big thing is we knew each other. When we had a video conference, I, in effect, knew personally everybody on the other side. Now, part of the reason was that I… we had a lot of fieldwork. I wouldn't be surprised, 20% of our funding went into fieldwork and some of our scientists would be away for six months at Spitsberg and up in the Arctic and, you know, doing… and I always encouraged people to go on the field trips and, in fact, if anybody didn't have money for the field trip, we could… you could apply to NAI Central and… and… so people got to know each other. If you're hanging together, you're in a tented camp for a week or two weeks, having all your meals together, you know, working together, people really get to know each other very well. So that was… that helped. And then we… we had a lot of conferences. We had an annual get together, a scientific meeting, when a lot of the members came and then there… there was something every year.
Well, and then I was very interested in foreign involvement. There's no way the United States can… can maintain a space program on its own, particularly now because the budget's gone way down. And… but, on the other hand, this… this is a kind of human effort and there's a great tradition of international cooperation in space in addition to competition. And even during the Cold War, you know, NASA and the Soviets were having joint missions, it's quite amazing. At the height of the Cold war there was still a level of cooperation, and I've never heard a NASA scientist or engineer criticize the engineering, let's say, they admire Russian space engineering. So, I decided, well, we can't do this by ourselves and our institute, the NASA Astrobiology Institute, is going to encourage international cooperation, very much in line with what headquarters were doing also. So we set up a kind of an affiliate, and the first one was with Spain, and they really were anxious to affiliate with us, with the… with the NASA one, because that gave them validation in their own country. Well, the Spanish — incredible scientist who ran that — he, even before I came on board, they were… they had an affiliation, and based on that, he got a huge amount of money from… from Spain to build a great laboratory for astrobiology. And we went to England and I spoke to the advisor, the science advisor to the government — who was an old friend actually — the science advisor to the British government, and he recommended scientists-to-scientists rather than government-to-government, so we did that. Then we had one in Australia who is… we don't have one in China yet, and with the European Union and with France and there are others as well. So we had this ring of… but I… one thing we made clear from the very origin is that it wasn't what the Soviets used to call hegemonic, that is, we didn't run it, and we said we didn't determine the quality of their science. In a way, we did because they were looking for that anyhow, you know, they… so, we… the assumption was their government or their scientists, decided who was going to represent them, and, okay, we accepted that but we did go through a very careful review, of every international application; we had a really stellar group of reviewers and the point was that we wanted to see compatibilities and… and we would respond, and sometimes it took a while, like a year or two, you know, to get the arrangements worked out, but for the most part they’ve gone forward. And now it's become a kind of federal organization, in other words, we don't dominate it — well, in a way we do because we still have a lot more money than most of them but that… that's changed greatly. This was, you know, a confederation of astrobiology programs, astrobiology institutes. So that went famously, you know, and a large part of it was because of this great staff I had. There were these highly competent NASA civil servants and contractors that were professionals and dedicated.

One of the best things I did with NASA was… I told — when I first accepted the job, there was a kind of press conference at NASA headquarters in Washington — and I said, look, now, you scientists, you wrote these applications, what, about a year-and-a-half, two years ago, and it's going to take you a few months to, you know, to get cracking and get everything going, and those were good applications because, you know, we approved them in a highly competitive environment, I don't expect you to do what you said you were going to do. So you go ahead and do what you think you should do now. If you want to write and tell me about it, it's okay. If you don't, you don't have to. If you need extra money, you know, if you're starting a new program that you haven't budgeted for… we had a kind of competition, actually, we had a fair amount of money so we awarded most of those who were competing, so if you want to start something new, we'll… we'll help you get cracking on that. That was the best thing I could have said, you know, because most of these grants… people, there's a kind of deceit, you know, there's a sort of cynicism, people write a grant for something they've already done and then they go ahead and do more or less what they want to but they… but they're constrained by the fact that they have to somehow fit in what they're reporting to what they said they were going to do. It's a terrible... I mean, I think it's a terrible situation. So I… it took them a year or two to realize I really meant it, but I did. Okay, we had, it's a little hard, well, we had about 700 to 800 people in 16 teams. And to say somebody was in a team, I told the principal investigator, I said, ‘You tell us who is in the team and that's what the team is’. So they included a lot of graduate students, undergraduates in some cases, and then… then a fair number of independent scientists. So I'd say altogether we estimated we had maybe 100, 150 principal, you know, co-investigators, that is people with their own programs, so senior guys, people who would be eligible for National Academy. We had 23 members of the National Academy of Science out of 150, let’s say. I... you know what I mean, that's like Caltech, you know, or… or Stanford or Harvard.
[Q] And you hadn't selected based on that?
Maybe. The selection was done by... I know I appointed a very high quality committee, so there was an exhaustive review process and then… and I wouldn’t say I entirely took their recommendations, but I'm saying 90%, and again, you know, they knew more about it than I did and I realized that. Then I finally had to present it to the Director of Science at the… at headquarters, and… because he had the budget. I always managed to cadge an extra million bucks or so. You know, I remember once we had… we had… we were looking for five new teams and there was one team that was really outstanding but they were ranked sixth. So we… and we only had enough money for, you know, for five, so I presented all six of them and I said, ‘There's no way we can leave this number six off’. So they said, ‘Okay’. So I… you know, I've learned a lot about how headquarters operates. A lot of it is... well, they listen to reason but somebody has to present it, you know. So that was, the organization itself was good, and then the other thing that I did is I visited, I think, all but one of the teams, which was a lot to do because they're spread all over, and I'd usually go to, like, they made it a real… for the most part, they made it a really formal thing. You know, people would present their documents, they had slide shows, and… and it was… it was an exhausting time because I was seeing all sorts of stuff that I'd never seen before, but totally stimulating. I mean I was on the — and also it was new things — I was on the edge of my mental capabilities most of the time. I was skirting on the edge of what I could encompass.
[Q] That's saying a lot, too. 
Well, you know, it's wonderful when you're in your 70s, you know, to be stimulated that way. But, you know, in retrospect, my, you know, I'd been trained, my undergraduate degree is in physics and in math, I mentioned that early on, and I had a lot of engineering, we… in this small program that we ran, engineering was… we took courses with the engineers, so I had… I had some kind of appreciation for… for engineering issues, and I've always been interested in technology — not good at it myself, but, you know, fascinated by it. And I… and boy, did we have toys, you know… you know, NASA, you know, some of the equipment that's made, all, you know, hand-crafted essentially, and all particularly for this task, and with very novel engineering because you're operating in a totally demanding environment, different than — things like protection against radiation. For example, NASA tends to use old computers and some of the computers on the space ship and on the shuttle and the satellite are quite… well, we can't… we can't risk… NASA can't risk some using some kind of new program that nobody’s tested. You have to have space-tested stuff; it's got to be protected against radiation, against the space environment altogether. So, we, you know, you can't use the most advanced stuff, you have to use something that's been fully… fully tested.

Well, the other thing that I tried to do was to go on the field trips because I felt that was the kind of heart of it and then, you know, I liked field trips, and most of the field trips I'd done before were, you know, with patients or with populations so it's kind of indoors; you get to some exotic place and then you go into hospital. But most of the fieldwork in astrobiology was in harsh environments actually, because one of the things that we were most interested in was extremophiles, that is, organisms that live in what we think of — humans think of — as pretty extreme, the organisms think it's great — if they think. But because that would have been the environment of early Earth and we wanted to understand that, and that would have been the environment on early Mars which was the strong candidate, one of the strong candidates still, for other places with life in our solar system. So we would often go to geothermal sites or, you know… or… but the places I went to were fascinating. One of the most interesting there, I went to a place called Devon Island, which is in the Princess [sic] Elizabeth Islands in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. Okay, so that's 75 degrees north, the only big island north of there is Ellesmere, and you’re… you're just at the same latitude as northern Greenland, and there's a big impact crater there, the Haughton crater and Devon Island's uninhabited. It was briefly inhabited some years ago but it's a very harsh climate; stormy, you know, cold, not much snow, you know, there's not much, as you know, there’s not much snow on the Arctic littoral because the Arctic Ocean is covered by ice so far and as a consequence it's… it’s very… the humidity is very low so you get very little rainfall and very little… and not much snow, but whatever falls stays there. The rain stays because there's permafrost that doesn't drain, and up until now, in the… if you go to the Arctic littoral in the… in the summer, you don't see much snow because it melts. As soon as you get much more rain, even if the climate gets warmer… I'm sorry, as soon as you… if the ice pack covering the Arctic Ocean thins — as it is, by the way, as you know — or disappears, it's the prediction, it may actually disappear in forty years, then you get a lot more rain, that means the snow's going to build up or remain in the… over the summer, that's how you get an Ice Age. You get glaciers flowing south, they build, build, build until they get big enough and high enough and heavy enough and they start… they start moving south. So that's one of the consequences, which oddly isn't talked about much, of… of the thinning of the ice.
[Q] Has global warming affected the ability of your scientists to do their experiments?
Not really because, you know, they're studying what's happening, you know, at the time. A lot of what they do relates to the global warming… global warming issue and, of course, NASA maintains the surveyance, you know, it was a… it was a… using NASA satellites, that the ozone hole was discovered in the South Pole, and in the North Pole as well by the way, and now they've just… they've just… orbited a satellite that can measure the thickness of ice, up until… before that, there's a radar… you can look to some depth with radar, prior to that, you actually had to go and measure it so there was spotty information, but now there should be, you know, world or polar wide value measurement. It’s going to provide some incredible data. So that was a fascinating place and we had to fly in, land in, you know, in a twin Beaver and there's no airfield there but there's a kind of windswept plateau where they can land one of these twin engine Canadian planes, that are really amazing. But you… they wouldn't land if the wind velocity was more than about 12 knots, and the average wind velocity is 20, so, you know, if you landed, I… I was there and I… there was a plane going out and so I decided to take that after I'd been there a few days, and the next plane they couldn't land for another two weeks. But it… but that was a fascinating site and a lot of interesting research happening; exposure to UV light, you know, constant UV in the summer, a very important issue.

Another site was… there’s a… a place down, halfway down the Baja Peninsula in Southern, you know, in lower California where there's a big oil polder… salt polders where they dry salt essentially, they… they cordoned off a square mile of pools and there's a lot of wind there and a lot of sun, and it evaporates very rapidly and then they had huge front-loaders and bulldozers and immense trucks, and, you know, they pack up all the salt, and it goes to Japan mostly. Well, that's a very interesting environment because as the water evaporates, it gets more and more saline. Now, the… the early… the early Earth was probably saline, very saline, okay, so the NASA scientists spent years studying biomats in that area. Now, biomats, which are very similar to the biofilms that you get in… in medical issue, biomats were very common in the Cretaceous, and they can flourish in places where flowering… flowering plants won't. So in these salt polders, there were masses of these biomats and sometimes, it was really bizarre, they would kind of creep up on ground, or you'd find them on the ground where… where the water had evaporated, it was like a Cretaceous landscape you were walking through. So I was there for about a week and they were doing, it's… it’s a kind of an out of the way place, you know, it's was mostly industrial, it's not a tourist spot; oh, that's where grey whales breed, that's one of the major places, so it is in the breeding season, people come down and see the whales, but it was a fascinating place. There was one great restaurant there, a really outstanding place, there was a small fishery there too, you know, they had fishing boats, and so they had really excellent fresh fish, but the margaritas were… were really good so at the end of the day, you could have one margarita and rest easy for the next day.
So that was another site, and then, oh, yeah, and then I went to Iron Mountain Mine, that's near Redding, California, so that is up Route 5 in northern California not far from the Oregon border. And if you ever drive up in that direction, as you're approaching Redding off to the west, and you see a kind of tortured looking mountain, that's Iron Mountain Mine. And it was… it was a site for… they mined… they mined some silver and gold but I think it was mostly zinc and eventually they mined iron pyrites. Well, one of the things they did is they blew up the top of the mountain in order to extract stuff, a very damaging thing but then the mine was abandoned in the 1960s. Well, you get about 60 inches of rain a year up there, it's one of the rainiest places in California, and that washes through this iron pyrites, you get sulphuric acid and it's highly exothermic and it pollutes the upper part of the Sacramento River so that… that acidic mine rainfall which went down to pH of zero, and pH1 and 2, highly acidic...
[Q] And there are living organisms?
Yes. And it was hard to get in to them, because you could go in some of these old mine tunnels. Well, I went down there with one of… one of the scientists who subsequently became a principal investigator in the NASA Astrobiology Institute, well, she’d been… that had been a subject of much of her research for years and… but there was a… it was a DEA site, you know, for remediating this acid mine flow which they'd done, they’d put a half a billion dollars into it and there was an enormous amount of engineering diverting the water, treating it, you know with alkali, which was fairly successful. The salmon were beginning to come back. But we had to go… I'm kind of claustrophobic, you know, and to get into this… to get into the interior, to the places where the biofilms were really interesting, there was a mine shaft that was actually horizontal, you know, went into the side of the mountain. Well, when I went there, I thought, well, how am I going to do this? But, you know, everybody else was going so I… so I… we were all equipped, you know, we had hard hats, of course, and then protective coverall and boots and carried oxygen and, you know, a mining light in case the lights went out, and it was… but it… it was… it's hard rock mining so you're in this really solid rock tunnel but with water flowing everywhere and filled with these bizarre organisms and biofilms, including, I think they're called snottilites [sic], they're… they're… they look like… like the word sounds, and they have these long chain polysaccharides which give them this character, and that's an... of these very complex mixtures.
Let me see, so that was another, oh, yeah, Yellowstone. Yellowstone is the biggest geothermal site in… in United… in North America probably, and there are, and you know the magma is very close to the ground there. There’s… the BBC had a program on a big volcano in Yellowstone, I don't think it was shown here, at least I didn't see it, and the… but they're fascinating sites there and each of those pools are kind of different and you… you can look at the coloration, you… you've been to Yellowstone?
[Q] Yes. 
Well, you remember those pools and they have very strange and fascinating colors, you can partially identify the organisms…
[Q] Based on color. 
Based on color and, of course, examination. So there were multiple research projects that, some of which we were funding. But then we developed a kind of program with the Parks Service, which I helped with, to provide educational material; we paid for roadside signs, trailside signs rather, to… to introduce the public to the microfauna. You know, most of the interest in Yellowstone is in the, you know, is in the buffaloes and the grizzlies and the elk and so forth, but the microfauna is also fascinating and we're… and NAI is going to help with it, they're putting up a new exhibition centre. And I did something similar in Volcano National Park, that's on the big island in Hawaii. You know, there's a vent in the Pacific, in the continental… the… the… there's a shift over that vent so each of the islands gets to have an active volcano as the plates… as the tectonic plates pass over this hot hole and there's a new one forming, by the way. It's to the east of the… of the last Hawaiian island. There's a sub-surface volcano developing there.
[Q] And those volcanoes are what? Create the vents?
They… they… you have underwater eruptions sometimes. I'm not sure on that one but I… these are… the volcanoes on… on Hawaii are shield volcanoes, you know, they're… they're midplate volcanoes, and they tend to be non-explosive, so the stuff kind of flows out and in a funny way they're the safest volcanoes in the world because you don't get these horrible explosions. That was an awesome sight and there were several others. So… so much of what I did was connected with extremophiles, and then we got interested in, as you might imagine, in the viruses in extreme locations.
 

I formed these focus groups and we had a Mars focus group and… and that contributed greatly to the science team for the Mars exploration rovers. You know they were landed just getting on four years ago, the Mars exploration rovers; we, as I said, much of the science was done by NAI scientists, some of them was…  people we funded and so they… they landed those… perfect mission. They landed just within — they even landed right side up, they didn't have to turn them over, and they were designed for a 90-day mission, so the engineer sort of said, okay, you design this to work for 90 days. And part of the limitation was they… they, you know, they were dependent on solar power and a lot of dust on Mars so the concern was that the solar collectors would be covered with dust. Well, it turns out that there's a lot of wind down there on Mars and it kept it clean.
[Q] And they're still going today?
Nearly four years.
[Q] Both rovers?
Both operating. One of them has got a bad bogie wheel, you know, they… but they learned how to operate it backwards so they could, and, you know, for example, once they got stuck in a sort of sand trap and it took them months to get it out but it was because they were learning how to get it out of sand traps so it was a kind of instructional period, shows the adaptability. Well, what's happened, I had the principal investigator of the Mars exploration rovers, I invited him to speak at the American Philosophical Society and, that was a few months ago, and one of the rovers was on the edge of the Victoria Crater which is a big impact crater and it's about... I've probably got this wrong, I'd say about ten kilometers across, you know, pretty good size crater and pretty deep but you can see stratigraphy there, you know if you go into a crater and you can examine the layers and… and, if you're ever going to find something like fossils or evidence of prior… prior water, or evidences of… of shallow water, going down into a crater is the way to do it. Okay, you know, there’s this big hole, right? And they did a kind of circumnavigation of the hole looking for a way to go down, looking for a kind of ramp. So he told us that, yep, they’ve decided they’re going to go down and just last week they tentatively went down, they went ‘brrmm’ , you know, back up, they wanted to see what kind of a grip they could get on the… and now they're planning for descent, with measurements along the way and it should reveal extremely important stuff.

In a way, it's very hard to be a research director because you have to… you have to sort of see the end of things in their beginning; well, you can't do that, you know, and it… it's kind of risky. Now, there are indications as you go, for example, on our own line of research on hepatitis, we had to decide whether we were going to work with this Australia antigen when we’d discovered a dozen others, but a lot of it's kind of intuition and a lot of it's kind of imagination. You can sort of see, you can kind of imagine, what could happen in the future, but a… but a big feature is if you can determine some order in it, if you see some order in… in the phenomenon, then you have a sense, okay, first of all you can study it, secondly, you know, if the techniques are feasible, they’re reproduceable and all these, and relatively easy to do, not expensive; and so you make your decision on that basis, and… and part of the decision is often made, if you have, you know, collaborators or colleagues and you like working with them on that particular project. That… that's a good reason to do it because —  not the only reason, but if you're really interested in a project and excited about it and you like to work on it, you’re going to … you’re going to… you're going to turn it into something. You know, if everything's connected to everything else, right? You can start anywhere. And you’ll end up finding something, something that's valuable. It's a question of pursuing it. I often use the… the metaphor of Paul Bunyan, you know, there's a sort of folktale about Paul Bunyan. So the story is how did… how did… what happened… caused the 1905 earthquake, right, in San Francisco. So, the story was that he was in a rooming house in Oakland, and it was cold in the room, you know, there was a radiator and it wasn't operating, so he grabbed hold of the radiator and started shaking it. Well, it turns out the radiator was connected to all the other radiators in the house and they were connected to all the radiators in the Bay area and he shook it and that was the earthquake. Okay, that's the way nature is, everything's connected to everything else and you change one thing, you change something else in a highly unpredictable fashion.
So it's very hard for me to… I… I think the work on extremophiles, you know, I personally was interested in that. Prebiotic chemistry, there's a lot of work done on that. There's… there… the elements to make proteins and to make… to prepare DNA and so forth, nucleic acids, and you can… there…. the basic elements are in space and, you know, meteor… some meteorites, carbonaceous chondrite meteor… carbonaceous meteorites, contain a lot of organic stuff and some of those have been, many of, several have been… have been analyzed, particularly the Murchison meteorite which landed in Murchison in Australia and it had a lot of organic stuff and it was kept… you see, the problem is if you pick up on a meteorite, you know, is it contaminated by Earth material? But apparently this… they had reason to believe that there was little contamination and, boy, they found amino acids you know, some that we don't… not in our biology and PAHs and many other organic compounds and stuff that you make phosphile lipids, you know, so a lot of… there's a lot of interesting work on… on prebiotic chemistry in space. Now, a lot of that comes from meteorites — when we get return missions we'll learn more — but there's also a lot of, tons, of meteoritic dust or micrometeorites land on earth and if you go up to the Arctic, I'm sorry, down to the south, the Antarctic, there's a… there’s a research base at the South Pole, the Scott-Amundsen Research Base [sic], and they get their drinking water by melting snow and they have a big kind of pit there where they have steam, you know, and it melts the snow and they get the water out of it and occasionally they… they clean it. Well, you collect… there's a bunch of dust that's collected in there, essentially it's all extraterrestrial because there's very little dust at the… at the South Pole. There's a machine… there's some machine tools and stuff like that, but not much dust. So most of that’s extraterrestrial and there are organic molecules in that and then they just brought this stuff back from the comet, you know, a very successful mission and that's landed, and then they do spectroscopic observations, you know, for things like the Perseid shower. You know what those are, by the way? Those showers that we go through, you see all the shooting stars, you're going through the track of a comet and very often it was the track of the comet in 1872 so, you know, each orbit you can kind of plot out when it came through based on the Newtonian physics and there are some that are periodic, you know, you go through the same one every year and, well, there’s a colleague of mine, who we actually helped fund and he, with great energy, managed to get the Air Force and NASA to loan, we have some experimental aircraft that carry a lot of equipment, so they can fly them fairly high, 30, 40,000 feet I think, and you can get spectroscopic measurements on the… on the stars. They're… they’re quite low, you know, they're 20, 30,000 feet, 40,000 feet. So they're pretty close, and you can get a lot of information on organic material and other constituents from that. So that prebiotic chemistry is… is a very important part of what's happening.

Well, there's a lot of interest in, you know, how… how you make a cell and there are constituents in space that… that form cells, you know, if you define a cell as… as something that has an inside and an outside, it's a big characteristic of a cell, it's got an inside and an outside and it's got, you know, another characteristic, it has a specific semi-permeable, or it has semi-permeability. In other words, there are places where things can get in and out but they're quite specific, not everything can get in through every pore. That's what… from a good deal of contemporary research. Well, they're kind of manufacturing these cells from space-available constituents. This idea that these things get kind of formed from on earth or even conceivably in space. Well, there's another important aspect of it and that is this question of whether life came from elsewhere. Now, that doesn't tell you about the origin of life but it does tell you that that remains a real possibility and this idea of… of life emerging from it, it's been around for quite a long time; you actually find it in religious beliefs and mythic notions, and science fiction, you know, a big thing in science fiction. So, the question is, how… how would it get here? You know, it's hard to believe you can have… you can have DNA floating through space but, as a matter of fact, there have been experiments done. Rocco Mancinelli, a colleague of mine, working with the European Space Agency; you can actually put bacteria in a… in a container, put it outside a… a satellite or space ship, the shuttle, and… or a sounding rocket, you know, something goes up and comes down, and open it and expose it. Well, bacteria, some survive. The probability is that if life ever did come here or came from here and went elsewhere, it would be inside a meteorite because the inside of those meteorites are pretty protected and they don't get very hot because the outer surfaces ablate and the piece that lands is actually fairly cool. It's probably 40 centigrade, tops.

We were talking yesterday, I think, about this observation that was made on the Caenorhabditis elegans that was aboard the… the Columbia, the shuttle that crashed several years ago, tragically crashed, with the loss of all the people on board. That, by the way, was a science mission, you know, most of the missions recently have been to build the space station but the… but the Columbia was sort of dedicated to this mission, to a science mission. Okay, so they had C  elegans on board and when the… when the shuttle crashed, it was coming in for a landing in Texas, and it crashed, I think over, probably over eastern California, but most of the debris field was in Texas, and they enlisted a large number of people, NASA did, you know, they had forestry service and others, I think maybe some of the military and they collected all the debris and very carefully mapped everything with GPS… read so they could find everything, I mean they could locate everything, and they brought it back to… to Kennedy. They had a big hangar there, a big shed, and they reassembled it, reassembled the space shuttle.
Well, among the debris they found five of the six anodized aluminum containers, things about that big, that looked like a big coffee can... long coffee can, and… and they looked kind of used but not… but I mean you could use them again, and they were pitted, they had this strange collection of… some of them. Well, that’s the thing, so they survived the crash. Well, they survived the, you know, the break up of the aircraft and intense fire, the deceleration when they hit the ground, and then some of them were on the ground in Texas for… for up to a week, I think, or more, and they were close to or below freezing; they survived all that and some of them even were reproducing in there. Okay, well, what happened was they were able to estimate, they had temperature loggers but they went way off-scale, but probably the temperature inside, you know, was tolerable, obviously, and they… they could estimate it by… there was some adhesive, you know, plastic tape, and they know the melting point of that so they can, you know, figure the…
[Q] And that was intact?
 I'm sorry?
[Q] The adhesive was intact… ? 
The… the adhesive was inside the container and they could make estimates of probable temperatures, so that was… that's a fascinating finding, you know, for, good for good old C elegans and, secondly, there were some practical hints that came from them. One of the issues we have on the space station is how you, you know, they have a visit there every few months, what you do is you experiment, and you want to do some measurements on it and so forth, on the ground, you want to be able to get them ashore, get them down to earth. So, it would be great if you could sort of throw them out the door, deorbit them and they could… and they could get down. As a matter of fact, there are devices…
[Q] Put little rockets on them?
Well, well there are devices that have been recommended. I think some built, that you could, you know, launch from the space station, put it under a space lock, you know, or launch it… you'd have to push it out, you could… you'd push it out with a spring so that it separated, and then you'd have to have power on board with the rockets of some sort, you'd have to deorbit and you'd probably have to have some navigation capability in order to direct it to some extent. But all those are quite doable, you know, on a very small… you know, NASA has plenty of experience with directing small satellites and then parachuting down to, you know,  land in Utah or somewhere, which is where these things often land, or in the middle of Siberia, or in the middle of… it's actually Tajikistan I think — no, Kazakhstan, that's where they land. So, and then you could… that… in fact, I'm going to a meeting on Monday in California at NASA - Ames Research Centre - where, once again, we're going to be talking about research on the space station.

Another thing that I did while I was in NASA, the… the…  the administrator of NASA, that’s the head officer of NASA, Dan Goldin, asked me to be his senior advisor for… for biology and asked me to come to work in NASA headquarters. Now, NASA headquarters is unlike any other part of NASA. It's right near Capitol Hill; a good deal of what they have to do, I mean a lot of the central planning is done there, of course, there are a lot of top level scientists, but also they very much have their eyes on commerce and on the White House because that's where the money comes from, and they have to be able to convince the people's representatives that we should do these projects and they want to know about the details. So a lot of the attention is focused on things like press releases and… and interviews with congressional staff and so forth. So it was a very strange environment for me, different environment, and in NASA, people who are kind of career NASA people, they usually planned on spending a year or two at headquarters because otherwise, it's important for advancement, but putting that aside, it gives you… it gives you an idea about how the place runs. So, you know, my colleagues at Ames, they'd say, ‘Oh, you're going to headquarters’. Now, one thing you have to remember, in Washington perception is reality. That's true everywhere, it turns out, but it's very true in Washington. So your perception is the big thing and while I was there I sort of didn't like it. First of all there was, you know, I had to get up and park in a parking… or if I'd take the underground there, the metro, you park in an underground parking garage which was really claustrophobic, and then you're up in an office all day and you had to wear a shirt and tie and, you know, it was… I had a great office with… given that building, you know, with a big conference table and… and paintings of rockets shooting off, I had a NASA flag and an American flag, it was kind of middle level administration, and I was in the compound where the… where the administrator was. And… so it was kind of fun, you know, but… but on a day-to-day basis, there was so much baloney and it was… it was actually hard to get anything done. I mean, I had all kinds of plans for what I would do, and some of which happened, but at Ames, you know, if something you wanted to happen, it happened, but there, if I came with an idea, before I'd even articulated it, somebody was in to tell me why I couldn't do it, you know, so I was really… I really wasn't accustomed to that. But, on the other hand, in retrospect, it was a very rich experience and I liked working with Dan. Mainly… he was a somewhat controversial figure because he was very strong-minded and didn't shirk controversy, but I thought him very effective and what I liked about him is you never knew what he was going to do next. So I remember once I was walking down… I wanted to ask him about something, and he saw me, you know, walking down the hall towards his office. He said, ‘Barry, do you want to go on a shuttle launch?’ I said, ‘Sure, when is it going to be?’ He said, ‘I'm on the way to the elevator’. So, you know, and fortunately I had been some place, so I had a suitcase with me, I didn’t need very much in any case, so, you know, I said, ‘I'll see you down in the parking’. So we get in the… we go to the parking lot, there was a NASA van that took you to the national airport, where there's a… the FAA maintains these crackerjack airplanes, they were old but beautiful, and they have a G5, well they had a G4 actually, a Gulfstream 4 executive aircraft, and you pop in that and you fly, you know, 500 miles an hour, 40,000 feet, you land on the skid strip at Kennedy in two hours, the station director comes and picks you up and you, you know, the police escort you over to the launch site. But the launches were fantastic. First of all, they're very patriotic some of them are, you know, you get, I mean, they are, you know, when you see the achievement that we're capable of and that we do routinely, I mean I find it very moving, very stirring. It's a great accomplishment of the country, I mean our science all together, but space science tends to be rather spectacular so it's a lot better than hanging around in a biochemistry lab without windows.
 

It's a fascinating thing, you know, we're kind of interested in astrobiology because, you know, asteroids could have conceivably been the... the mechanism for bringing life to Earth. But as, they estimate, I... I think the figure seems to change from time to time, but they estimate there are a couple of thousand, let's say, near… near Earth objects that could… that are a kilometer or larger. A kilometer… an impact by a kilometer would destroy a large percentage of the world's population. And the… so a near Earth object is a asteroid or, I guess, they'd include comets as well, that come between the orbit of the Earth and the moon. And if you detect those, and then you take measurements on multiple orbits of the near Earth object, you can make, you can predict, with very high accuracy, the probable course, because, you know, it's straight Newtonian physics. I don't think there's any relativistic physics, because they're not going that fast. So, they've detected, they think, maybe 80, 85% of the kilometer or larger. Now, they recently got authorization, in the last few years, to track stuff that’s something over a hundred thousand, I mean.. a hundred – I forgot the level — I mean, you know, it's less…less than a kilo… less than a kilometer.... and that's a couple of hundred thousand. Now, the way they do that, there's a sort of central registry, and professional or amateur, astronomers will detect these near Earth objects and then other, mostly amateurs, are enlisted to follow their orbits and make the appropriate measurements. And that's all pooled in a big database that the Air Force runs.
[Q] So, when you say there's a hundred thousand, you mean there's a hundred thousand objects that would qualify for a… ?
Yeah, less than a kilometer. But big enough to... if they struck a city, you know, it would destroy the city. But it wouldn't cause a world-wide cataclysm, but it would… it would probably have world-wide effects, you know, if it's a few hundred… a few hundred meters... 300 meters, I think is the bottom limit, something like that. Okay, well, so astrobiology is kind of interested in them because a lot of the history of the Earth, of early life, was dependent on these missile strikes. And characteristic, of the… of the Mars geology are many, many impact sites. And that's true for many objects in space, so, you know, we… we kind of want to understand the dynamics of that. But one of the reasons - and some of the astronauts have taken a real interest in that - Rusty Schweickart, one of the early astronauts, he's focused on that project. And the notion is they… they might be able to have an interventional… interventional act that… that would change the orbit. You see, usually they can find these things 10, 15, 20 years before their… the possible impact, so that means you have a long time to effect any change. And also, if you just, change the orbital… velocity, or change the orbit, just slightly, you know, but over the course of eight, ten years... it could be… it could be changed such that it wouldn't hit the Earth. So you don't have to have a huge explosion and, you know, blow it up, or anything. So, there are various strategies that have been proposed. One of them, which is… is not going to happen, I mean it shouldn't happen, is to blow it up, because instead of having one big potential impact, you have a lot of ones… a lot of them, and it's difficult to predict their orbits. So… but there's a possibility of a gravitational tug. You know, you fly a spaceship up and… and with the gravitational pull, then you gradually sort of pull it away, just by, you know, it's kind of following. The other thing is actually tether it, you know, to attach a motor to it, to land, or do it… do it probably robotically. And they’re actually planning missions... there have been missions to asteroids. About four or five years ago, we had an orbital mission on an… on an asteroid called Eros, and it orbited it for about a year, you know, at a very close orbit and a very slow one. I think it's about the size of Bermuda, right, Eros.
[Q] Could you ever land on it?
They did land. It was a robotic landing. They had a soft landing, which was unexpected. And I was at headquarters then, you know, I was with the Associate Administrator for Space Science. He was out of his mind, you know, to think, I mean, he was so freaking excited! They… they hadn't expected a soft landing. And they actually photographed it, right down to the landing. Then everybody said, okay, there was… there was a little juice left, you know, they had some power left, and they said, we'll lift it off again, right? And we'll get an image of the impact. Nobody’d ever seen that! You know, just an impact, just after it’d been made. Well, it turns out that they couldn't, you know, it was not feasible to do that. But there was this, you know, great excitement about it. Now, there's... there are plans for a… for a human landing. Way in the future, I'd say — it's not… it's not a high priority. But they're… they're, there's another mission, I think it's in orbit now; it's en… en route to do some orbital investigations, both the Europeans and the Japanese... the Japanese, they had a really risky mission. They were going to have a landing and a… and a capture – you know, collecting material, and a lift off, dispatching the, collecting the vehicle, parachute it back to earth. It didn't work. I mean, the Japanese have had a tough time, actually, with their space program. They've just recently had a good launch, a good success. But it's tough doing this stuff. You know, everybody's all crazy about these, this private enterprise they… they shout and think, that's what NASA did 40 years ago, they had a sub-orbital flight with a person in it, you know, that was the period of John Glenn and everything. But there… there's a lot of... in… in this meeting, there's going to be quite a strong focus on… on private enterprise to provide small… small launch vehicles, inexpensive ones, and... and have them do it, not, you know, as a business of some sort. You know, it's a major topic of conversation now, the idea that free enterprise will be able to take over much of this, which is, I think, you know, possible. But it takes a lot of imagination and boy, a lot of capital, and a lot of risk. It's a lot easier to invest in bonds.
 

I remained on the… on the payroll, so to speak, at Fox Chase, during all this stuff. I very often didn't get… didn't get a salary, but you know, I was still, kind of, part-time. And I maintained my office, and I was back here, you know,  quite often. So I've had this, since 1964, you know, I've been on the, you know, paying social security and… and so forth through… through Fox Chase. Well, when I… when I came back, I… I got sort of… sort of restless for a while. I didn't, I thought it would be unwise to try and start up a new laboratory again. Part of it was practical, you know, when you're what 80, or something, or late 70s, you don't want to hire… have young scientists come in and work with you, it's not very good prospects, you know, for their career. And starting up a whole new lab… and in a way, I mean I was sort of tempted to apply for grants, but one of them was, if I… if I didn't get the grant, I'd be disappointed, then if I got the grant, I'd say, well, I'm being competitive with these young scientists who, you know, the money was kind of scarce. So, on balance, I didn't think it was a good thing. And I think you sort of, after a while, scientists may kind of taper down, so to speak. I mean, I feel I still have a lot of new ideas and… and fresh approaches, but it's… it's probably best exerted by, you know, talking to people, you know, and telling them about, in the hope that some of the ideas are good enough, so somebody will do them. And you never know, you know, sometimes you give a lecture... I told you the story about the Gender Ratio, that somebody had read the book by chance. Well, you never quite know how that's… how that’s going to happen, but I feel I do have an obligation, you know, to talk about it.

Well, essentially what's happened is the vaccination program has, is now widespread, and some 76, 77% of all the countries in the WHO have universal vaccination programs of one kind or another, and others are joining. The places that don't have them, unfortunately, are places that need them. Some places, like in Africa where the organization of vaccination programs is very hard to accomplish. Some places are doing okay, like, you know, South Africa, and several of them are… there's a few places that are doing pretty well with vaccinations. I've tried, you know, I talk about it quite a lot and I’ve made visits, and hoping to encourage that. The... and then strangely, some of the northern countries don't have it, you know, like England and Scandinavia, parts in Scandinavia, because they, the risk is not deemed to be so high. I think, actually, they're contemplating adding it in the United Kingdom now. The… okay, so the — and there's been a dramatic drop in the prevalence of carriers of hepatitis B. The… in places like China, where it's been used by the... not universally in China yet, but widely, the prevalences has dropped from like 15% down to one percent or two percent, within 10 years. Now, that's in the impacted population. So that means, the ones that got the vaccine — children. But the interesting thing, in some of the studies, the prevalence is also going down in the non-vaccinated population. Not as much as in the vaccinated population. And with, that's a… that's rather strange, because the notion was, if you get infected chronically, then you'll remain infected. But the implication of this is, is that revaccination, I'm sorry, re-infection is needed in order to stay in the carrier state. Now, that's based on this… this kind of observation. You know, that you get a decrease in the vaccinated and non-vaccinated - there may be other explanations - but the question is, how did the… how did the people who are carriers, know about it? I mean, how does the virus know that? Are they re-infected, and if so, how? Because the major source of infection would be... would have been before the vaccination... would be children. Well, children wouldn't ordinarily infect adults, except there's some mechanism we don't understand.
[Q] Bed bugs?
What?
[Q] Bed bugs?
Insect transmission? I think, it hasn't really been examined sufficiently, particularly the molecular biology. So that's a very interesting area. So, okay, so that's where they've been. Then there've been at least two studies, maybe three, really, but two that are… that are seen in publications of, where they have looked at what happened to primary cancer of the liver. And the best study was done in Taiwan, where they started vaccination programs in 1980s, and I went there in 1978, in the year after I went to China. And again, I spoke to probably hundreds of scientists, gave lectures and talked personally to them, told them about the vaccine. But they were... the people in Taiwan... they were already, they were well up on what was going on. And it didn't take an awful lot of encouragement to, they didn't need it, you know, they already had it. Although, I think my going there was helpful, of course it’s a focus to the people who heard it, you know, I gave lectures with large… pretty large attendance. There was another, sort of funny incident. When I first went there, they would... they had set up testing and blood banks right away. And I went to one of the… the, they're a national… it’s sort of a… the equivalent of Red Cross, or is Red Cross, actually, and the… and I went to the transfusion centre and they were testing blood, so I said, well, what do you do with the blood that you find to be positive? He said, well, we put it in the fridge until we discard it. So I said, may I make a suggestion of, save that blood, buy some deep-freeze units and save that blood, and when people start making vaccine from the carrier blood, they'll have this stuff, you know, to use. Well, I… I didn't go to Taiwan for, I don’t know, five, six, seven years, and I went for a somewhat different purpose, and — I was doing some plant collecting, among other things — and I… but I was at a meeting there, and a young woman, she told me she was from the Central Blood Bank, and would I come back for a visit again, after having been there some years prior. So, you know, I said I'd be happy to and we drove through the summer heat, and, boy, it gets hot, you know, in Taiwan, and she said, ‘Well, actually, we're in a different location now, and we have another much larger building than we did before’. And she said, 'It's all due to you’. I said, ‘What do you mean? What happened?’ She said, ‘Well, we took your advice. We bought the things, and we sold the blood for an enormous amount of money. And we built transfusion centers in several places in Taiwan!’
[Q] Wow! What an impact. That's great. 
But, you know, I didn't know about that, I didn't realize it. And I went to the building, they had a new building, you know, they had, my picture was on the wall.

They did an excellent study to show that the... they can only look at childhood cancer because that was the impacted, to see the effects of vaccination. But there's so much primary cancer of the liver in Taiwan. It's… in the 50, 40-60 age range, it's the most second most common cause of death — not death from cancer, but death in… in Taiwanese males, and Chinese in Taiwan. But they did show a significant two-thirds drop in the incidence of cancer of the liver in Taiwan. There was a similar study done in Korea with… with the, in the same direction. And I believe there's been another study since then. Okay, so if those things are substantiated, that means there’s - other than theoretical prediction - there's actual evidence, that it’s a cancer vaccine. Well, we suspected that, we had no way to predict that would be the case, the data of course, is what really counts, and I have… have been trying to advocate, since then, the use, the development of vaccines against cancer. Now, the second cancer vaccine was just introduced last year by Merck, and the data looked very good on that. And that's... it will be in use, you know, they kind of got into a little bit of trouble — they kind of pushed it a little, a little harder they pushed, you know, there was that kind of back — but I think in the long-run, it will be widely used. And what I'm trying to advocate now, what I'm trying to tell people, you know, talk to people at Fox Chase here, is to find other infectious agents that cause cancers, and give, and use preventative measures. You know, we know a lot about preventing bacteria and viruses. Vaccines is, you know, probably the best solution, but there are others also. So there are a whole bunch of cancers that are caused by… by viruses.

We know very little about the causes of cancer in the pancreas. And I'm strongly advocating, I mean, I didn't do any of the studies myself, but... in our lab, but I mean, about 20 years ago, I put in a grant application to study cancer of the pancreas and hepatitis B virus, and that... which wasn't successful. But I'd love to see more work done on it. You know, you have human T-cell leukemia, virus 1 and 2, which is fairly common in parts of… it's common in Equatorial Africa. And there's nasopharyngeal carcinoma, which is quite common in Southern Asia. And there's… there’s a tumor associated with, there's several bacterial ones, like cancer of the stomach, you know, they have a connection with pylori bacteria — Helicobacter pylori. And I'm sure, there are many others. And sometimes the connection may… may not be, you know, clear. As I mentioned before, everything has multiple causes. So in some cases, the virus may have some role, but not, you know, there may be other causes as we… but actually, one… one of the things you want in medical research, in particular, is you want complicated answers. You want complex answers, not simple ones, because the more… the more you know about different mechanisms, the more places you can intervene. And that's what's happening in drug therapy now, we know more and more about the molecular biology, that every time some sort of mechanism, it looks as if you could find some small molecule there, that will interfere with it, your… that's your candidate. That goes into the pipeline. You know, you have some idea of mechanism, you have, you know,  a cheap drug you can make, synthesize, and that's your next pipeline. So, what we don't want is simplicity. We want complexity, you know, understand as much as you can, in order to intervene.

Well, in 1985, ‘86, I… I was a… a co-chair of a big meeting we had in Switzerland on, well, they wanted to call it the eradication of hepatitis, but I… I think we changed it to the possibility of eradication. And I think on the face of it, you know, if you vaccinate enough people, which is happening, and re-vaccination may be required, but let's say you maintain vaccination levels, and you start treating people who are already infected, and you break the mother-child transmission by vaccinating newborns, then, you know, conceivably, it'll go away. But there's a very interesting question about whether you want to push for eradication. The… the eradication of smallpox was feasible, because there's only human-to-human transmission, and… and it's human to… of human transmission with pretty close contact — it's not respiratory spread, you know, it's close contact. And the… and they had a really good campaign and they… you really… which went through various stages, but finally they tried to find the last few cases, and then they kind of put a wall around… around them with vaccination processes. And that was pretty effective. But, you know, for years now, they've been trying to eradicate polio. And the Rotary International, as you may know, has taken a particular interest in that. And they have really pushed it enthusiastically; highly organized, they're very, an international organization, and they're very well organized. And they've made that a kind of goal. But they have, you know, they've eliminated it from the United States, pretty much. And they've eliminated it from other places. But the… the argument is, well, if it's anywhere in the world, you know, it can spread. And then you have to ask the question, do you want to spend all your money and effort on getting rid of those last few cases – something that would be very desirable — or, do you want to say, okay, we know how to control it, we've got it pretty well controlled; it's not perfect, but then, nothing's perfect. So, why not do something else? And I've spoken to them at Rotary to ask them if they want to consider directing their considerable energy and resources towards doing work on hepatitis B, and I've elicited an interest. I must say, I haven't sort of pushed it very far, but I think I may, again, I met, I've spoken to several people from Rotary. It's a remarkable organization, you know their health-orientation towards public health is really commendable. So that, I… I think that's about it. My guess is there will be more discussions about it.
One of the problems with hepatitis B is that it's never generated the kind of interest that AIDS has, for example, although, probably a lot more people have died from hepatitis B than have died from AIDS. And I've seen some formulations that this is still the case. It probably is, there's probably more people dying from it. But somehow or another, it's much less dramatic. And it’s… it affects the same people, essentially, the same population groups, more or less, not… it varies from country to country. So our, my money, the practical thing, I think, is to try to continue to extend it and I've tried to do that in China when, my small bit is never, it's always hard to tell what actual impact you had. That trip I took to India, I think that had some role, but things move slow. And India, now, they're really pushing it forward. So, I… I, eradication, fine, but in the meanwhile, let's work towards control. It's... one of the things I've learned, is don't do things you can't do. You know, it's not going to happen. Don't do… there's something else you can — but I wouldn't despair. But again, there can be interesting consequences when there isn't any more hepatitis B virus around. We don't know what they are. And you know, I'd like to find out. For example, I told you about this funny grouping of bacteria that are all related to the same susceptibility gene. Okay, let's say you vacate, you remove hepatitis from that class, that classification of bacteria — what's going to happen to the other ones? Are they going to increase? You know, the world's a very… nature is very dynamic. You change one thing, something else happens, like with Paul Bunyan and the radiators. So, we, and I'm not... that's not an argument not to go ahead — don't misunderstand — it's an argument to find out more and to investigate things at the population level. And investigate with, well, in field studies, not just in the laboratory.

As you might imagine, it's very… good that this vaccine has moved forward so well. There have been some concerns about side-effects, but so far, the... any objective evidence is there isn't… there isn’t… there aren't any significant side-effects at a population level. And the… there’s a… the WHO, at present, does not recommend revaccination. That's being re-evaluated, and they may change that program. The… there are, you know, mutations occur, but strangely, they don't seem to affect the efficacy of the vaccine, much. The… it's about, you know, let's say 90% effective; that's about as good as you can expect from a vaccine. If there was a vaccine for AIDS that was 50% effective, 40% effective, they'd use it.

That's on our turf, so to speak, you know, I only live two or three blocks away, so I've known it for a long time. And I was… I was elected a member in the 1980s, I think, you know, I've been a member for quite a long time. But I, you know, I've been busy, pretty busy doing other things, and although I have a great admiration for people who take a role in organized scientific association — I think it's very important, you know, the maintenance of these things — I've never kind of aspired to be an officer of, you know, the Genetics Society or the Human Genetics, so although I was involved when it was early set up, I… I'm not terribly good at committee meetings, you know, I tend to get restless sitting down, and, you know, a lot of it's not… but nevertheless, it's important. But, the Philosophical Society is, you know, a very unusual organization. It was founded pretty much by Benjamin Franklin and… and many of his friends, and our date of formation is usually given as 1763. 17… yeah, '43… '43, okay. And it… it's had a long history, but it's survived. Well, in the... just after the Revolution in the early Federal period, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania deeded us a footprint of our clubhouse, in the late 1780s, early 1790s, I believe, and we're still there. You know, the building's still there. It's right next to Independence Hall. That was the Pennsylvania legislature, and we're right next to the... what was the Pennsylvanian Supreme Court. And we have been there ever since. And we've acquired several other buildings; we have a library that's right across the street. And that was the location of the Library Company of Philadelphia, also founded by Benjamin Franklin. And they moved to another location, a very grand building down on Broad Street, and then subsequently elsewhere. But we… we are tenants of the Park Service, on that piece of property and we built a replica, a façade; there's a replica of the Library Company building. And it's a wonderful library; we have a fantastic archive — Thomas Jefferson's draft of the Declaration of Independence, that, sort of poetic, founding paper of ours. That was our… that was, kind of, our vision statement for the country, you know, that set off the broad objectives. And the Constitution was our, kind of, rule-based, legal-based document. We own that; we have a lot of Benjamin Franklin's papers. We have the largest collection of Darwin papers, outside of Cambridge, England… we have a lot of stuff from early explorers.
Actually, one of the things, well then, every so often they elect officers; they’re usually, in a funny way, non-contested. There's a nominating committee and they kind of look at who's around. You know, who's had... has interest in the club, and who has, you know, and very often, you know, the average age of members is 76. It's not getting much younger. We've increased our number of women; we have, considerably, over time… time, and it was never... one of our earlier members was… was a woman. She was a friend of Benjamin Franklin's and was nominated by him. And she... her name was Princess Dashkova, and she was the President of the, sort of, Academy of Sciences of Russia, under, at the time of Catherine the Great. She was a political ally of Catherine the Great, so she was given this prestigious post. But apparently, she was a very intelligent, very bright woman. And Franklin met her when he lived in Paris, met her once, but he was so impressed that he, you know, nominated her by mail, by post, and she was elected. So she was our first woman member in the 18th century. We didn't have another one for 60 years. But, in any case, that's changed now. But we, what we do, is we have meetings which are really wonderful; I mean the meetings, and they're heterogeneous; there's science, a lot of stuff on law, history, art.

One of the things that I did there that I must say I think is a kind of main focus is I established the Lewis and Clark Fund for Exploration and Field Research. And it was established in 1804, and that was the year that Lewis and Clark and their party of explorers took off from St Louis. And the prior year, at the urging of Thomas Jefferson, who was then President of the American Philosophical Society, as well as his day time job, you know, of being President of the United States, he sent Lewis to the Philosophical Society to learn about science, essentially. I think they did a lot of surveying, you know, they had to establish latitude and longitude, and navigation. I think he may have been… had an… he was an artillery officer, so he knew a lot about that, and... but then we instructed him in botany and taxonomy and zoology, and medical… a lot of his medical information came from the savants in… in Philadelphia. And then they'd take, they took off the following year. It was a kind of complex trip, actually getting to St Louis, and then they were gone for two-plus years. Well, they kept meticulous journals. They kept, a kind of, joint journal, Lewis and Clark, and all the members of the expeditions were… were encouraged to keep journals. It was a military expedition, so most of them... funded by the Feds... Jefferson, essentially, and the… but they were encouraged to keep journals, and some of them did. And there were a few contractors, too, like, you know, the people who navigated and paddled the… they had these pirogues and rowed... rowing, big rowing boats, they had. So, and then Sacagawea was the wife of one of these, of a French Canadian contract employee. But in any case, so we have the journals. The journals are at the… we have, I think there are two or three we don't have, but we have most of the fascicles and volumes of the journals, and some of them are fantastic, clear hand, beautifully preserved, you know, it was… it was written on rag paper, and there was, they're often out  on our exhibit. And I remember, we were loaning some of the stuff during the exhibit, and I had to sign off on… on the material we were sending off to exhibit in St Louis and elsewhere. It was like 10, 20 million in value. They’re sort of priceless. There's no, you couldn't replace them in any way.
Well, then, I've been very excited about this Lewis and Clark fund, and I started with money that I had available to me, that had been, fundamentally, donated by an old friend of mine, Stanford Ascherman, who sadly died before... he'd been quite ill, and he didn't live to actually see this use of his funds. But, based on the relatively small amount that we were able, with, we had authority to use it for this, we built up the endowment now and, you know, fairly well; we need more. And we've had very good support. And the… the plan is any... who feels a field trip is important, can apply. But you can't use it to go to a library; you actually have to go out and do something. So a lot of geology, quite a lot of anthropology, many, a lot of archaeology, and geology, as I said, forestry, geography, field biology, a lot of systematics, you know, botany and zoology, and a… a certain amount of… of medical-oriented stuff, based on, mostly on epidemiology, and surveys. And we also, we have an arrangement with… with the NASA Astrobiology Institute, which I directed. We fund their field work. So we have a special fund that they can… gave, and we administer the applications.

We've had an overwhelming number of applications. We got... the first year, we sort of advertised it; we sent an email message out to the heads of departments, but we stopped advertising, because we... you know, you don't have to advertise on these things anymore. If somebody wants to get a Fellowship, they go to Google and they type in ‘fellowship’. And then they put some ancillary words in, and they, you know, they eventually come to our website. And then you fill out the form and input, you know, it wouldn't take very long, because it's all online. And all submissions are online. Well, we... the maximum that we give is 5000. Well, you know, I've had a lot of experience with fieldwork. For $5000, a graduate student can go to Kamchatka, spend two months there and come back and still have some change left. It's, you know, relatively — and they're not staying at a $200 a night hotels, you know, they're usually out in the field someplace. So, we've had incredibly interesting stuff, and it's just heartwarming to see... and on several occasions, people have written back and they've said, if we didn't get this fund, you know, I’d never have been able to do, go on that field trip, and it's totally changed the direction of my work. There was a young woman who wanted to go and examine some sites on the… on the track, I think, kind of Altaic speaking people, of course, Central Asia, and she'd been working on museum specimens, that had been collected 100 years ago. And she'd never seen the place. So she got $3000-4000, went and spent, you know, visited the sites where these things had been found, and spoke to people, saw scholars there, and she came back, she wrote, she said, it totally changed my perspective, and my… and it was one of the best things that happened to me. Well, that gets repeated time and time again. And it also demonstrates the need for funding. We had money... we funded about 70 or 80 people in three years. And we've had 1500 applications. So we fund 10% - it's embarrassing. We've tried to cut back the applications, and say, it's only for people on the doctoral programs now. And we still get 400-500, without advertising.
[Q] Do you fund projects world-wide?
The stipulation is they’re for US citizens, not US citizens, they're — well, US citizens and non-citizens who are working at US institutions or on a US project. So I would say, 10 to 15% are non-US citizens, but associated with a US university. And if we get more funding, I’d…  I would be happy to expand it. In fact, what I plan to do is try to develop some international connections, so that we get — but right now, we're, you know, administratively, we can't handle too much more, we have a very small staff. But it's, again, it's something I really like to do, that is to encourage young people to be in the field, to see… see a project in its… in its setting. And the astrobiology projects have been... we've done some really interim, a lot of them into these extreme sites. You know, the favorite place to go is Kamchatka, by the way. Kamchatka is one of the most tectonic places in the world, you know, lots of volcanoes, earthquakes, you know, geophysical, geothermal sites. And we've had several NAI expeditions there.

We had one very… very unusual request. It was from, actually, an older person, and he was a historian really, and he wanted to have funding so he could join a deep submersible trip to view, and take photographs and, I believe some collections, from a… a United States... former United States submarine that had been scuttled just off the edge of the continental shelf, off Oslo, in Norway. And the story of this submarine is really sort of bizarre. It… it was a World War I US submarine, actually obsolete, and the Navy loaned it to a British polar explorer named Wilkinson. And he had this goal of taking this air-breathing submarine — it was a diesel submarine — taking it under the ice to the North Pole. Well, in the scheme, nobody had any pre… any idea of what it was like under the ice. He actually had a kind of skin-like, sled-like arrangement on the top of the submarine, the notion being, you sort of skid along on the bottom of the ice. Well, it turns out the bottom of the ice isn't like that at all, you know, it's big stalactites, you know, it's big projections, it's very uneven, and it was, you know, totally inconceivable it could happen. Well the… the… fortunately the trip was aborted. They did… took one sort of quick excursion under the ice, and recognized the difficulty. And then there was irreparable damage to the submarine, didn't sink it but probably couldn't navigate one of the diving planes. According to Wilkinson, it had been sabotaged. Well, if that's the case, the saboteur was one smart guy because they would never… it would have been a death sentence. So, with great difficulty, they finally got it back to Norway and they scuttled it at about 1000 feet. And they... so we funded it. You know, we could — but there was another reason. The Chief Engineer of the submarine was named Blumberg. Well, it turns out he was Frank Blumberg - he wasn't related to me, but he was related to our Chief Librarian, and we actually had his archives, we had his papers - Blumberg's papers.
[Q] It is a small world. 
Then, we got a request, he said, they were being funded by the, you know, National Geographic Society, and I think the National Science Foundation. And they wanted to get a logo from the… the American Philosophical Society, that was suitable for deep submersibles, you know. So, our logo was a little busy - it's got an awful lot of figures, a lot of kind of Latin on it, you know. So I thought we needed something a little, kind of, more stark. So we had… we have a wonderful designer at the APS, and she made a logo which is a silhouette of Franklin, and then, ‘American Philosophical Society’ atop of the medallion, and then ‘Philadelphia’ on the bottom, and then of course, the front, ‘Exploration’. So we have images of some… and then there was the young woman who was studying butterflies that… that remove blood from cattle, you know, from mammals. You know, they live on, like vampire butterflies, in Nepal. And she discovered, and she went to Nepal, spent about six weeks there, you know, visited the sites, collected, and found one or two new species. And she found one that apparently was a, you know, fed on humans. So that, you know... but that's the sort of thing that, very often, you know, they're explorations of, natural history explorations. There was a young woman who got a… thought it was a great grant, to visit isolated beaches in Hawaii and collect crustacea and screen them for anti-virals and, you know, for potential medications. And also, she did a lot of work on classification. But as I said, we had… we had masses of these things.

We're also trying to be somewhat creative. We have a music program and what we may do, is… is commission music for our meetings. So we could commission, I thought, we were going to do it with students, you know, students who were training to become composers, and then we'd play those as, you know, every year or two, when we had our meetings. It's a way we contribute. And right now, we have an exhibit on… on, it's called Dauntless Courage, and it's on five explorers who were members of the APS. And that includes Elisha Kent Kane, who was from Pennsylvania, actually. And he was an Arctic explorer. And he was on the expeditions to find Franklin. Then there's a Kent Fracture Zone in the — Kane Fracture Zone, rather — in the mid-Atlantic ridge, and he did a lot… he did a lot of geographic and other exploration, up in the Davis Inlet. He's a slightly, you know, I mean, a somewhat eccentric guy. And then Audubon was a member and he did a lot of exploration in this part of the world, the Eastern United States mostly. Also, down south, in the west. And Ruth Patrick, who's a contemporary woman who’s a… she's a limnologist. Well, actually, she studies estuaries and… and rivers, and studied diatoms — she did a lot of work on classification and physiology. And then, Titian Peale. His father, Charles Wilson Peale, was a founder of this society, was a Patriot in the revolution, and a portraitist. He's done millions of portraits, and he named all his kids after, you know, like Rembrandt Peale, and Titian Peale, and his daughter, also was an artist. And Titian Peale was a kind of an explorer, and, was an explorer, and he…  he was a naturalist, and he went on the US Exploring Expedition which was after the Lewis and Clark. The… the Feds funded another round the world expedition, led by Lieutenant Wilkes, and they circumnavigated the world, brought back a huge collection of natural history and ethnography and…  and that was the beginning collection of the Smithsonian, is the Titian. So much of the old stuff that they had came from that. And Titian Peale did a lot of the paintings. We have a wonderful collection of… of some of his paintings. And let me see, that... well, we have other contemporary, you know, Admiral Byrd was a member. And Neil Armstrong is a member. And he comes to meetings occasionally, you know, I've invited him to chair a program we're going to have next spring on… on space. So we'll… he's, you know, he was the most famous man in the world, you know, for a long time, but by nature, I think, I wouldn't call him shy exactly, but he's not, you know, he's a private kind of person. But he has intellectual and engineering interests and, you know, so I am very pleased he's going to come to the meeting. So, it's kind of interesting. And you meet, I've tried to meet local, and our, sort of,  fellow societies in Philadelphia and several… and there's a whole bunch of scholarly and academic public interest groups in the city, so from time to time, I go and have lunch with those.

I'm going to go to Japan. And there's a meeting there that is… that is focused on a anti-viral for hepatitis B. But the people who are funding this, which is a big drug company, who makes this stuff. It's a… it’s a pretty good, actually, it's fairly effective, the… the trials were impressive. But there… there's a group of these drugs that, very often, the virus becomes resistant. So in a way, the more you have, the more possibilities there are. And I think, one day, there'll, some kind of combination therapy will eventually emerge that, you know, put together, working on different parts of the pathology, pathogenesis cycle, or pathogenesis scheme, you will be able to really get quite a lot… so, quite a lot of control, and decrease the levels of… of virus.
[Q] Different antigenic loci from the same kind of virus, you mean, or different viruses? 
The same virus, I mean, broadly speaking, the same virus. There, it turns out, you know, there isn't a big difference, there's some difference in the strains of the virus, in terms of treatment. There is. Some respond rather better, but it's not as striking as it is with some other things like papilloma virus, for example. Or even AIDS, you know, where some respond much better. Some of the varieties. So I…  but I think that, you know, there's a funny characteristic of hepatitis B; it doesn't lend itself to mutation very readily. It mutates far less than AIDS; I mean, a lot less, and a lot less than hepatitis C virus, too. And part of the reason is, it's got this somewhat strange, really constricted genome that's… that's… has two bands, you know. And it turns out, if you have a mutation in… in one locus, you'll also… you'll also mutate a second... at least one other locus at the same time, which may make it non-viable. So there's far less mutation. And as I said, it hasn't affected the vaccine, these, the vacs... so far, anyhow. So, and there hasn't been kind of runaway strains of the virus that you can't… that you can't… you know, you absolutely can't treat. Okay, so... but then they called and asked me if I'd come and talk there. And they said, well, you know, this is the 40th anniversary of your first paper, which was, they reminded me, was published in 1967. Well, you know, I knew about the paper, obviously, but I'd sort of forgotten, or if I did, I didn't notice it, so there's, it's going to be kind of associated with the 40th anniversary of the paper. Since I did some of my original field work in Japan, you know, I hope some of my old colleagues will be there.

Some of the things I’m trying to… ideas I'm trying to get across, one of them, we've talked of already, about trying to understand the… the complex dimensions of an infection, and… and stop thinking about it just as pathogen, because that's only part of the story. You know, 90% of the micro-organisms in the world aren't pathogenic. You know, soil organisms for the most part aren't - a whole bunch of them. And then the organisms we're interested in, they’re viruses that infect archaea, that infect  extreme virus... bacteria. They never see humans, you know, they never did. There weren't any humans when they… when they flourished, you might say. So again, to look at this in a kind of context of population dynamics, and what the consequences... see, there are consequences —  not consequences that would prevent the use of the vaccine, but consequences you would have, you want to know about, if you can.
But the other thing is that there's now been several studies that if you decrease the amount of viral load, even if you still are infected, but the… but the loads are quite low, there's a marked decrease in the risk of getting cancer of the liver, or… or chronic liver disease, which is death, you know, you at least see a death, you're dying from it. So, that means you don't need a very good drug. Or you can use drugs in very low dosage, because what you want to achieve is not total eradication of the virus, which is going to be very difficult in many cases, anyhow. You know, it's… it's integrated. The genome is integrated. How are you going to…you have to kill all those cells, which, you know, is feasible, but it's… it’s pretty harsh. And in some cases, you know, essentially all the liver cells are infected. So you don't want to get rid of the liver. But if you say, well, okay, let's just decrease load, even in asymptomatic people, and then you can decrease their probability of getting cancer. Well, that means that it's beginning to get something like treating hypertension, or, you know, people, as they get older, and contemporary societies with advanced medical systems, or advanced medicine, they… they're taking all kinds of drugs for… for non-diseases, you know, things they haven't had. They've never had any symptoms. And if… and if the thing, if the measure is effective, they never will have a symptom. For example, hypertension. You know, people who have hypertension, they don't have symptoms for the most part; you have to measure it. And then you start taking really powerful drugs, you know, and it's very hard to get the right level, and you know, the right adjustment, the right combo. And there's been a hell of a lot of research, fortunately, much of it successful, to get pretty good treatment. Or diabetes, you know, very often, people, if they're diagnosed early, before they really have much in the way of symptoms, and they're given the appropriate doses of… of insulin, and the proper care, you know, then they'll never get symptoms. And… and with hope, they won't develop the complications. If you treat the diabetes, at the risk of complications, you know, the sequelae, blindness and certain other horrible things, kidney disease, that won't happen. The same goes, you know, everybody's taking drugs for cholesterol. Well, if you, unless somebody measured your blood, you wouldn't know you had… okay, but you do know that there's a high risk of early death, earlier death. Okay, so we're taking a whole bunch of drugs for the things that we never had symptoms for. So, this will be something like that. You know, you get diagnosed, you get tested, and you're found to be a carrier, and then you can be treated to prevent cancer, chronic liver disease is the hope. Now there is data that… that supports that.

The practice now is, you don't treat carriers unless they have symptoms. Now, the symptoms may be abnormal liver chemistry or an abnormal biopsy. And, actually there may be very little perceived symptoms. But you don't treat… carriers if they have no symptoms, or they have no clinical findings, and serological findings. That's the issue. And, so… but… but this argument that you really don’t have to use a lot of drugs, you know, if you only have to keep it to a certain level. So, what I'm trying to urge people to find out now, you know, to determine — and I've been speaking to the drug companies about this for several years — is just, what the level is. Now, it can only be, kind of, you know, it's going to vary from person to person, and one day, you may be able to find that out too, based on this genomic analysis, you know, looking for susceptible, genetic susceptibilities in an individual; if they have a particular allele, that may indicate that you want to go to a certain level. I mean, that can all be determined in time. You know, empirically, you're actually making an observation. And then you could particularize the treatment, and decide some people are never going to have big problems, and others are. And that's what we're, when we started this stuff on polymorphisms, that was our kind of hope. And you'll know with the SNPs, and all the possibility of looking at polymorphisms in great numbers, that again, is the kind of promise. Now, it has a lot of potential hazards, and there may be a lot of several, total show-stoppers, but it means you, kind of, particularize medicine — individualize medicine where you find out what the risks are and then try and mitigate them. Now that has dangers connected with it, because people don't really understand the concept of risk. They equate risk with certainty. When you have the RAC2, certain women, they do mastectomies, you know, in asymptomatic… you know, that's a pretty big consequence. So you can see the possible hazards, but… but also the potential benefits, because you'd have to balance the treatment; I mean, you wouldn't want to give a treatment that is, if you can avoid it. You want to devise certain benign treatments that, generally speaking, improve your health one way or another. And you can conceive of that happening. The problem is, a lot of this is drug driven, so the only things that, very often, get funded are the ones that are… are based on drugs, they’re based on something you can sell, essentially. Well, nevertheless, I think that's going to be a direction, that's, kind of, really going to be amplified now. My great concern is that it's going to, kind of, get out of hand. And if your motivations are to sell drugs, you know, then that… that's going to be an issue, because that's going to affect your judgment about how to proceed. But that's an issue in… in contemporary medical treatment.

Becky reminded me of the [unclear] lecture which I gave, and also there was a similar one at, here, at Fox Chase Cancer Centre, and it had to do with predictions for the future. Well this… this was a kind of thinking about what would happen in the future, and there was a kind of story about an older person - strange, right? Who was, you know, who had never been hospitalized in 80 plus years, or something. And he was still physically very active and mentally very active, and he was off on a trip in the… in the Trinity Alps. The Trinity Alps are in the… this range of mountains up in Northern California, between the Cascades and the Coast Range, and it extends up into Oregon and… and into Washington - it's the Klamath Range. But it's a very unusual formation; it's quite different than the Sierras and the… and the Cascades geologically. But in any case, so it's a story about his climbing, and, you know, his connection with young people and including two of his grandchildren, so it was sort of a… but one of the things he… he did was, he was collecting… field specimens of… of, from water and earth and so forth, to look for micro-organisms. Now, the way that we detect… we detect epidemics, you know, is a bunch of people get sick. So a lot of people get sick and you go and very often you find a new… a new infectious agents, like that disease that occurred in the Four Corners area in Arizona and New Mexico, and so forth, which turned out to be, I think, mouse-borne or… or…  
[Q] Hanta virus.
Yeah, you know, and… and then, you know, the development of ebola, and some of those strains of viruses that were… are similar to ebola. And AIDS itself. And then you've currently got Gajdusek’s work with kuru, and then with these Iceland... the disease of Icelandic sheep, you know, that turned into all this fascinating stuff that's going on now. Well, another way of doing it is if you look around and see if there's any new infectious agents, and some which would have… would have potentially, pathogenic characteristics, or you could see mutations which had pathogenic propensities in existing agents. And so… so this vision... there were a bunch of amateur collectors who were assigned various areas where they went to, and they collected samples and they had a, kind of, decoder, you know, like a Dick Tracy decoder on their wrist, and that would read the DNA that they needed, and that had a certain amount of storage, you can make comparisons; otherwise you'd contact GPS satellites — they could find you pretty easily, so that you got instant information on location. And then that would radio the sequence from the satellite to, probably, you know, radio probably, you could use other sources, like communication, to a big data bank and then make a rapid comparison, and then you'd get a message back, you know, ‘collect it’, ‘bring it home’. And in that way you could sort of do epidemiology without disease. You know, there was a notion that, I think, and also in that article, I talked about, what I just spoke about, you know this idea of being able to predict susceptibilities and take measures of a — what's the right word? Of a… of a reasonable kind to… to prevent the disease, so you can live out your lifespan without being very sick. You know, that's the big objective, you know, to kind of drop dead at age 90 something or other, you know, never having been sick before. A lot of people die that way. My mother more or less died that way, you know, without being hospitalized, rather than the sad business of protracted illness, when you lose a lot of capability and you're a big burden to a lot of people. So that was… that was the kind of theme there. And it is a very, and that… that… there's a real likelihood that might happen.

What's happening is the ancillary technology's happening, like the… the amazing applications of GPS. You know, having done celestial navigation, what, 40 years ago, 50 years ago, and it's really, I mean, when I worked on the sailing ships, you know, when you're trying to take a reading in a pitching ship, you know, you're only a few feet from the waterline, and, you know, very often, you can't take a reading for several days because, you know, there's cloud and you can't see the sun, you can't see, you can't make any star shots. And then with a GPS, you get a device that costs a few hundred bucks, I mean, an ultra one for 5, 600. And you just carry it, you know, and you can get, it gives you accuracy, tells you what the limits are, and you know the military, they run the GPS system, it's their satellites. The… they downgraded the civilian signal for a while, but I… but I think they've stopped doing that. They may change it from time to time, but actually, even if they downgraded it, their methods of, kind of, integrating data, so you can circumvent the deterioration of the signal. But having said that, it's just a civilian hand-held instrument. Now, you know, when I go sailing, across, on a lake and there's a fog up, you know, I just take out the GPS — you can follow the course between navigational markers and all. Here we only have two navigational markers in the lake, but, or — I was doing some plant collecting recently, and, you know, a big thing when you collect a plant, you want to know exactly where the… well you take a GPS reading. It's hard to do in the forest, by the way, you have to get, you have to be able to see it.
So, and the GPS is just incredible. People, you know, farmers use it a lot now to plough. And, you know, or not plough, but to plant seeds, and they can, they detect to say how much fertilizer and insecticide you need; you know, to put in, you can plot out the whole field, program the tractor to… it's quite amazing. Well, I think the availability of that, and the development of other technologies. For example, we currently, you know, our internet, is pretty much the land-based, you know, I think it's very much a fiber optics and all that, but you can… you can predict a satellite-based internet, where you have, you know, a hundred mini-satellites, and, you know, you can launch pretty cheaply, on cheap launchers like, you know, they use submarine missiles — you know, missiles that are used on Polaris-type submarines, and the Russians have a lot, we have a lot of them. And there is a treaty that requires you, the United States submersibles to get rid of many of those. So the warheads have been removed, but then the question is, how do you get rid of the missiles? The easiest way is to shoot them. And… and if you put a... you know, you can get a very cheap launch. You can put a… a very good sized satellite, and those things can achieve orbital heights.
In any case, I'm rambling again, but it… what it has to do with the development of these technologies, that, in time, people will say, well, you know, if you've got all this stuff, we can do this pretty easily. Well, we're, you know, NASA's trying to develop, we're going to have more onboard sequencing capability on, one of these days, on the shuttle. And, or on landers. We're going to be able... they're going... because, well, I, we bought a Raman spectrograph to use for… for field use, and eventually use on Mars. Well, it weighed a kilo. You know, a Raman spectrograph used to be the size of that table! That's an incredible — and they promised us they'd make it smaller! You'd have a computer too, but you'd have that onboard, anyhow.
So… so I think what's going to happen, there's going to be an emergence of realization of what you can do, as the… as the technology improves. And that's why, I think, you know, a lot of this, much of what, you know, directing, particularly entrepreneurial action towards the development of alternative energy sources, that's going… that’s going to lead to all kinds of stuff that people have never thought of. And see, what often happens, is that you develop some engineering, or some technology, for one purpose, and after it's kind of around and available, and people know about it, some clever person will say, well, gee, I can use it for something else. For example, there's… there’s a big industry now that… that uses, what are known as, MEMS: microelectronic… microelectromagnetic [sic] systems. And those were developed by NASA, in the... I think the first one was, they had a contract with a... an engineering student, actually, at… at Stanford, and had developed a… a kind of inertial monitor for a rat heart valve. They wanted to do experimental measurements in space. Well, what in effect, happened, is you incorporated the memory and other electronic characteristics, the way you have on a computer chip, with a mechanical device. And you can stamp them out, you can produce them, etch them — the mechanical part, as well as the electronic part — the way you make chips. And they were chip size, this whole thing. Well, you know what those things are used for now? In your... the air-bags on the automobile, they have a deceleration detector that is a… that’s a MEMS device. And when you… when you have rapid deceleration at a… at a limit that's set, it sets off an explosive charge and the bag comes flowing out. That was a…
[Q] That’s a great example. 
And there are… there are… it's a, must, by now, be a $10 billion a year application. Or the interpretation of things like scans, you know… PET scans and functional MRIs and so forth. A lot of that pattern recognition comes from work with Landsat, when you — Landsat, is the earth observing satellites, and that kind of interprets land shapes, land forms.

One other thing I wanted to talk about was this paper that I wrote some years ago now, with Renée Fox, who's a, probably now retired, professor of sociology at the University of Pennsylvania, and a good friend. And one of the things that kind of impressed me, you know, with the work on hepatitis — impresses anybody I think who makes, who works in medical research — is very often, you develop something that really has some clear advantages, and then after it's used for a while, you begin to see the disadvantages. And a case in point was we developed this technique for detecting carriers of the hepatitis B virus, and we, therefore, we were able to screen blood donors. And we essentially eliminated, you know, post-transfusion hepatitis to hepatitis B in the United States and elsewhere. There was still hepatitis C, but that can be detected now, too. And post-transfusion hepatitis has essentially been eliminated. Okay, so that's a good thing, you know, it's hard to argue with that as a disadvantage. But we began to get calls and visits from people who told us that they — very often they were health care people, and they'd been tested, donating blood, or for other reasons, and they were found to be carriers; they were told they were fired, they couldn't work anymore.
Or, there's... it was the time of the Vietnam War, before it was quite, well, it was just about over and there were a lot of orphans who were available, or, up for adoption. And by that time, we were… one of the first groups I studied was from South East Asia, and there was a very high prevalence of hepatitis carriers in Vietnamese. Well, the US public health service, you know, had to decide, they had to pass on whether they were health hazards; they wouldn't allow a child to come to this country, you know, or to be able to be put up for adoption. Their, I must say, their attitude was very liberal, and very clear-thinking. And they knew about hepatitis B, but they decided not to test for it. You stop and think, to decide a kid's fate, his or her whole life on the basis of a single serological test? And the argument would be, you know, well, it would be much better to find some kind of prevention, instead of living with it. I had personal experience — some friends of mine who adopted children who were found to be carriers.
Okay, so... and then we had the… we had, you know, a woman who was of Asian origin, she was all concerned because she had told her then boyfriend, and he'd left the scene, and she used to do a lot of cooking. And she was very concerned about cooking for… tough problems.
So, they still exist, by the way, this… this issue still comes up. Well, one of the ways we dealt with it at that time was to say, well, there's nothing we can do if we detect a carrier. We knew HBV was pretty infectious, but if it were as infectious as the common cold, there'd be a hell of a lot more hepatitis around. So we thought you could not endanger all these people at that time, but we should work on the vaccine, that was just coming through, and treatments and so forth. For example, if you treat a carrier and lower their levels, they're not infectious, or… or I would say, they're unlikely to be infectious, a decreased risk.
 

I've always been interested in myths, you know, you'll learn a lot from myths, you learn a lot from, you know, many sources, because a myth is another way of explaining nature. It's not consistent with the testable model that we use in science, but certainly, it's very colorful, and very dramatic, and, you know, it tells you the whole story in very complicated ways, new ones, too. So, I got interested in...in Daedalus. Now Daedalus was a mythic figure, and he… he was, he did a lot of things; he was, he invented forms of sculpture — the lost wax method was attributed to him. He was a kind of engineer. He was a… he was a sort of problem-solver. And… and to my mind, he was a kind of model of contemporary technology and engineering science.
So the story is a rather long-winded one, but an interesting one. He was from Athens, but he got into trouble there because he defenestrated his nephew, threw him out a window, and he was accused of murder. It was a kind of complicated case; he said there had been incest involved. Typical kind of Greek myth. So he flees to Crete and he is, goes to work in the court of King Minos and his wife, Queen Pasiphae. So the king had a kind of problem, you know, so he turned to… to Daedalus, the big time problem-solver. And the problem was that his… that the guards had presented them with this white ox, and which they, in time, expected to have sacrificed to the gods. And, but she, his wife developed a hopeless love for the… for this bull, and so they appealed to Daedalus how to deal with this issue. So he constructed a model, a life size hollow, upholstered cow. And she gets into the cow and is put into a field; she's impregnated by the bull, and it satisfies her ardor. But there's another problem, because the offspring was the Minotaur, you know, this terrible half-beast, half-man. And it was going around causing, you know, killing people, causing destruction. So they call on… they call on Daedalus again to solve the problem. So he builds a labyrinth and — it's actually a sort of maze, you know, there’s a difference between a labyrinth and a maze; a labyrinth, if you… if you kind of  follow it you eventually get to the centre, in a maze, there are blind alleys. So he actually built, I guess, a maze. And they put the… they put the Minotaur in it, and he's saved, I mean, the country. Now the problem arises, because the Cretans had had a war with the Athenians; they won them, and every year they had to send a tribute of young men and women, who are sacrificed to the Minotaur; they were put into the labyrinth, you know, to die there. So naturally, Daedalus - he was an Athenian himself - so he was very upset by that, and the… the Athenians sent a kind of undercover agent to kill the… kill the Minotaur, and that was Theseus, a born killer, if you ever want to see one. So he allies with the daughter of Midas and Pasiphae, who was Ariadne, and she falls for him, and she promises to help him with the Minotaur if he would take her away with him after that happens. And she was already married to somebody else. And... mind you, she's the half-sister of the Minotaur, right? Okay, so she gets this magic spool from Daedalus, and he... there's a little door and they can get inside, and they go and kill the… and kill the Minotaur, and they escape using this golden thread — a theme that comes up in the Daedalus myth quite often. And they flee, and they go to Naxos, where Theseus, not unexpectedly, abandons Ariadne, hence the opera, you know.
Okay, the story goes, I mean, that's not the end of the story, but I’m not going to spend… so there's… there's a constant theme, you know; you solve a problem and you create another one. Well, the next part, what happens is that Daedalus gets imprisoned in the maze with his son Icarus, the ill-fated Icarus, and so, okay, he solves that. He develops a vertical solution to the problem. He develops a theory of aerodynamics, invents wings, and makes them; cautions his son not to fly too low to the ground where the aerodynamics will be poor — too much moisture — or go too high and get it melted. The son, in his exuberance, flies too high, the wings fall off and he falls into the Ionian Sea, named after him — Icarian Sea, the Icarian Sea. And, but Daedalus escapes and he ends up in Naples, near Naples, in Cumea, or, he eventually ended up in Sicily. And it goes on. There are other parts of the story.
All right, so there's this notion that there are no perfect solutions. Every time you solve a problem, you cause another one. The other thing is you can never know everything, because every time you know something, you know more about what you don't know. You keep creating problems. And that's what science is good at. The big thing that drives science is not the answers to the questions, but generating the questions, because if you answer all the questions, there's no place to go. But fortunately, you always... you always generate more questions than… than answers. You know, everybody writes a paper, and they said, well there's more questions than answers — that's how you can tell you're doing a good job! It's not that that's surprising; that's what you expect. So that was a, we refer to that as the Daedalus, the Daedalus factor, or something like that.

I think it's an important lesson in science, not to expect perfection. And it's actually, it's really important to know that, because that means something is going to happen that you don't know what it is. Well, how can you… how can you… something unexpected is going to happen. So how can you expect the unexpected? When are you going to expect that something unexpected is going to, so you're kind of prepared? Well, the best way to be prepared is to not try to get narrow answers, you know, get yes/no answers. But you want to kind of look around the issue. You want to see the stuff that doesn't seem so important - it's not goal-directed. You know, if you have a goal, you don't want to... when I was working on this therapy, you know, for the virus, and we were funded by some drug companies, they didn't want us to go off on tangents, that, you know, that we think, gee, well, it doesn't have to do with the manufacture of the drug; this is pretty interesting stuff. They want you to, you know, they have land… what do they call them? Not landmarks, but…
[Q] Milestones.
Milestones, yeah. And they have, somebody's got them at an office in some top level of the drug company, and you have to sort of check in on the milestones so often. And if you hit the milestones, the stock goes up, you know, and if you don't hit the milestones, the Wall Street guys find out about it, and the stock goes down. So there's a lot wrapped up in not looking at extraneous stuff. Which, I think, in the long run is not a good idea, because actually you miss... because the history of science is, you always find stuff that you hadn't expected. That was certainly, you know, that's my personal experience. We weren't looking for a hepatitis virus, but we were prepared for the unexpected.
That's another Heraclitean... you know, Heraclitus, the 3rd, 4th Century BC Greek philosopher, I suppose. And he said you… you have to expect the unexpected, because it's fleeting. He's the same fellow who said, the same philosopher who said, you can't step twice into the same stream, you know, because it's always changing. Everything's in flux; you never can do the same experiment twice. And experimental science has tried to get around that by… by putting a cork in the test tube, you know, you put item A into item B; chemical A, chemical B. There's a cork in the test tube, so nothing outside gets in, then you look and see what results. But the cork's not tested, you know, there is no cork in the… in the world. So you'll always have this interference. I'm not arguing against that, because it's the development of experimental science that actually has brought us to where we are now, but there are limitations to it. It's not… it’s not always the… always the answer.
