bernard.lovell

Bernard Lovell (1913-2012), British radio astronomer and founder of the Jodrell Bank Observatory, received an OBE in 1946 for his work on radar, and was knighted in 1961 for his contribution to the development of radio astronomy. He obtained a PhD in 1936 at the University of Bristol. His steerable radio telescope, which tracked Sputnik across the sky, is now named the Lovell telescope.

I was born in Gloucestershire on the 31st August 1913 so I'm now talking to you in the year 2007, at the age of over 93. I was born in a very small village, which was remote, about midway between the cities of Bath and Bristol. In fact, about less than a mile from where I was born and brought up, there was an old milestone which says 7 miles Bath, 7 miles Bristol.
The village was isolated. There was no public transport. In order to get anywhere, one always... one had to use a horse and trap, a bicycle, or walk two miles to the nearest trams into Bristol or station midway, railway station midway between Bristol and Bath. So I was the only child of Gilbert Lovell, who married Emily Laura Adams. My childhood was a very peaceful one. I lived alone in this village with few friends. I remember walking to school bowling a hoop. I might say that if one tried to do that nowadays... well, I think one would be mowed down by very fast cars, because the village is now almost entangled within the outskirts of Bristol.
My father was a local businessman. I don't think my parents were very well off, although they were comfortably well off and I was never starved of anything. I am told that during the First World War, I was still well fed. I remember little about the First World War, except at a very young age I remember recruiting marches around the village. The village had to make its own music and therefore I was brought up in a very musical family. In fact, I still have my father's score of Handel's Messiah with all the markings on it.
The point which influenced my young life very much and which has remained with me was that my father, although he was a businessman, was a lay preacher and he normally took three or four services a day, often travelling by bicycle or by horse and trap for several miles to preach in villages. Now I mention that because that has had a very fundamental influence on my life. Even now, so many years later, I remember that my father when he reprimanded me he did so by quotations from the bible. In fact, his knowledge of the bible was as great as that of any person I have ever since encountered. Of course, later on that influence was... received a great shock when I moved into the greater world.

I attended a local school. I might say that the village has now grown and the school has been replaced, which I'm honoured to say bears my own name, but that's by the way. That indicates the enormous growth around that area. I think I was fortunate in that when it was time for me to leave the local village school, a new school had been opened. It was then called the Kingswood; I think it was then the Kingswood Secondary School or Grammar School. I think its name has subsequently been changed, but it was about two miles from where I was living, and I cycled there regularly, every day and so I lived at home during this formative period of my life. The school was modern in the sense that it was a mixture of girls and boys and indeed I think I was one of the earliest scholars there, I think one year after the school was opened, I became one of the pupils.
The headmaster was a retired major, Major Eaton, who was extremely strict. Now, I don't think I was a very good scholar. I was... the new radio, we call it radio now. It was then called wireless, the earliest stations had just been operating and I think we used to listen on headphones, with a crystal set, and then I became so interested that I built my own receivers, and eventually made an illegal transmitter, so that I could transmit short distances. It was all very crude in those days, with the aerial strung between very high poles in one's garden.
My life was changed significantly when I was, I suppose, the age of 15. I don't think I was terribly good at anything. I was pretty near the bottom of the class, or not more than halfway up. And then one day, for the sake of the outing the physics master or one of the physics masters took me, with a party, to a lecture in the University of Bristol. Now, I had rarely been to a big city and never to a university. Now, the University of Bristol had just built, had built a new physics building called the HH Wills Physical Laboratory and I was absolutely astonished by that building, particularly the lecture room. The lecture was by the Professor AM Tyndall, who was a director of the physical laboratories, and it was on the electric spark.
Now, many, many years later when I was quite old, I met the director of the Royal Institution and he said, 'Oh yes, that was the notable lecture that Tyndall gave as one of the children's lectures at the Royal Institution, and he must have given it either as a rehearsal or as a repeat of those lectures'. Well, I can see that lecture room now. A marvellous room with electric sparks raging right across the room, the hissing arc running the epidiascope and Tyndall showing the difference to his teeth, false teeth in ultraviolet light and so on. Well, after that night the... it was remarkable. I had a great ambition to become one of Tyndall's pupils, and I did so. After another two or three years of examinations, I became in September 1931, that is a few years after my 18th birthday... I became a pupil of Tyndall, and three years later, I graduated.

I remember that I was a keen cricketer and my prowess as a cricketer had obviously reached the university captain, and he came to me one day and found me in the library, and said, 'Lovell, we're beginning practice in a few weeks' time and we expect to see you'. And I'm amazed now to think that my reply was, 'I am sorry, but I've come here to work, not play cricket'. I mention that because it shows the revolution that had taken place in my life as a result of that one lecture, and it is something that had a great influence on what happened, many, many, many years later at Jodrell Bank which we shall come to later on.
Now, I graduated and then I did play cricket. I played a lot of cricket. I played cricket for three teams in Bristol and my own village, and I was very, very happily living there. Tyndall assumed that I would want to stay on and do research, and of course that was my great ambition.
Well, now the University of Bristol, the physics department in those days was not a unified department. It had a variety of researchers in progress, and I was allocated a very interesting task. Apparently there was a problem about the conductivity of thin films of metal, that at a certain stage, as you reduce the thickness of the film the normal conductivity disappeared and it became highly resistive and I was asked to investigate this problem. That was my first research. Now, it was fortunate that Bristol at that time had one of the finest glass blowers in the world. He was an expert on working with the... not the solder glass, but with Pyrex, which was then a fairly recent invention I believe. His name was Burrow and we became great friends and he would always give me priority because he knew that I was not afraid to do a bit of glass blowing myself and that I received a good workshop training during my university career. I was put in charge of ETS Appleyard.
Now, Appleyard was a very good physicist and he directed my research, although I did it all myself. I was not one of a pair or a team, I just worked alone, and I was... Appleyard suggested that I investigate the conductivity of some alkaline metals, which were relatively easy to deposit, so Burrough built me a most beautiful apparatus in Pyrex glass, in which I could heat rubidium first of all and through a very small aperture, it became effectively a very small atomic gun in which I could deposit increasing thicknesses of the rubidium on armoured glass surface, across which I measured the resistivity. The apparatus was evacuated to a very high degree with an automatic pump and a mercury system, and I suppose in those days I was working in a vacua which must be close to those which were then obtainable. The results of my two years research were very clear and that is that if I baked the whole Pyrex glass system in an oven, to nearly a softening point for 24 hours or more, and obtained a very, very clean glass surface, then right from the beginning of the deposition of the atoms of rubidium on the surface, I was measuring the normal conductivity or resistivity of the surface. So the answer was clear, that the reason why it had been found previously, the conductivity of the metal was poor, as it became thinner and thinner was that it became impure. Appleyard of course was not satisfied with these initial results and so I built or got Burrough to build me a series of equipment's in which I could introduce impurities onto the glass surface, as the thickness of the metal was increasing.
The results were decisive and they were published in a number of papers in the proceedings of the Royal Society, under the name of The Conductivity of Thin Metals... Thin Layers of the Alkaline Metals. I did all this by Tyndall who had obtained for me a small grant from the Department of Scientific Industrial Research at the DSIR, which was then the body which gave grants to students, to enable them to proceed to postgraduate work. Now, after two years I had so many results that I had done enough to obtain my thesis for the degree of PhD.

I think I then had a small grant, called a Colston Research Grant, in order to continue with my research, but one day Tyndall said to me, 'Look here, Lovell, I think it's time you left here. You need a bit more competition'. And I was desolated because I was then very happily playing cricket for the university and my other village in another team called the Bristol Optimists, and he said to me... And there are two people who have asked me if I had a young man. One is Blackett who is working at the Birkbeck College in London, and the other is Bragg who works in Manchester. Well, of course, the thought of working with Blackett was terribly exciting. He was a hero to those of us who were young in those days. He had been brought up and became a lieutenant in the Royal Navy. He had fought in the Battle of Jutland. He had then resigned his commission in order to work with Rutherford in the Cavendish, and there he had demonstrated in an expansion chamber the disintegration of a nucleus which had been discovered by Rutherford in Manchester actually before he went to the Cavendish, and this photograph of the emergence of a proton from particles bombarding an oxygen nucleus, adorned every textbook of physics. Furthermore, with Occhialini from Italy, he had discovered the positive electron.
Now, it transpired recently that Anderson in America had discovered the positive electron independently, a matter of only weeks ahead of Blackett and Occhialini. Anyhow, that sets the scene that I desperately wanted to go to London and work with Blackett. So on a summer's day in August 1936, I reluctantly took a train from Bath to Bristol, and no doubt with the optimism of youth immediately expected Blackett to offer me the job. Well, he was very charming and he said, 'Well, Lovell, I'm very interested in you but I must interview another person and I will let you know the result'. So by a previous arrangement and with great reluctance, instead of returning to Bath I got on a train at Euston and reluctantly travelled to Manchester. I arrived in Manchester on a dreary, wet evening and I thought: my goodness, this is the first and the last night I'm ever going to spend in this dreadful place. I remember standing outside the library in damp, foggy drizzle, and waiting for a bus to take me to somewhere to spend the night, and little knowing that I think forty years later, chances were to occur where I was made an honorary freeman in a spectacular ceremony in that very building.
Anyhow, that was much later, but it does indicate another accidental revolution that occurred in my early life. I was interviewed the next day by WL Bragg in the physics department with his staff, including I remember one of the staff called James who had been on the Antarctic expedition with Shackleton and they offered me the job of assistant lecturer, and I had the impudence to say and I really stil feel rather embarrassed about this. My reply was, 'Well, I'm afraid I can't tell you if I'm going to accept because you see I'd really rather work with Blackett in London'. Well, that was really an abominable thing to say and I left Manchester with that attitude, returned home and went on a cricket tour in Devon, not realising that I had really, so to speak, put my foot in it, because I don't think much love was lost between Bragg and Blackett in those days, and after a short time I began to get telegram messages from Bragg to say that he urgently needs a decision, otherwise he would appoint another person they had in mind. And I think it was Blackett who then told Bragg that they had decided to appoint a person called JG Wilson, so to carry on with his work on cosmic rays at Birkbeck College, because, as Blackett wrote to me, he said he was sorry he couldn't appoint me but he felt bound to give preference to Wilson, who already had experience with the technique which Blackett was then using to investigate cosmic rays with the expansion chamber. So I reluctantly came to Manchester in 1936.

Bragg was then working in the Schuster Laboratory and the laboratory was packed with his staff, nearly all of whom were engaged in crystallography. Well, of course, this was wonderful work, which Bragg was one of the great experts, but I simply could not interest myself in crystallography. There was so much of it, and I realised later on that this was typical of me. I never... I was not then and never did really become interested in beginning research on subjects which had always been well explored. I always seemed to have this initiative and inkling to start new things. So I tried very hard to interest myself in crystallography. There's so much of it. Massive books and so many experts, that I thought it was not for me.
Two things then happened. I made the great mistake of trying to continue my work on thin films, but it was hopeless. I was given a room in the new physics building. Oh goodness, what that room was. In the basement, looking out on a brick wall and I thought of the lovely room I had worked in in Bristol, and I asked Burrough if he would make me another equipment so that I could continue my work. It was a very bad mistake. There were no facilities in Manchester, no glass blowing, no liquid oxygen or liquid nitrogen, and Burrough did send me the apparatus, but it got smashed in transport. So on that Christmas vacation, I did return to Bristol and complete another item of work on thin films, but meanwhile... and I can't remember how this happened.
Douglas Hartree, the professor of applied mathematics had become friends of the family of the girl with whom I'd fallen in love and whom I was to marry. Joyce Chesterman, well-known family in Bath. And I remember they would pick me up on their way back from the south country and it was Hartree who had built this amazing machine, the first differential analyser. The first integrated machine. A superb mechanical device and he asked me if I'd like to spend some time working with him on that machine, and I was delighted to do so. It was in the basement of the Schuster building, and though Hartree was the professor of applied mathematics, he did spend most of his time in the physics department, and there I met Dr. Arthur Porter, who became a life long friend and he was the person who built the original Meccano model of this differential analyser. I worked on that and helped Porter and Hartree solve a number of equations using this machine. I don't think I ever published any of the results for any of my work on that, but in later years as the modern computers took over, I'm very happy to have had association with that elementary machine.

And then another remarkable thing happened, which again changed my life. Bragg decided to leave Manchester and to accept an appointment as Director of the National Physical Laboratory. Now, to save any confusion I will say straight away that Bragg only occupied the post of Director of the NPL for about a year. He then succeeded Rutherford as the Cavendish Professor, so he will be remembered as the Cavendish Professor and it may be forgotten that he did spend about a year as a Director of the NPL. Well, there was great interest and rumours as to who would succeed Bragg as the Langworthy Professor of Physics and director of the physics laboratory. An amazing succession, Schuster, Rutherford, Bragg. Who would succeed him? The various rumours... Chadwick, for example, was mentioned who discovered the neutron but Hartree then informed me that Blackett had been appointed to succeed Bragg. Now this was an amazing change. Hartree had said that he had written to Blackett and thought that this boy Lovell would be interested in carrying on research on cosmic rays in Manchester. And so Blackett asked me to go to London and take over a marvellous device, an automatic cloud chamber, which had been used by one of his Chinese students, Yu Shien Shan, who decided to return to China in order to help in the war against Japan. It was by the end of... so I collected this equipment and got it transported to Manchester, and by the time Blackett arrived at the end of 1936 or 1937, I had this expansion chamber working in the Schuster Building.
Now, then became a very exciting couple of years. I ought to say that my association with Blackett became lifelong, and he will... I will say a bit about him now, because his name will appear frequently in the account of my life. He had been a Naval Lieutenant in the war. Those whose career had been interrupted, The Royal Navy allowed them to return to complete their education and Blackett went back to Cambridge and spent one night there and immediately decided to resign his commission and work with Rutherford, and it was there that he did this famous work in the Rutherford Laboratories on the display and disintegration of an atom in the cloud chamber and then the discovery of the positive electron with Occhialini, and he then had some disagreement with Rutherford and got the job as professor in the Birkbeck College, London, which was then really a college for night students. And Blackett had built an enormous electron magnet in which he could place his cloud chamber, and thereby from the curvature of the tracks measure the energy of the particles. And it was that great enterprise in which I became deeply involved in Manchester in 1938 and 1939.

Blackett and Wilson had been studying... they had put a lead plate across the centre of the expansion chamber and had been investigating the large showers created by the impact of energetic particles. The chamber was automatic. A single particle going through a series of Geiger counters would trigger the whole mechanism and it was this technique which I inherited in Manchester. Now, there was... a great dispute arose because Blackett and Wilson had published a number of papers and they claimed their results did not agree with the conventional theory of the impact of high energy electrons and that the conventional theory was breaking down at high energies.
Now, I should remind you that the Bethe and Heitler had in those years developed the cascade theory in which a high energy particle from outer space would enter the atmosphere, and by a series of paired productions, by collision with atoms would create positive and negative electrons, which in turn would create photons and then the photon would collide with another electron pair. And, therefore, you had a great shower of positive and negative electrons emerging from the impact of a single particle. In the atmosphere, but also in the lead plate in the cloud chamber. So Blackett said, would I design an electron magnet. He had transported his usual electron magnet to Manchester, but he wanted me to build a smaller electron magnet to surround my cloud chamber and repeat these measurements or extend the measurements which he had been making with Blackett and Wilson. So I went to Metropolitan-Vickers, designed an electron magnet and eventually surrounded my cloud chamber with this electromagnet and happily settled down to investigating.

So I had a line of Geiger counters about the cloud chamber, so that the expansion process was initiated only with a single particle going through the Geiger counters and entering the chamber. The mechanism was marvellous. It had been devised by Blackett and as soon as the expansion took place, then this mechanism would clear the chamber and make it ready again for the next expansion. I had the recording was done on an endless strip of film, which I wound round a great frame and then went to the dark room and impatiently looked at it before it was fixed, to see if there were any particles on it. I then in this basement room in the... what was then the new physics building, measured the... I projected the results both of the incoming particle and the outgoing cascade of electrons onto a screen, measuring the curvature and thereby derived the energy from which a single particle would... of the single particle and of the energy of the emerging electrons and positrons. My paper on that, I think, was published on... I think it was called Shower Production by Penetrating... by Energetic Penetrating Particles, and I doubt, I think, other things had happened and I was occupied with something entirely different when that paper was published, I think, in 1940.

Blackett had arranged a weekend conference and this weekend conference was attended by, I think, some of the most eminent physicists in the world. At that time, Europe was becoming extremely disturbed and the refugees, both from Germany and from Italy were pouring through Blackett's department, and that was another great privilege of being in Manchester at that time. One met so many people, either in passage or they stayed for a long time and worked with Blackett.
Now, this weekend conference... I particularly remember Werner Heisenberg. Heisenberg was one of the great physicists in Germany who came from Leipzig, well-known for his uncertainty principle, and the whole of that weekend was occupied by the discussion of whether the conventional theory of high energy electrons, high energy particles was correct or whether a new particle was involved. Yukawa, a Japanese theorist had postulated that there was a heavy electron, I think then about 180 times the mass of the normal electron, which we then called a mesotron.
Well, for clarity it soon became a meson, or mason, and there are now large numbers of mesons known in particle physics, but during that weekend conference with Heisenberg believing completely in Yukawa's theory that we were studying not high energy electrons impacting on the lead plate or on the atmosphere, but one of the heavy electrons that became the matter for dispute. And gradually during that weekend I remember Blackett's view beginning to change, and before the end of the Sunday, he had been finally convinced by Heisenberg in particular and by the other physicists there that the theory was correct, and that we were dealing with a new type of particle. That may sound very odd nowadays, when there are hundreds and thousands of new particles, but one must remember that in those days we're dealing with the proton, the positive and negative electron, the neutron which had just been discovered by Chadwick. And this was remarkable, that we were adding to it a new particle which was about 180 times the area of an electron.

Blackett then suggested that I studied the very large cosmic ray air showers, which had been discovered by Pierre Auger in Paris. They were then, and I think still are known as the Auger showers, and the question was: what is the energy of the particles from space, impacting on the upper atmosphere to give such energetic processes in the atmosphere?
I then worked first of all with Jånossy, a refugee from Hungary who had built an enormous block of lead to study these particles, and secondly with JG Wilson, whom Blackett had brought with him from London, and Wilson and I had set up two cloud chambers, separated by increasing distances in the Schuster Laboratory and measuring within an arrangement of Geiger counters, so that they were only triggered when there were particles in both of these chambers. And we very quickly measured particles of very high energies, or rather the result of the impact on our equipment, very high energies.
And I think my memory may be not quite right but I believe that we wrote letters to Nature. I wrote one with Wilson and one with Jånossy, in which we said we were dealing with particles which had impacted on the atmosphere with energies of the order of 10¹6 electrons volts. Well, one might think that all this was a very happy time, but it was not. There was a terrible background, which began in Bristol with Hitler re-arming, marching across... beginning his march across Europe into the Rhinelands, with Mussolini invading Abyssinia and then in 1936 with the civil war beginning in Spain, so the time was full of great anxiety. And I remember in Bristol there were already many refugees working, and I had quite a large room in which I was studying my conductivity rubidium films and one day a German joined me. He was working on something different, but in another part of the room and I certainly did not like him, and in the next room a person called Fuchs arrived.
Well, now... Fuchs I disliked from the very beginning. He was extremely inquisitive and I never got on with him. Fortunately, he... we were not in the same room and I might remind you, though it’s not part of my story, that he was, after the war, arrested as a spy because... he was working at Harwell... because of releasing the secrets of the atomic bomb to the Russians. That is by the way. Most of my association with the refugees was extremely happy and profitable ones.

The critical time came of 1938, when Prime Minister Chamberlain made his epic journey to see Hitler and then we had the year of appeasement, but things did not calm down. In 1939, for the next year and months we were lectured on protection against poison gas. We were issued with gas masks, and this had the following effect. I, having done this work with Wilson and Jånossy on the high energy air showers, Blackett had suggested that I build an apparatus and take it in a van to the Pics du Midi in the French Pyrenees and work high altitude to study these high energy impacting particles before they had developed so completely into these great air showers. And he suggested that I called in... in Paris on the way to liaise and perhaps pick up Pierre Auger, who had discovered these showers and go with him to the Pics du Midi.
Well, in 1939, I assembled, I hired or bought a van and began to put equipment, cosmic ray equipment, cloud chamber, small generator for supplying power into this van, and I was... must have been within a few weeks of starting this journey. In August 1939, the van was standing outside the Schuster Building in Couplan Street, and I was suddenly summoned to the telephone. This was Blackett from London. 'Lovell, you are on no account to start on that journey, I have another job for you'.
Now, what I did not know and was amazed to find out later that although Blackett was often absent from Manchester, we always assumed that he was at conferences or meetings in London, mainly concerned with physics. On the contrary, it transpired that he had been one of the foremost members of the committee set up by the air ministry, first meeting in January 1936 under Sir Henry Tizard, and then known as the Tizard committee, which had been ordered to study by the air ministry any means of detecting, of protecting the country from German bombs. And Blackett had been one of the foremost advocates of this committee, in favour of pursuing the system which became known as radar, which was then known as RDF and had been demonstrated by Watson-Watt in the famous Daventry Experiment when he showed that reflections, the Daventry transmissions could be reflected from an aircraft. Well, it's amazing now, so many years later to remember that Watson-Watt was regarded as the father of radar, and I will explain in a moment what happened but that indeed international communication was then so poor that it did not seem to be realised that the same effect of radar had been developed in many other countries, including Germany.

Instead of taking my equipment to the Pics du Midi, I began an entirely different life. This was before the Second World War began, in August '39. I covered, reluctantly covered my cloud chamber with a dust sheet and drove to the east coast, to a place called Bawdsey, Bawdsey Manor, and that was a revelation. I had no idea. It would be impossible to maintain today the secrecy that had surrounded the evolution of Bawdsey Manor and Watson-Watt's work on observation of the so-called radar arc a few years earlier.
I arrived at Bawdsey sometime in August with a group of other people, who had been seconded from universities to help with this new system, and was met by AP Rowe, the superintendent of the establishment, and the first thing I saw was a cricket bag in the hall, and I thought: oh cricket, oh what a dissolution. It was the last time I saw a cricket bag for nearly six years. The Bawdsey was then the embryonic, what became known as Chain Home. It was an operational radar defence station with an enormous mast, steel mast 300 foot high carrying the transmitting   aerials, and the receiving aerials on the wooden mast I think about 200 foot high. Enormous transmitters and receivers, and from there I was taken to the place near London where... the operational station where they were testing the system. And we were demonstrated by a spoof invasion by a French squadron, and there we saw all the RAF girls with their... on their plotting and the high officer above, directing the fighters to intercept the friendly aircraft.
Well, I had then been sent to a place in Yorkshire called Saxton Wold, near Scarborough and to be trained further in the use of radar. Now, Saxton Wold was another of these giant chain home radar stations and it was at an operational status and we were... with one or two other people I was sent to the different departments there – the transmitter room, the receiver room, the operations room – to become acquainted with all that was happening in this entirely new science. I had been utterly bewildered by the technology. I had thought that Manchester was... must have been one of the most foremost physics department certainly in the country and perhaps in the world, but the techniques we were using there were obsolete to what I found in Bawdsey. For example, we were still heating our soldering irons in the Bunsen burner. I'd never encountered an electric soldering iron until I saw them at Bawdsey. It was that sort of dramatic change, not only in one's lifestyle but also in the equipment with which one was to become associated.
I was at Saxton Wold on that epic Sunday morning in September 1939 when Prime Minister Chamberlain, in a famous broadcast at 11.00 o'clock in the morning, made the announcement that we were at war with Germany. Now, the operator had this enormous cathode ray tube and on it there appeared suddenly masses of echoes, transient echoes on the time base and I said to the operator... I said, 'Why don't you report that we're about to be bombed? Why don't you report immediately to Stanmore that this...' And he calmly said, 'Oh, they're not echoes from aircraft, they're what we call ionosphere'.

I didn't really know anything about the ionosphere. I knew it existed and what it was, but it occurred to me that... still my mind on what I'd left in Manchester that what were the echoes? Could they be this powerful radio echoes from the high energy showers which I had been studying, for the ionisation of these great showers in the high atmosphere. Then I forgot about it and so the war began. I was appointed a junior scientific officer. As a matter of interest, the salary was then £300 a year, which seemed quite a lot of money, and I was posted to an airfield near Perth in Scotland, Scone of famous history. The main establishment from Bawdsey had been evacuated to Dundee, and it had been a gorgeous error and mistake which is now in the history books. I was sent to work with Taffy Bowen, EG Bowen and he had formed a group to deal with airborne radar.
Now, Tizard had foreseen that the chain home stations, which then surrounded the coast would enable fighter command to defeat any raids which the Germans make in daytime, and with great foresight he then thought that the Germans would turn to night bombing, and so he had encouraged the formation of this new group under Taffy Bowen to find out how to convert these enormous great chain home radar stations into simpler, which one could put into one's night fighters, so I joined that group. It was chaotic. In this airfield, it was a private airfield. There were hangers containing small Gypsy Moths. It was grass. There was no runway. There were no facilities whatsoever, and I... there was a small group. Bowen had devised a very elementary airborne air interception equipment which he had fitted in a two engine Blenheim. The equipment consisted of two thermionic valves, working on what was a very short wave length of 1.5 metres. The transmitter was a dipole on the nose of the aircraft and he had developed the system already such that the receiving aerials were on the wings of the aircraft, again dipoles, and there was a device which compared the echoes from supposed enemy aircraft, so that if you equalise them on the cathode ray tube, then you were heading for the enemy aircraft. I had my first flight in this Blenheim aircraft, from Scone airfield a really bumpy ride, sitting on a parachute and I must say I was... in that autumn, I was far more interested in the beauty of the snow covered Scottish mountains than I was in what was happening on the cathode ray tube.

There was known to be a trouble with this equipment, not only that it was very poorly made, but the very fact that it was working on two long wavelengths, because the transmitting aerials, transmitting and receiving aerials were... had a very broad beam and one immediately got solid ground returns from whatever height you might be flying at. If you were flying at 10,000 feet, which was quite high for a Blenheim, then for any range greater than 10,000 feet, the system was completely blocked by ground returns, therefore the great thing was to find some means of working on a much shorter wavelength. And Blackett... sorry, Bowen said to me, 'Look, we want you to work on finding how to make a transmitter on a much shorter wavelength than 1.5 metres'. Well, I absolutely knew nothing about it. And there was no library, there was no workshop, this was just an open hanger, and it soon transpired that I was... so in fact, what actually happened, I did a lot of testing with the old equipment and made some rather vague progress with trying to think and devise how one would use... devise a narrower beam and I’m afraid I wrote a letter to Blackett complaining about the lack of facilities in what was supposed to be a matter of the highest priority. Well, I complained that there was no workshop, no facilities, no library and that the constant changes of instructions from high levels to Bowen, as to whether what type of aircraft he must use. It was first of all to be short nosed and then long nosed and this made an enormous difference to the type of aerials.
Well, unknown to me, Blackett had sent my letter to Tizard and again, completely unknown to me, Tizard had sent my letter to Rowe, who was then in Dundee and was really the superintendent of the whole lot. I did not know until very, very much later that Tizard never destroyed any letters and that he had kept Blackett’s letter and it is now and I saw it, for reasons I will mention later on, in the archives of the Imperial War Museum, and I did not know that I had put my thumb so to speak on a very sore point. Tizard had already suspected that things were not right with this development and I... this caused... I learnt much later on that although it did not affect me then, that quite a revolution at high levels.

We stayed at Scone Airport for a very short time and I think in November, Bowen's airborne group was moved to an aerodrome in South Wales, St Athan. Now, this aerodrome was being built and it was a terrible winter. Everything froze up. It snowed and this aerodrome, again, no facilities. Bowen's group was set to work in an open hanger, and he does describe in his... in the book that he wrote about it sometime after the war that he remembered a future professor working in an overcoat and gloves, trying to solder some delicate equipment you see. It was that sort of life.
Anyhow, we had hardly arrived there when a German JU88 proceeded to drop a bomb on the runway. Well, fortunately, the bomb bounced and didn't explode, otherwise that might have been the end of us. Anyhow, at St Athan, we were told to proceed with utmost urgency in installing this 1.5 metre equipment in the night fighters, and that is in fact what we did. And also to install it in the aircraft, the Hudson aircraft, just arriving from America for Coastal Command to operate over the sea, but then Blackett appeared again, and he was then, appeared as a member of the Tizard Committee, and he saw what I was doing and he appeared at a very sad time because two young men that had come with me from Manchester called Ingleby and Beattie. Beattie was the son of the professor who lectured in electromagnetics. They were testing this equipment in a Hudson one weekend and it flew into a mountain and killed them both, so that was... then Blackett came to console me and he said, 'You know, people are not yet being killed' and it was one of the earliest tragedies that beset me. Anyhow, he saw what was going on and soon arranged that I should really be taken away from this installation and testing work and continue work again on the business of improving the system. And he arranged that I should be sent a young man, whom he called an Alpha Plus young man, and in the early years of 1940, this young man called Alan Hodgkin arrived to help me.
Now, Hodgkin, he was... I thought I'd have to teach him how to use a cathode ray tube. On the contrary. He already knew far more about those techniques than I did, because he was a physiologist from Cambridge who had been using all these new techniques. Well, Hodgkin became a great friend and later on he, he became... he won the Nobel Prize for his work and became president of the Royal Society and Master of Trinity, but that's far ahead. Anyhow, that was a great relief, to have a fellow spirit to work with and we built ourselves an enormous horn, not a paraboloid, but a metal horn and somehow we managed to find the... I think we used a very simple split anode magnetron and we certainly began to work on wavelengths as low as 50 cm, instead of the 1.5 metres.
Well, before we got very far on that, Bowen's group more or less disintegrated. A great dispute arose between the people who had been left in Dundee and Bowen on what was wrong with the equipment. There was not only the question of the ground returns, which obliterate everything greater than the height above which one was flying, but also the question of minimum range. How far one had to get to a German bomber in order to identify it as an enemy and not a friend. And the department at Dundee, it had been a great mistake to fund the move then. You'll find out from the history books how that mistake occurred, but in the spring of 1940, they were moved to the Dorset coast near Swanage, a place called Worth Matravers and we were ordered to join them.

Now, that was marvellous. We left this horrible aerodrome at St. Athan and that dreadful winter through the beautiful spring of the Dorset coastline, and in fact I had commandeered as it turned out a lot of equipment which didn't really belong to us, but it belonged to the Air Force. So I arrived at Worth Matravers with two great trailer, RAF trailer loads of equipment and test equipment and I think I arrived there before the main lot from Dundee, and went along with the head of workshops to, who had been ordered there to put up the buildings and so on.
Well, it was... I think it must have been April and early May when we all assembled at this place in Worth Matravers. This remote headland, extremely beautiful and wild, and I was told that we would use... the airborne group would use the aerodrome at Christchurch, so I remember going with the head of the workshops one day to Christchurch and finding out... remember going into, I think, into a sweet shop or tobacconist and saying, 'Please, could you tell me where the aerodrome is?' Chap said, 'The aerodrome? There's not aerodrome here. The only thing we've got is a small flying field, private flying field'. Well, this is the aerodrome we were supposed to have.
I was taken to this place. It was simply a field. It was a field with a hut in it which contained a small Gypsy Moth and this was the place where we... to which we transferred our Blenheim's with all their equipment. And I remember I was a very young and very junior person, and I... I telephoned the director of communications development in London. And you see, I hadn't got used to the... the hierarchy then, and I told him that there was no aerodrome at Christchurch and where was the aerodrome, we could only find a flying field? And he became very, very angry that an unknown young man should tell him there was no aerodrome at Christchurch. In fact, one was being built at Herne, but that did not materialise really for another year.
Well, now, in Worth Matravers, again everything was transformed. We were allocated a small... they were all temporary buildings, all wooden huts and there the entire establishment assembled. We were given a small hut, rather... two or three fields remote from the main centre of the establishment and quite close to the... quite close to the sea, where the coastline dropped a few hundred feet into the English Channel, and it was extraordinarily beautiful there. We... to begin with there were very few of us and slowly during those early spring months of 1940, more senior people arrived. In particular, there was Phillip Dee from one of Rutherford's staff, and HWB Skinner, who had been one of my lecturers in Bristol, so... And there were I suppose three or four others who slowly began to build up this group, and it was Dee who emerged as the leader of this group.

We were given the prime task of finding a solution with great urgency to this night fighter problem of how to devise an air interception radar system, working on a much shorter wavelength to avoid the ground returns. I then worked on the problem of the aerial system and I first of all substituted small paraboloids instead of... instead of these great horns and we gradually assembled the equipment. I had a split anode magnetron, working on 10 cm. A very, very low power and measured a polar diagram and also how one could displace the narrow beam from... by moving the focus and so on, by moving the dipole of the focus, and we gradually assembled complete equipment.
And then, I think, it was in June or July, Oliphant from Birmingham arrived with the new device, a Cavity Magnetron. Now the story of the cavity magnetron is that in Birmingham, Oliphant had a contract from the committee development to work on this problem of producing a device which would generate sufficient power at very high frequencies. And it was in February of 1940 that Randall and Boot had working on the bench the first of these cavity magnetrons, which astonished and it is now extremely well-known how they were gradually led to the use of a series of cavities, of resonant cavities, through which the electrons moving in a magnetic field would generate these very high frequencies. And, of course, they had this working on the bench, and it was very, very far from any device which could be used in an aircraft, but GE's, General Electric company, and particularly Megaw. They transformed this cavity magnetron working on the bench to a sealed off version, and it was this beautiful sealed off version, the first one which Oliphant brought to us at Worth Matravers in June or July. I think it must have been June of 1940, and so we built this into a... a potential air interception equipment. Now, we had the thing working and there was a lot of discussion with the General Electric company who had also been given a contract to work on the problem of devising an air interceptions system, working on a much higher frequency and they had managed to... they had devised what was called the micropup, in which the outer casing of the... of the valve was the anode and this so reduced the electron transit time that it would work on a wavelength of about 25 cm.
So we had a system on 10 cm, and they had a system on 25 cm, and one day in August most of the senior members of the group had gone to liaise with General Electric company about the use of an aerial system and so on, and I was left at Worth Matravers, I think it was August 10th or 11th, with Bill Burcham. Now, Burcham was another of Rutherford's young men who had joined us during that summer and he and I had worked together, assembling this equipment. And I had two paraboloids, one for receiving and one for transmitting, working on a movable framework. And others had built a modulator and a transmitter and Burcham and I happened to be there on this afternoon alone when we had this equipment working.
And suddenly an aircraft had begun flying along the coast and lo and behold, there was an echo on the cathode ray tube, and I believe that this was the first radar echo from an aircraft ever seen on the 10 cm equipment. Well, of course, the effect of that was like an explosion. I mean, immediately all the big wigs assembled to see a repeat of this, that 10 cm really would be useful in the detection of aircraft. That was in August 1940, and there... there we were, in the midst of the Great Battle of Britain, with the chain stations doing its job. The trouble was, of course, that we were short of Spitfires and Hurricanes and shorter still of pilots, and therefore the great value of the stations was that they could direct the pilot to an invisible range during day of the enemy and that saved us, but nevertheless our work was greatly disturbed. We were constantly being machine-gunned and ordered into air raid shelters. And we could see some of the great battles in the Battle of Britain taking place to our left over the Isle of Wight and to our right, over Portland, and it was really unforgettable and dramatic. But the... the disturbance to our work became too great, and we were moved to... lower down to... we took over a place called Langton Matravers. It was a girls' school, Leeson House in Langton Matravers, and the other parts moved to other places in Swanage and Langton Matravers. The workshops did remain for some time at Worth Matravers and I think they were then machine-gunned and I think there were fatalities. Furthermore, by that time Worth Matravers had become an operational chain home station.

The next critical phase of our work took place at Leeson House. Now, Leeson House was a slight rise above the town of Swanage through which one could look right across over the Bay of Swanage to the Isle of Wight, and I will return to that point in a moment. At that time we were still all concentrating on how to get this elementary air interception system on which we'd seen an echo from an aircraft into... into a Blenheim. Well, I remember one day going to... with Alan Hodgkin, we were being driven to the aerodrome at Christchurch to do something about one of the Blenheims there. And we were talking about how we could possibly scan this narrow beam, which we were now producing from a three-foot paraboloid, because that was about the largest we could get into the nose of the Blenheim, how to scan that to see so that we could get coverage from an appreciable area in front of the fighter. And I remember Alan suddenly saying, 'I know how to do it. We will rotate the scanner in a spiral and because then... and we will rotate using a mag slip the time base of the cathode ray tube in the spiral'. And he said, 'I know how to make the spiral. We will go to an engineering firm and we will have a rotating cylinder, a sliced rotating cylinder and rotating the paraboloid at 1,000 rpm'. What a wonderful device.
We went to Nash and Thompson, and they very quickly made this brilliant engineering device of a spiral scanner, which would rotate at 1,000 rpm, and the sight of that mounted in the nose of a Blenheim was quite fantastic. I mean, one almost felt it was coming towards one of them and it was going to suck one into the aircraft. Other problems that had to be solved was how to use one scanner, one paraboloid for both receiving and transmitting, and you must... it has to be remembered that all of this was on this very high frequency, wavelengths of 10 cm was extremely new. Nothing at all was known about the properties of the radiation. Anyhow, these problems were slowly overcome. I remember Skinner working endlessly on the problems of the crystal mixer and eventually in... with the most amazing speed we had the first flights of this elementary 10 cm air deception equipment in the Blenheim, in March of 1941, and that's amazing. In those few months, the transformation of this ungainly ground equipment into an elegant equipment which would fit into a small night fighter.

Hodgkin remained in charge of the air interception equipment, and I was transferred to another problem with night interception, but I ought to say, before I deal with that, about the general situation of the night defence, Tizard, who believed that when the Germans had been defeated in the night battles, in the day battles as they were, they would quickly turn to night bombing. And they did so, and in the autumn and winter of 1940 there were these terrible raids, our devastating raids on London, Coventry and the other cities, and really the ack-ack guns and the night fighters could do little about it. They had very little success but it was not our 10 cm equipment that transformed the situation. It was the fact that the improvements in the original 1.5-metre system... a firm had been drawn into this, EMI, Electrical Musical Industries, and they had probably the most brilliant electronics engineer in the world working for them, Blumlein, whose name will appear as a tragedy later on. And it was Blumlein and his staff who really put good science into this 1.5-metre equipment. They rebuilt the transmitter, they rebuilt the receiver and they used the modulator so that the tail of the pulse, which went out originally from the transmitter, which was I should have said a swaging device, had a long tail and so we now had sharp pulses.
Furthermore a system of controlling the night fighter from the ground, known as GCI, Ground Control Interception had been developed and the prototype of this system had been built on the cliffs of Worth Matravers just below where we were working. And on this one could see the... both the approaching bomber and the night fighter, and one could guide the night fighter into, into range above that... below that obscured by the ground returns on the 1.5 metres, and it was the night fighter, the improved 1.5-metre air interception equipment under ground control, which dealt with the night bombers.
The first operational contact occurred, I think, in November of 1940 and by that time the equipment was being put in a new night fighter called the Beaufighter. The Blenheims were fairly useless. They were too slow and then their armour, their machine guns were not capable of dealing with the German night bombers, but the Beaufighters were equipped with a cannon and it was in the early months of 1941 that the historic people like Cunningham devastated the German night bombers. And by the spring of 1941, more than 10% losses were being inflicted on the German night raiders, and that was beyond... they could not sustain that. That was really the effective end to the night raids... there had been sporadic bombing afterwards and elsewhere. But it's very interesting that the point I'm making now is what really dealt with the night bombers was the original, continued improvements and the application of experts and skills and techniques into an original system under ground control that defeated the night bombing system, the night bombing raids. The 1.5, the 10.0 cm system which Hodgkin and others tested in a Blenheim in the spring of 1941 again went on with enormous speed and by one year later, in March 1942, this 10.0 cm AI interception equipment with Hodgkin's spiral scanner was in operation. In March 1942, that is a year after the first flights in the Blenheim with the elementary equipment. You know somebody was once... going ahead a bit after the war, I gave a lecture to the Aeronautical Research Council and someone asked me afterwards why things could be done so quickly during the war. And I said, 'Because nobody ever asked us the cost'. The question was, 'Can you do it and when can we have it?' And that had a big impact on my future story of the war.

Hodgkin and Barcham continued with the installation and development and improvement of the 10 cm air interception equipment in Blenheims and in the Beaufighters, and I was given another job and that was to make an advanced air interception system in which the paraboloid scanner would lock onto this target and enemy and it could be done by blind firing. Well, I worked on that and with... and I had the great help of FC Williams who was another electronics expert, who had wide ranging applications in TRE, as we were then called TRE, the Telecommunications Research Establishment, and FC Williams was particularly good on this.
We devised... I think I originally had a system from Metropolitan-Vickers in which I could lock the echo so that the scanner... I could use the echo so the scanner would lock itself on, onto the echo. And I had this system going. I did many, many flights from the bumpy airfield at Christchurch with FC Williams and another colleague, called Ritson, and we had a good system working quite reasonably well by the end of 1941, and the only one interesting problem. That is the fading, the high speed fading of the echo from a target aircraft, and you see we were using pulses, very loud pulses of 1,000 a second or thereabouts and the high-speed fading, we had somehow to cope with this, because it was disturbing a long follow, and I began to build a high-speed camera, so that we could analyse the... what was happening with this high speed fading.
Blackett then frequently came to see how we were getting on. He had then been... I think he was first of all a scientific advisor general pike of AA command and then Coastal Command, and later on the Director of Naval Operational Research in the Admiralty, but he frequently came to see how we were getting on and one day he said, 'What are you doing?' And I said, 'I'm making a high-speed camera to study the fading of the pulses from the target aircraft', and he said, 'Oh'. He said, 'Well, I think I've got a young man who... who might be able to help you'. This is a remarkable story.
A few days later, Andrew Huxley arrived. Now, Andrew Huxley was another of these brilliant young Cambridge people, a physiologist. And Andrew Huxley said he'd come to help and I said, 'Oh, where's your equipment?' He said, 'Oh'. He pulled a Leica camera out of his pocket, and I said, 'What are you going to do?' He said, 'It's easy'. He said, 'I've taken away the lens and I'm going to put this in front of the cathode tube and I'm going to do that for the film, and so that happened'. Now, those original records are now with my own... many of my own papers and records in the archives in the Imperial War Museum and you can see it just worked. He did this and that... from that we were able to analyse. The pulses were separated, of course, one by one by one, no problem in analysing the type of fluctuations which were occurring. That's an interesting sideline. Huxley again, this brilliant scientist. Master of Trinity, Nobel Prize winner, President of the Royal Society and he is still a friend. I still see him occasionally in London, but I'm sure he's forgotten that episode. Anyhow, I was about to... I had arranged to get a Beaufighter and to make arrangements to have this lot follow blind firing equipment manufactured properly and installed in a squadron of Beaufighters.

Then at the end of 1941, another change occurred in my life. I was summoned to the superintendent's office, it was still Rowe, and he said, 'Lovell, you're to drop all you're doing. You can hand all your data over to someone else. We've got another job for you. You're to form a group to help Bomber Command'. And I said, 'Sorry, I don't want to do so. I'd like to put my blind firing equipment in the Beaufighters'. He said... So I went away. His summoned me agin the next day, accompanied by various other people and he said, 'Lovell, you are to drop all you are doing', and I said, 'I don't want to'. There is no alternative. Just like that.
So, I handed all my data over to someone else. Alas fortunately for me, I did so. A few months later, he was testing this equipment off the east coast and against a target aircraft which was dropping window which was meant to interfere with the radar echoes, and he was shot down by a friendly Spitfire. I'm afraid it would often happen. We were flying along with these odd noses on our aircraft and we were often approached by our own Hurricanes or Spitfires, who were uneasy at seeing something strange about an aircraft.

I ought to return for a moment to the sporadic echoes which I mentioned I'd first seen at Staxton Wold on the day war was declared in 1939, and the operator had said they were ionosphere and I had thought they might have something to do with the high energy cosmic ray air showers. Well, oddly enough, when we were testing the AI equipment at St Athan in the winter of 1939, I still saw these odd echoes went flying at 10,000 feet and above, and clearly they'd suddenly appear. They had nothing to do with any target aircraft, and one day I had mentioned that Blackett frequently visited us and I... I mentioned this to him and he became very excited. He... you see, he had thought that the then mystery of the origin of these very high energy particles or gamma rays, we did not know impacting on the earth's atmosphere, might have really something fundamental to do with the cosmological problem and I remember him mentioning to me. He said, 'Look, we might be dealing with a case which has... which is something like the... something like Hubble's discovery of the red shift. We do not know what it is, something extremely high energy in the Universe, same as these particles'. He said, 'So, for Heaven's sake, write up something about it and there'll be a nice job for you if the war ever ends'.
So I had, while we were still at Worth Matravers... I had written a draft paper on the radar echoes, it's called Radar Echoes from Cosmic Ray Showers. Well, you know, we were being... we were hectic then. We were being bombed and strafed. There was no library and my account which I sent to Blackett was pretty elementary, but unknown to me he rewrote this and added a bit of finesse to it and he told me he did this while he was sheltering in an air raid shelter in Westminster. And he sent the paper to the Royal Society and completely unknown to me, the Royal Society published this paper by Blackett and Lovell, On Radar Echoes from Cosmic Ray Showers, in the Royal Society. It appeared in 1942. The date is important because I will return to that later on in my story.

We... I had... my equipment... officer had our own equipment then which were being built in the aircraft, but I had quite a large ground equipment. On which I was constantly putting improvements and on this field at Leeson House, looking across the bay at Swanage, I could easily see ships and so on, and one day we arranged for a submarine, HMS Usk, to come into the bay and lo and behold, there was a clear echo from the submarine on our screen. And we summoned the people from the Admiralty Signal School and, you know, this was an amazing diversion of our efforts.
After some doubts, we demonstrated that we could detect this submarine at a range of eight or ten miles, and we... I drove the equipment down to... I think it was Peveril Point over Swanage Bay, and there demonstrated this and they said, 'Oh well, of course, if we ever put this on a destroyer, the roll and the rock' and I said, 'That's no problem, instead of using a paraboloid, we'll use a cylindrical paraboloid, which has... although it has a narrow beam and azimuth has a very, very broad beam and elevation, so if your ship rolls, you won't lose the echo'. And it was just before Christmas of 1940 that they took my equipment away to the Signal School in Portsmouth and I thought: oh dear, it's going to be a long time before I see any result of that. I was completely mistaken. In a remarkably short time, within months, they had this equipment working at sea, on a Corvette and that's the story of how centimetres got into the Admiralty.
The other diversion we had was in using the centimetre technique to direct the anti-aircraft guns. This we put another person... another person was put in charge of that. I had nothing to do with it but it was not terribly successful it was eventually... a brilliant system was eventually made and used later in the war by the Americans and we will come to the American story in due course.

Having been ordered by Rowe to form this new group, I began to pick up the pieces and the story is this. That in the summer of 1941, Churchill had become our prime minister, had become rather uneasy about our bombing force and he had asked Lindemann who was the scientific advisor, later Cherwell. I shall refer to him as Lord Cherwell, to look into the problem. Cherwell asked one of his staff called Butt to arrange to do a photographic reconnoissance of the effect of the bombing in June and July of 1941. The result was extraordinary. It was found that only one in three of our bombers were getting within five miles of the target and that that was only the fraction of the force that actually got within five miles of the target. And the rest of the force never got anywhere near it, and the net result was that the bombs had been scattered over an area of 75 square miles around the target.
Well, Churchill when he was told of these results, I gather he was not all together surprised that the bombing was so ineffective and he ordered Cherwell and the Secretary of State for Air to take immediate action with the highest priority to do something about it. He said, 'Otherwise, we cannot risk so much life in this useless enterprise'. As a result of that, Cherwell had visited TRE in October of 1941, and at what was called the Sunday Soviet in which Rowe had arranged for many of the high level people and air staff to attend every Sunday, they were glad to escape from London and come into the country and his Sunday Soviets became famous as a free for all. Those of us who were young could say what we liked to the air marshals and so on, and we thought we could also get their views.
Well, the story was this. Cherwell demanded Rowe that he diverted his staff to find some answer to this problem of how to enable our bomber force to get within range of their targets and bomb them. Now, the problem was not exactly new. TRE had already developed a system called GEE and this used two ground stations on the east coast and from a hyperbolic grid which was formed in the bomber, they could get over the Ruhr, they could get within an ellipse of about 8 miles by 4 miles of their target, which was a tremendous improvement. But, of course, that was limited to the range of a few hundred miles because it used ground stations in England, and it only encompassed the Ruhr. The more distant centres of German industry, Hamburg and so on, were completely outside the range, and Berlin, and completely outside the range of this system. Although it was eventually fitted to every aircraft and became an important navigational aid.
Also being developed in TRE and I might say in great... sort of perhaps not quite so friendly but friendly has an odd meaning during the war, friendly opposition to what I'd been given to do, a system known as OBOE developed the idea of a man called Reeves and built by FE Jones. Now, a system called OBOE also used ground stations in England but it sent out two beams and I won't go into the details of the system because they're not really relevant to my story, but they could control a single aircraft over the Ruhr and to great accuracy. They... one aircraft could be given a bomb release with a guaranteed hit on a target of a few hundred yards in the distance of the Ruhr, but again that system could only use one aircraft at a time and was limited to this distance of a few hundred miles. What Cherwell wanted and ordered us to do was to find something in the bomber which was quite independent of ground control or any ground system in England.
Now, in the autumn of 1941, and I'm now relating a story which I learnt later on, because I'd had nothing to do with this until the end of December 1941, Dee who was in charge of the centimetre AI system had... I mentioned Hodgkin's spiral scanner, which was being put into operation. There was also an alternative system made by GEC, which used a rotating scanner, and Dee had asked after Cherwell's visit... he asked two of his staff, O'Kane and Hensby if they would would modify the scanner to press it so it looked at the ground, when the scan rotated to the ground and Hensby and O'Kane filled this 10 cm air raid system at a height of 10,000 feet with a scanner rotating but depressed, so that the 10 cm beam was sweeping the ground. And they took a film of the tube remarkably when this film was developed it showed echoes from objects on the ground, from Salisbury town, from hangers in airfields, and this film apparently it is related that Dee, when he saw this film before it was fixed, rushed it into Rowe's office, and Rowe looked at this. He said, 'This will mean the end of the war'. You see, this possibility that in an aircraft you could see an individual target, and that was the problem that I was given abruptly and unwanted.

So in 1942, in January I began to pick up the pieces and I found out that my problem was to adopt a system to make it work in some of the new four engine bombers, which were about to come off the production line. Well, the first was to put it in a Halifax bomber and so I studied this and I thought that originally the problem might not be too difficult because the echoes had been seen from a scanner rotating in a small Blenheim aircraft. The problem with the Halifax is that the scanner could not be put in the nose of the aircraft. That was the first problem, because that was occupied by the bomb aimer and the forward gunner. So I decided to... it's amazing, you know, how one made all these decisions, made them oneself apparently. I don't remember asking anyone else about it, and I decided... well, the only thing to do is to build the scanner under the bomb bay, under the fuselage and put it in a perspex cupola, an inverted perspex cupola.
So I took a three foot scanner, cut it in half... not in half, sliced off the top of the bottom, and decided on the sort of depth I could have and went to see Handley Page, who was the director of the firm making the Handley Page aircraft. And he summoned his chief engineer, chief designer and I said to him, 'Mr. Handley Page, I'm asked if you would please mount this under one of your Halifax bombers so that we can put it in'. Oh, I've never forgotten the atmosphere in the room. He said, 'Put that under one of our bombers... It's out of the question'. He said, 'We'd have to take the bombs out. We'd have to take most of them out anyhow'. So I thought... but fortunately I was not rude enough to say it would be better to take a few bombs out and drop the rest in the right place.
Anyhow, I retired because what could I do. I was still in my twenties. I couldn't order him to do this, but of course things were quite different then, so I phoned Cherwell and told him what I'd done. Well, you know, within a week or two a Halifax bomber arrived at Hurn Airport with the cupola fitted underneath. You see, it became... it was my misfortune to suffer the highest priority. Churchill, as I will explain later, had ordered Cherwell to do that, and the secretary of state for air who was Sinclair. To do this with the highest priority.

So, I still did not see the problem as difficult. It's the worst misjudgement I've ever made in my life. The equipment after all, I think my reasoning was not unjustified. We had made the essential equipment. The centimetre transmitter was being manufactured. The receiver was all right. All I had to do was to make a new display unit for the navigator and connect this to the rotating scanner underneath the belly of the aircraft. They had a prototype equipment in a Halifax bomber at Hurn airport in April of 1942. Amazing speed at which these things were done. I arrived at Hurn airport to take off and see on this initial flight and to my astonishment was met by the Deputy Chief of Air Staff, who had been told to accompany me to see how the equipment worked.
Well, this was really incredible. I need hardly say the equipment did not work. I mean, on the first flight the power supply broke down and we landed again but it was that high pressure absolutely hindered any sensible development of the problem, because it turned out that the polar diagram of this truncated paraboloid rotating in the cupola under the fuselage of the heavy bomber, the polar diagram was atrocious and not only that, but the original echoes which we convinced people that it would work had been carried out of the height of 10,000 feet and the Halifax was flying at 20,000 feet. So that was the problem that besetted us, and we made these early flights and really we were bedeviled by the breakdown of the equipment because of flying at higher altitudes by the rotten polar diagram, the fades which constantly occurred because of the peculiar polar diagram of the system.
And then a most awful thing happened. We... in February of 1942, we had... not we, I mean the country... the air force, and so we had designed to make a commando raid on Brunevar, to capture some German radar equipment to see how they were getting on and one of our staff was engaged. He was put into uniform and went on this raid. Now, the Brunevar raid was successful but it had the most terrible effect on the Germans. They assembled a parachute division on the Cherbourg peninsula and we learnt that their intention was to capture us on... we were working on the Purbeck Peninsula. We were ordered by Churchill to get out before the next full moon. Every night we had to drive this highly secret equipment, using the magnetron beyond the Corfe gap and so in late April, early May, after an enormous amount of trouble and investigation, we all moved to Malvern College. The second time the boys had been evacuated and entirely took over Malvern College, using an airfield at Defford, about seven miles away for our airborne gear.

The Halifax containing the equipment was moved from Hurn and landed at Defford satisfactorily, and we continued to use our tests there. I had then assembled a group of about 15 people, I suppose, of various types, and I ought to say about the code name that was given. My original files on this subject were named called BN, for Blind Navigation, and when Cherwell saw this, he went into a rage and he said, 'Look, you're not designing a navigation equipment, you're designing a bombing equipment', and he said, 'We'll call it H2S because it stinks', because it ought to have been done a long time ago and therefore it became known as H2S, and that was the official code name of this equipment.
We had even in this crude elementary state, the government had placed an order for 200 crash equipment as we called them. Crash programmes, 200 equipments with the firm of EMI and the other problem was that the system was not allowed to use a magnetron because it was so secret. We were to use a klystron which could be destroyed anyhow and those principles are well-known. So EMI were given the problem of making a klystron equipment with enough power to do what we were doing with the magnetron. And so in early June, when we... we had been making slight improvements and I remember flying with it over the Bristol Channel and it was particularly good on coastlines and the coastline and an airport between Gloucester and Cheltenham. I've got a photograph of it, it was on the cathode ray tube. Gloucester and Cheltenham showed up as big blobs on the tube, and so did the airport. So we thought, on Sunday, we'd had a weekend conference with these EMI people, including Blumlein at Defford, and we had flown the equipment on the Saturday night and it looked quite good. And the next day, the Sunday Blumlein said, could he and his team go up and see how the system was working.
So O'Kane and Hensby were both in my group and O'Kane and I had been up the night before, so we asked Hensby to take up these EMI people and the Halifax took off at about 2.00 o'clock and I retired to Malvern and the aircraft never came back. O'Kane remained in Defford and after a bit he phoned me and he said, 'There's trouble. The aircraft has not returned'. It, in fact, had crashed in the Wye Valley and it killed everybody on board, and that night I was grasped by the group captain who was in charge at Defford Station and he drove O'Kane and me to this remote place in the Wye Valley. Look, I was still a youngster in my twenties and it's just unforgettable. There was the burnt out remains of this bomber and we searched the wreckage and the only thing we could find which we could recognise was this cavity magnetron. We knew it could not be blown up anyhow. Well, I thought that was the end of H2S. I thought it was hopeless. We'd lost our only equipment. The thing was simply not working very well anyhow. No, that was not the case.

Well, Churchill admitted to the Secretary for State for Air on that very day, 7th June 1942, saying he had heard good reports of progress and how he got good reports, I don't know but there you are because there was nothing good about it, but he... when he heard of the crash, he demanded to see us. And so a few weeks later Dee, who was our division leader... he and I were summoned to the... to Downing Street to meet Churchill and he'd assembled in the cabinet room a whole galaxy of cabinet ministers, Secretary for State for Air, the Chief of Bomber Command, the Deputy, his advisor, Cherwell and Shonberg, who was the Head of EMI, who had the contract for making 200 equipments and it was a very extraordinary meeting. He was told what had happened and he repeated his demand that he must have two squadrons by October, to light up the target, and Shonberg said, 'Prime Minister, even if we had all the details we couldn't possibly make 200 equipments by October', and Churchill got very angry and said, 'Look here, we don't have objections in this room', and then I had the misfortune to say, 'Prime Minister, we have just lost our bomber with the only equipment in it'. And he turned to me and he said, 'Young man', he said, 'You've just lost one bomber, don't you realise that last night we lost thirty over Cologne and you've just lost one. You go into that ante room and don't come out until you tell us how you're going to do it'. And I could see his unlit cigar being whipped over his shoulder into the place in the shelf behind him, and that was Churchill. And he... so he was really asking for the impossible. He said, 'Don't you realise this is our only means of hitting the enemy?'
Of course we were isolated and we'd just lost Singapore and the situation really did seem hopeless. Well, what happened then, we had a frantic weekend of going around various firms and Churchill then appointed Renwick. He wrote to the Secretary of State and said he wanted to put a superior person in charge of this development who would report directly to him, and he said he heard good reports of a man called Renwick who was the Chairman of the London Electricity Board, I think, so that's how we came in touch with Sir Robert Renwick. He later became Lord Renwick, and by that means we really did have immediate contact with the Prime Minister.
Now, Renwick... he appointed a person we called a winger, a Canadian called Sayers and if anything went wrong or if we wanted anything and Sayers couldn't put it right or couldn't get the thing we wanted, he'd report to Renwick and Renwick would report immediately to Churchill. That's the sort of priority we lived under in those days, and I can tell you it was pretty unpleasant. At the same time the Bomber Command reorganised itself and CMC Bomber Harris was at the meeting and Saunby, his deputy, and they scarcely said a word and the situation was quite dramatic because General Ismay, who was the secretary, kept coming in and being summoned by Churchill, and he came in and said, 'Prime Minister, the Cabinet are waiting outside'. He said, 'Tell them to wait'. That sort of attitude. Anyhow, I must say he made a tremendous impression on me and he appointed Renwick and that situation was thereafter nearly every day Renwick would phone me and he'd say, 'Any news? Any problems?' That's the sort of life we lived.

At the same time Bomber Command had... instead of being a unified command had decided to set up a Pathfinder force. Now, I don't think Harris liked that... Bomber Harris liked that because he indicated that there were a couple of... a few squadrons who were superior to the rest. Anyhow, this path finder force was put under Don Bennett, an Australian, a remarkable person who held first class certificates in every conceivable discipline, navigation, engineering, flying and so on, and he flew the first heavy aircraft across the Atlantic from America to Britain during the war. He'd been shot down over a raid on Tronheim and had escaped through icy conditions into Sweden and I think he had already married a Swedish girl and anyhow, he was repatriated. He got back to England, and it was Don Bennett who was put in charge of the Pathfinder for us, and that's how I met Don Bennett and he believed the best time to fly was either after midnight or before 6.00 o'clock in the morning, and so we spent most of the night flying and the rest of the day trying to make the equipment work.

I think we had persuaded Cherwell that we would never make the bombing equipment work with a Klystron and that we must be allowed to use the Magnetron, so a decision was made, about a month or so after this meeting with the Prime Minister, that we would abandon all attempts to use EMI equipment with the Klystron and concentrate on the Magnetron. Now, that did make the situation much easier and I was reinforced by two or three excellent people who helped with the flying. I had two flight lieutenants, two flying officers, Ramsey and Hillman and a Canadian flight lieutenant, Richards, and an American from the United States Air Force and they were all marvellous. They took over a lot of the brunt of the flying and so by sheer... by sheer activity and constant adjustment of the scanner when flying at high altitude, which fortunately was beginning to be borne by these more experienced flying people, we gradually improved the equipment.

Churchill didn't get his two squadrons by the autumn, but he did pretty nearly get them by the end of the year, and in December of 1942 – it seems incredible that all this happened in that one year of 1942 – we had quite a lot of my staff at Whitten near Huntingdon which was the headquarters of the Pathfinder force. And the duty of the Pathfinders was really to drop flares, to light up the target with the main force coming behind and bombing on the flares, and I had a code, O'Kane who was one of the originals I mentioned, who flew the original equipment. He was... I stationed him at Whitten, the headquarters of the Pathfinder force, at the aerodrome at Whitten and he was there maintaining the equipment, which was difficult to maintain because of the high altitude in which the planes were flying. And the Secretary of State ruled that although there were seven Halifax in one squadron of the Pathfinder and seven Stirling aircraft in another squadron, they were not to be used over enemy territory unless or until the Russians held the line of the Volga.
Now, I must say that in that autumn a most extraordinary situation developed with the Americans. They regarded... although they had nothing to do with the invention of the Magnetron, they were astonished when the secret was given to them in the Tizard Commission in the autumn of 1940, and they believed it was a war winner, and that if we lost it – if we lost the secret to the Germans – it would be used against us. In fact, in one awful time a high level deputation was sent over from America, including Purcell and Rabi and we had a very unpleasant meeting in the division leaders' office, in Dee's office, and they were quite unpleasant. They said, 'Look, we've tried to repeat your equipment in the United States and it will not work', and we had... it happened that some of the TR people had been sent over to help the Americans and they also said it could not work. Well, you see, it was all the difference between living at reasonable peace and being at war, and so it was because of that I think and because of the worry of the Americans that this sort of attitude was taken by the Secretary of State.

In any case, that terrible Battle of Stalingrad in January 1943, when von Paulus – I think it was eighth army – was completely destroyed. Bomber Command received permission to use the equipment operationally over Germany and I had an agreed code from O'Kane who phoned me one Saturday morning and said, 'It will be a nice weekend to come into the country'. So I drove over to Whitten and on that Saturday, the last... January 30th, the last weekend in January 1943. The bomber force took off to attack Hamburg. Now, that was good fortune from our point of view. I believe I was told that the original idea was to bomb Berlin on that night.
Now, for reasons which will appear later, Berlin would have been a very poor target. Hamburg, on the contrary, was a very good target because although our equipment was far from being good, it was at least extremely good on coastlines and showing up the difference between water and land. Well, that night at Whitten... you know, even 60 years later it's just unforgettable. The pathfinders, the whole... two squadrons took off, and sometime in the early hours they began to return. Bad weather had turned them back or engine failure or apparatus failure. Then at last one navigator came in and put his thumb up. He said, 'Marvellous'. He said, 'The docks on the Elbe stood out on the screen like my fingers', you know. That was our good fortune. So that was the first attack on Berlin and then that was the beginning of the operations with H2S.

Now, I'm going to break off the continuity of this story there, to tell you something quite remarkable. Many years later in peace time, when we were well established at Jodrell Bank which I'm going to talk about later on, I went over to see our German colleagues who had built a radio telescope near Effelsberg near Bonn and the director of the station said that my equivalent there was Hackenberg. Now, Hackenberg... he and one or two of my Jodrell staff had got jobs there and he was very pleased with the help they'd given him. And Hackenberg took us out to dinner one night, and to my embarrassment the conversation turned to the war, and Hackenberg turned to me, and he said, 'Of course, I know what you did'. I said, 'How would you know that?' He said, 'Because I was a young man working in Telefunken in 1943 and I was sent to pick up the bits and pieces of your bomber'. They called it Rotterdam. Well, I said, 'Weren't you surprised at it?' And he said, 'Not particularly'. He said, 'We knew, we worked out what you... what it was being used for and we knew about the Magnetron'.
Well, I didn't take much notice of this because I was then completely immersed in Jodrell Bank, an entirely different subject, but about ten years ago – and I'm really right ahead on a different part of my story – I received a message at Jodrell Bank from Wiebelinski, who had... Hackenberg had died and Wiebelinski had taken over from Hackenberg and he had gone through all Hackenberg's papers to try and sort them out, and he said would I be interested in seeing a report marked Most Secret which Hackenberg had written in 1943? So I said I'd be delighted to do so. So I received at Jodrell Bank – I think three years ago, I'm talking about 2003 or 2004 – from Wiebelinski this report which Hackenberg had written in February of 1943, in which he had written a complete description of this equipment. And you know, when he reached the story of the Magnetron, I just... I could hardly believe it. I'm afraid I nearly fell out of my chair. He said, 'It may be interesting to note that the Magnetron is a copy of a Russian patent'. So I found this unbelievable.
Well, I'll just complete that little bit of the story. I eventually got the original Russian papers on this astonishing story and it's perfectly true. In Leningrad, in... I think in early 1930's they had a complete Magnetron working on the same frequency that we were using and giving the same sort of power. Now, the remarkable question is: why didn't the Germans develop that Magnetron and use it against us? Well, I... the answer is most... there are two answers to that question. First of all it was one thing to get the Magnetron working on the bench. In 1940... in February 1940, in England, a Randall and Boot when they got theirs ready, they got GEC to do a lot of extraordinary, brilliant work on it in the matter of sealing and making it into a vacuum tube, which could be carried and used in an aircraft, and presumably the Soviets at that time had no reason for doing that.
The other question was this, that I asked Hackenberg when I met him in the 1970's why they didn't use the Magnetron, and he said, 'Oh' because we were ordered by Hitler to disregard it and carry on with what we were actually using. And the amazing thing is that the same thing nearly happened in England. In 1940, when we were busy on the very elementary centimetre in Worth Matravers in Dorset, the Germans who were marching across Europe and approaching Paris and Rowe had an order from the highest level that he was to divert all his staff onto what... onto that which actually existed, to make it work operationally. I don't think anyone at that time, neither in England... and it looks as though we would never survive and Hitler, it seemed incredible that he would not be the victor, they both had their reasons for getting on with whatever existed and not worrying about the future.
Fortunately, Rowe had appointed WB Lewis, one of Rutherford's people as his deputy, before the war began, and Lewis persuaded Rowe to let this small group of us who were working on this enterprise carry on, and we did that as General Dowling, Air Marshall Dowling, the CNC Fighter Command was brought down to see us. He preached to us about getting on with the 1.5 metre stuff, and there we were quietly getting on with the centimetre gear, so there are those two reasons why I think we in the end, we developed and used the Magnetron effectively and the Germans did not. Anyhow, that's the story of our crashed bomber, and that... I did write a paper on that, by the way, which I might refer to later on. It was published only two or three years ago and probably the last paper I shall ever write.

The H2S was manufactured, mass production, was fitted in every bomber coming off the production line and I think was... was successful in that it did enable the bombers to find their target, but I think as far as the navigators and pilots were concerned, they renamed it Home Sweet Home, because it turned out to be a wonderful device for enabling them to return home safely. I met in my old age a few people older than myself who wanted to give thanks for saving their lives. There was one case where a person had been shot up over Berlin and had struggled back to England on one of two engines, and found themselves all their navigation equipment had been destroyed except miraculously the H2S, and the navigator suddenly shouted, 'Hard to starboard', and they were about to go over the most heavily defended of the Dutch coast. And they reckon that certainly saved their lives through being able to get away from it, because of the H2S, so there were two or three questions like that, that... we had a lot of criticism during the war, but recently people have been more kind about it.

At the same time that we first used the equipment operationally over Germany, we learnt that the cabinet were severely worried, the war cabinet were severely worried about losses to our U-boats and merchant shipping in the north Atlantic. And it is perfectly clear from Churchill's memoirs that his one anxiety that Hitler at that time was to stake all on the U-boat campaign. Now, the point there is very interesting as far as our equipment is concerned. Coastal Command did have what is called ASV, anti... submarine... anti surface vessel radar and it was only about 1.5 metres. The Germans had captured the west coast ports of France, which they had used as a base for their submarines crossing at night to get into the shipping lanes to the North Atlantic. And they would surface to charge their batteries, because they had no snorkels in those days, but they could be attacked by the Coastal Command planes, using this 1.5 metre ASV, and they would be depth charged and severely hindered.
Then they discovered a very simple means of evading that. They built themselves a small receiving set, called Metox which they put in every U-boat and that easily picked up the radiation of the 1.5 metre from the Coastal Command aircraft and as soon as the signal was obtained, U-boats would dive and so the attacks on the U-boats went to almost nothing, and the shipping losses... when we first became aware of this in late 1942 and early 1943, this had risen to terrible proportions. We were then losing half a million tons of merchant shipping a month and this was expected to rise to something like a million tons a month by the end of January and February of 1943. Now, I think that if that really had happened the outcome of the war would have been entirely different. We would have become short of food, and the German... the American army certainly could not have been safely brought across the Atlantic. Anyhow it seemed to us that there was one simple answer to this, to change the wavelength and to use some of our H2S equipment on 10 cm and put it in the Coastal Command aircraft. Do you know the Coastal Command were moderately interested. Bomber Command were violently opposed. Harris said it would be much better for them to use the equipment to bomb the U-boat pens, which was a lot of nonsense of course. So in the end we – my own group in the lab – we more or less converted half a dozen equipment and got permission from Renwick to fit this in six Coastal Command aircrafts operating from Chivener Airport.
Now, in February of 1943... in fact, almost as soon as I had returned from the first operation, the Bomber Command over Hamburg, I drove to Chivener in North Devon, where I now had half of my staff trying to maintain this equipment. They wouldn't let me fly out of the country, but I managed to... someone, I had nothing to do with this but someone managed to persuade the authority to allow a rather senior member of my staff, Fortescue, to go into uniform and become the operator of one of these first operations over the Bay of Biscay. So I think it was then the first week of March that I was at this Chivener Airport and Fortescue took off with our hooked up centimetre ASV, for the patrol over the Bay of Biscay at night, and the station commander... fortunately I've forgotten his name. He was very irritable and I remember the dawn of the day they were meant to return, and they said, 'Look here, young man, your foolish equipment. What the hell good do you think that's going to do over the vast ocean expanses?' And he said, 'You should go out and see for yourself'. Well, of course, I would have loved to have gone out and seen for myself, but I was not allowed to.
Anyhow, the situation changed because the squadron returned. They'd had no contact with U-boats, but Fortescue had detected that they were being chased by a German, I think, a Fokker Wolf and he gave the instructions evading action, instructions to the pilot to take evading action, and of course that completely saved them. When he reported this on landing, that put a different emphasis altogether on the situation, and I think the next night the report said a U-boat was detected, showing no signs of expecting attack and was depth charged. Well, in March and April, that squadron from Chivener, using the centimetre equipment, only half a dozen of them by the way made 24 depth charge attacks on the U-boats crossing the bay and, fortunately, at that time the people at Bletchley had broken the naval code and the situation, the U-boat... Dernitz ordered the U-boat to stay on the surface and fight it out. They were harrassed and depth charged by our equipment across the bay. I think 24 were lost in those two months in trying to get across the bay and the... by the end of May... you can read this in the official report on the Naval warfare, written by Roscoe, who said he could still feel the heat of the sigh of relief in the Admiralty when Dernitz ordered the remaining U-boats to return to their home ports. And the shipping losses in the North Atlantic, they suddenly dropped, and in... I think it was in August of that year they'd fallen to instead of being one million tons a month, they'd fallen to less than 50,000 and Hitler in a radio broadcast said that the temporary setback to our U-boat campaign is due to one single technical invention of our enemies, and this was the Cavity Magnetron, used in our equipment.

Well, there's an interesting point to be made there. They did not... we thought immediately that they would discover what had happened and would immediately make a new receiver to listen to the transmissions on 10 centimetres. Remarkably, it was not until the autumn, in October, that the CNC, Coastal Command, Air Marshal Slessor, came to me one Saturday and said, 'Look...' He said, 'Have you got your new equipment ready? Because we expected them to listen', and I said, 'Yes, Sir, three centimetres ready for operation, but I'm afraid that the response from people is that they will not provide the necessary fittings to get it into the aircraft'. He was absolutely furious. He took off his beribboned jacket and said, 'Could you give me a piece of paper?' and he there wrote a most extraordinary letter to the Air Ministry, using phrases such as: 'nobody but a congenital idiot would expect this equipment to be any use without providing the means for it to be fitted in the aircraft'.
That led to a confrontation with Bomber Command. And another of those occasions which are ingrained in my memory is that shortly after Schlesser wrote that letter, I was summoned to appear in the war cabinet offices to discuss the situation between Bomber Command and Coastal Command, and I was sent alone. I remember Rowe and Dee saying to me before I left... They said, 'Look, here do be careful'. This is causing a lot of trouble in Whitehall, so I arrived in this office, off King Charles Street and the Deputy Chief of Air Staff was at the head of the table, and on one side was arranged Schlesser and his staff from Coastal Command and down the other side was arrayed not Harris from the Bomber Command but his deputy, Sornby and his staff. And I was asked to explain the situation and said that this new equipment at 3 cm, 200 were being manufactured for Bomber Command and Coastal Command would be privileged to have a few of them for the Coastal Command. After a long argument the decision was made in favour of giving Coastal Command some of these equipment's, so I thought, well, that's fine.
So I drove back to Malvern. As I arrived at the gates, Rowe met me, and he said, 'Look here, Lovell what have you been doing today? You haven't done too badly... you haven't done too well'. And I said, 'Why not?' He said, 'Well, you may think you've got Coastal Command some of these equipment's but after you left the meeting Sornby phoned his boss, Bomber Harris in with the result, Harris immediately picked up the telephone, spoke to the Prime Minister and got the decision reversed'. That was the sort of antagonism and inner fighting which went on between the commands in this country, of course, and in the groups in TRE. Of course, it did lead to intense activity. So that was the situation. The U-boat warfare never really recovered from that. I think that the Germans had developed a new high-speed underwater U-boat, called the Water U-boats, using hydrogen peroxide engine and a snorkel, which they'd not used before.
Well, we had no... we spent a lot of time with Coastal Command, because I had been put in charge of the radar equipment for Coastal Command by that time, and there was no means of getting in any operational range by radar on the snorkel and I think that war cabinet were worried that they expected Germany to have a whole squadron of these new U-boats in service by December of 1944. Well, by sheer good fortune, one of our bombers had bombed the banks of the canal, this is not the dam busters, which was used for taking the hulls of the U-boats made in the Ruhr to Hamburg for being fitted out. Instead of having a whole squadron in operation by Christmas of '44, they only had one, and in fact, just before the Germans surrendered to Montgomery in the spring of 1945, the naval staff issued a warning that they expected an immediately revival of attacks on the merchant shipping in the North Atlantic. So that's an incident which may not be well-known, but it was a very narrow squeak. So by 1943, my own group were handling both the Coastal Command and the Bomber Command developments.

One or two other things to say about the H2S equipment particularly. We gradually improved it. My staff began to be increased. There had been an independent development going on for Coastal Command radar. Well, that was cancelled and that group was put under my control, so I had achieved now... my own group was now quite large and it had a lot of very good people in it, and the H2S equipment was as a result got steadily improved. We were constantly putting in modifications, which very quickly got onto the production line and more and more bomber force were carrying this equipment. But nevertheless we were constantly attacked by our own people in the research department that our equipment was dangerous because the Germans would be able to home in on it and all that sort of thing. Well, my chief contact in Bomber Command was Group Captain Dudley Saward who became a great friend, and Saward. I would go to see him or he would come to see me almost every day, and one day in the early autumn of 1943, he took me out to dinner in Malvern, I remember, and he said, 'Do you mind if we walk back over the Worcester beacon' and I thought there was something on his mind, and he said that, 'I'm sorry to have to tell you that we had extremely heavy losses last night. The evidence is now perfectly clear that the Germans are homing onto your equipment', and I said, 'Well, how are they doing that, Dudley?' And he said, 'Well, they're attacking from the stern and below. Do you know we were around the top of the Worcester beacon?', and I said... suddenly I looked across and I said, 'Dudley, am I correct in thinking there is no high ground between here and the Urals?', and he said, 'I think that is so'. And I said, 'Well, look here, could you send me a Lancaster Bomber tomorrow and I will do something'.
So the next day a Lancaster Bomber arose. The answer was very easy. We would give the rear gunner a separate display of the cathode ray tube screen, in which the central region was expanded, so that whereas the navigator was seeing the whole area in front of them, the rear gunner would just see the aerial sky beneath him, right to the ground in which an aircraft could be seen approaching and I sent... a photograph of that is now in my archives in the Imperial War Museum. We fitted it in this plane, which Saward had sent and we arranged for a Mosquito to make an attack, a spoof attack on our aircraft and the result was marvellous. You know, there was the attacking aircraft coming at the spot of light. You could see him slowly approaching our rear gunner. Well, of course, it became... when this was put into manufacture and use with astonishing speed. It only meant for the manufacture one new cathode ray tube unit and a length of cable. This enabled our rear gunners to deal with the attacking German fighters.
The other thing at that time, shortly either before or after that event, Saward came into my office and said, 'I'm afraid that we're not doing very well on Berlin. Your H2S equipment doesn't show up much detail there'. Now, I had a big map on my office wall of the whole of Europe and I looked at Berlin and saw that below Berlin there were two very big lakes, the Wannsee and another name. And I said to Dud... I said, 'Look, we have a 3 cm equipment that is with a third of the beam width on test. If you could arrange to send six Lancaster's to Defford, we'll fit them with this new 3 cm equipment'.
Now, that happened and in the November of 1943 it was first used to lead the path finder force and the cover of my book, which I wrote very, very much later Echoes of War, the dust cover of that book has a photograph of the cathode ray tube as the bomber was approaching Leipzig and it shows the clear town of Leipzig and the railway station, with the bombing circle, so Leipzig was devastated that night and a few nights later it was used over Berlin, so the story went on like that. I must say, you know, it was total war in those days, but in later life I've being... what shall we say? Consoled by the fact that the equipment for which I was made to develop was used so effectively against U-boats as well as destroying and killing so many Germans.

We continued making better and better equipment. We reached a stage of mark after mark of equipment, all slight improvements and then, at one stage, we decided to try not a three foot paraboloid under the fuselage but a six foot, a whirligig, and that gave very high definitions and we did demonstrate that to the army and showed that it could detect tanks. But I'm afraid, fortunately the war was coming to an end and I don't think that was ever used operationally. I was... I don't think I have much else to say about the war, except that in the early years of 1945 from a personal point of view I became absolutely exhausted and it was relentless, almost day and night for four years, and I was... I was given leave for a few weeks, and by the time I had got back the war was nearing it's end. And one night Dudley Saward said he wanted to take me to some secret establishment, and it was somewhere in the Home Counties. And I never discovered where this place was until Dudley Saward wrote a book about me, and it turned out that it was a military establishment, highly secret, I don't think it even had a name. And I said to Dudley... I said, 'Why have you brought me here?' And he said, 'Because the Brigadier in Charge... he wishes to thank you because unknown to you he has used some of your equipment for getting special operations executive, for getting our agents in and out of occupied territory.'
So it was there in that establishment that I heard Churchill announce about the surrender of the German armies, and that the war against Germany, the European War had come to an end. So that really is my story of the war, but it had a profound effect on me. And I want to say this, that I... it's often said that the allied scientists were very much better than the Germans and that's why they helped in the scientific war. I don't believe that that's true at all. The reason is the attitude to scientists in Germany and in the Allies was entirely different. Look, we were completely integrated with the operational commands and certainly in the last, when most of the operation and research work had being done, I spent as much of my time on aerodromes as I did in the lab, in the last 18 months of the war. And so we were in complete contact with the operational staff and also with the hierarchy, who completely consulted us and we had free access to them.
Now, this did not happen in Germany. The remarkable case there was that in Peenemünde, Wernher von Braun developing the V1 and V2 rockets, he once gave a lecture on the possibility of using the V2 to get man into space and onto the moon. And one of Himmler's spies reported that Wernher von Braun was not making weapons to help win the war, he was wanting to get a man on the moon, so Wernher von Braun was arrested at a very critical time at the development of these rockets. You see, this sort of thing couldn't possibly have happened in England and America, so I know, and I think most people will agree with me now, that the really vital difference in the scientific war in the Second World War was the extremely close integration of the scientists and operational staff, in the case of the Allies and the complete separation of them in Hitler's Germany.

I want to say a few words about the situation in 1943. We had the American objection in the autumn of 1942, when they learned that we were going to... proposing use the cavity magnetron in the H2S System over enemy territory. And, in fact, we were allowed to use it when the soviets defeated von Paulus's Eighth Army in the great battle of Stalingrad at the end of January. Oddly enough, on the very day of that raid, Dee, who was our main supervisor and our Divisional Leader, he received a letter from Robinson, who had been one of the original centimetre development team, and had been sent to America to help the Americans with this new technique. And he wrote a letter to say he completely failed to get the system to work in America, and wasn't it time to do some real scientific investigations?
Well, on that very night, the first raid took place over Hamburg at the end of January 1943. Now, the... in the summer of 1943, the United States Air Force Eighth Army Air Force arrived in England to begin the bombing of Germany. Now, they had been trained in America with the most excellent visual bombsight, and flying at 30,000 feet, under clear skies, they could bomb with great precision. Alas, when they tried this technique, they suffered terrible disasters, and they were given targets such as the ball bearing factory at Schweinfurt, and suffered terrible destruction. And at about that time that this was happening, I was... remember I was at Chippenham, still with the Coastal Command people, working, flying over the Bay of Biscay, and I received an urgent demand to return to Malvern and to Defford, to meet the general who was in command of the Eighth Air Force. And he demanded, with great urgency, that – and this was supported by our own High Command – that we equipped the American Fortresses and Liberators with our H2S equipment, and we did this. We fitted them, in fact, at Defford; my own team did so. And they began operations under cloudy conditions and at night.
Well, before long, the demand by the Americans for the equivalent of our H2S system was so great that the American scientists really got to work on this, and very quickly produced an excellent three centimetre system, which they called H2X, and that was the odd reversal in American policy. Now, after the War, I got to know Rabi quite well, and he had been one of the deputation sent over in 1942, to accuse us of losing the war if we used the cavity magnetron over Germany. And I asked him, and later his biographer, if they had any idea why they could not make the system work in America, when they first tested it in 1942, but I never got a satisfactory answer. And my own opinion is that it was simply the difference between living under the enormous pressure of war in England, and even making a crude system useful, and in America, with... under more peaceful conditions, the drive to make anything work did not exist.

I... a few years ago now, probably the last paper I shall ever write, it was published I think by the Royal Society two or three years ago in 2003 or 2004, something like that and I'd dealt with this remarkable story of the Germans knowing about the Magnetron but not using and it and of the American opposition. And I made this point about the different attitudes to scientists in the two countries, and I calculated that the belief in the secrecy of the Magnetron held up the operation of our equipment by six vital months. And I don't think it made all that difference to Bomber Command, because they had OBOE and GEE working then, but it made a vital difference to Coastal Command, because in those six months I calculated that we lost nearly one million tons of merchant shipping, that we would not have lost if the Germans had not been... if we had changed the frequency of the Coastal Command equipment and... Sorry. If the Germans had not been so slow in detecting that we had changed the frequency, and if we could have used that six months earlier, I think we would have saved about one million tons of shipping, but of course, that's just calculation.

I wanted to get out. I was desperately anxious to come back to research. It had been a young man's war. In 1945, I was... well, I was born in 1913 so I was just 30, nearly 30, just in my early 30's. They wanted me to stay and they wanted me to go into industry and all that sort of thing. I made one or two vague manner of interest, ICI wanted me and somebody else wanted me and I said, 'No, I want to get back to a University and do research', and so I was released from the war in the summer of 1945. They wanted me to go to the Far East and modify my equipment for use over the greater distances, and I said, no, they really couldn't order me then and I don't think they wanted to. They thought I'd probably... they probably thought I wouldn't do it anyhow and that I'd done enough, so I had my release papers in I think June or July of 1945, before the end of the war. At the end of the European war.
And then I had no further contact with World War II and I thought I had ended for the whole of my life any contact with military matters and defence, but as you will hear, as I go on with my story, that turned out to be far from the case. I was released in the summer of 1945, and we had bought a house near Manchester so that I could return to the University. I had discovered that Blackett or Blackett told me he was then the Director of Naval Operation and Research in the Admiralty that he himself was returning to Manchester, and I wanted to return to Manchester and work with with Blackett. I think the day after I got back to Manchester I received an urgent call to return to TRE. This was because the Chief of Air Staff, Portal had visited the place and wanted me to explain to him the differences between our equipment and a captured German replica of our equipment, which they never succeeded in getting to work. But after that, that particular episode of my life's account is over.

Well, before we start on the long story of Jodrell Bank, I want to say a bit about myself, because so far I've really talked about the work and my occupation I was engaged in. I did begin by talking a bit about my upbringing in the rather remote place between Bristol and Bath, and when I was sent to the university in 1931, the only thing I was really interested in was sport, particularly cricket and I had a... I was fascinated by the new wireless, and I'd built for myself a lot of wireless sets and all that sort of thing and became quite knowledgeable from the point of view of electronics. My father was... also his business was related to that, and I often think that if I'd had joined his business and developed that I would become a different sort of man. I'm glad I didn't, but no doubt I could have done well, because I would have been right on top of all the radio developments.
Anyhow, when I was a student, I used to in the HH Wells Physics Laboratory, this lovely place in Bristol. I used to take some luncheon with me, a few sandwiches and a few apples, which I picked from the garden at home because I was still living in my home and travelling every day into Bristol. One day, I was sitting on the grounds of the Royal Fort. It was lunchtime, eating an apple and a young man came and passed by, and we said... he turned out to be a boy in the same class as I was, a class of only six in the honours school of physics and I offered him an apple, which he accepted. And that extraordinary event led to a very deep friendship with this boy, Derek Chesterman, and we discovered that we were both interested in music and he... after a short time he invited me to a concert in Bath because in those days all the great pianists of the age used to play in weekdays in Bath, and he was typical in that he invited me to have lunch with him and his family beforehand. It turned out that he had wanted to go to Cambridge and rather despised being in Bristol. The contrary was my case. I was only too thankful to be in Bristol but anyhow, I joined his family, they lived in Bath. It turned out that their name was Chesterman.
Mrs. Chesterman was the daughter of a former mayor of Bath and they were of the Spear, Brothers and Clark family, very well-known Bath citizens. At this lunch table, there was a 15-year-old covered in... wearing a girl guide uniform, covered in every conceivable badge, and I didn't take much notice of her except that she had to leave the table very quickly. I don't think that I was suspecting that she was ordered to get up and get another glass, and then she left abruptly because she had to return to school.
Well, as the years developed, she went to the Froebel Training College in Bedford and she was eventually the girl I married, Joyce Chesterman. And I don't think that the young people today would believe it, but her parents I don't think were too keen on me. They thought that I would not be the sort of boy they would like their daughter to marry. Anyhow, it didn't happen that way and we were married, just after she was 21, and really that... that's provided a background to all that I've been talking about and all that I'm going to talk about because we lived for 57 years, through war and peace. And we had one child before the war, and one child during the war, and we had five children altogether and where I'm speaking from now, we bought this house, the Quinta, Swettenham, a village in Cheshire, only a few miles from Jodrell Bank. We bought this shortly after the war was over, and so we've been here from 1948 and we've brought up our family, five children in this house. They are all married and remarkably everyone continued to live with the person they married and brought up their own children. So I'm now the possessor of 14 grandchildren and an increasing number of great grandchildren, but I ought to... that background because I will when I talk about Jodrell, reveal the remarkable episode concerning Lord Nuffield and my wife, and also her relations with the engineering husband. Now, I thought I ought to mention that because that's a partnership which I as you know sustained, certainly sustained me through all that I've already talked about and all that I am going to talk about, particularly while we're all living here. Just having revised my life so to speak for the purposes of talking about it now, I'm just astonished that I managed to survive it all, but I realise now it's because there was always the secure background.

The other thing about my life... I could have been... I could have been a cricketer but I'm jolly glad I wasn't, in view of what happened. I was quite good and played for the university and then the war came and there was no cricket then and the other thing was music. Now, music... I was as a young boy taught to play the piano, but then I became... became passionate about organs and still am, and I was... I had two uncles who were organists and at a very young age I used to deputise in the church for one of my uncles. And then, when I grew up and when I was at university stage, I became the pupil of an organist in Bath, Raymond Jones and he... he became... his church was destroyed during the war in which he taught me, and he became the organist at Bath Abbey and I've had this close connection with Bath Abbey. And he... he lived for a long time and he was emeritus organists for Bath Abbey, and his... until last year I'd made, when I was... at Christmas time I would always going to the organ loft in Bath Abbey with his successor.
Now, I have this strange passion for organs and I still have, and I will go anywhere to hear a good organ recital. When we moved to Swettenham, I was fortunate enough to become the organist to the local church, and in 19... the organ in the church, it's a very small church and he had a list of rectors dating from the 13th Century but it's a very beautiful church. And when I became the organist there it was a very poor organ, and then I became acquainted, through friends, with Noel Mander, the firm of great organ builders in London. And it was Noel Mander who frequently came here and stayed with us and we arranged for him to rebuild the organ in the church here, and so now since 1964 we have a Mander organ in this small church.
Now, I was the organist in the church for forty years and it was a riveting part of my life. It ordered some... gave some order to it, the practising and the playing every Sunday. And then, about ten years ago, my sight became so poor that I had to give up, so I'm no longer the organist but I miss it very much. I still amuse myself on the piano here, but I'm still passionate about organ music and about organs in general. That has been... I often wish, oddly, that I had really devoted my whole attention to music and become more of a professional musician than I could ever claim to be. But it's been a great release for someone in one of the awful times that I have to talk about at the Jodrell, one of my colleagues said to me, 'Well, I should think you could deal with a good gin and tonic when you get home tonight?' And I said, 'No, I shall sit down at the piano and play a little Bach'. It had that sort of effect on me and now in my very late old age of 93 I can't really see to read alas unless I have artificial means, but I'm passionate about it. I listen to music and I go to a lot of concerts and I'm mixed up intimately with many concert societies in the vicinity, Chester Music Festival and many others, and so on, so that has added a dimension to my life which has really stopped me from devoting my whole time to science.

I was brought up in the country, love the country. I always disliked towns. I like going to London or New York, but after a few days or nights, I want to get back to the country. And that when we... we bought the place I'm speaking from now, the Quinta in Swettenham, in 1948 and that has been a wonderful place for me and for us. The remainder of our children were born here and are still living happily in various parts of this country now, though they've often been abroad. Unfortunately, my wife became ill and she... she died in 1993, and since then I've been living here alone, but I do have many friends and am very happy to... to be able to carry on in this way.
The other great passion in my life has been trees and shrubs, and when we arrived at the Quinta in 1948, we found that this had been built as a rectory in I think 1911. The rector of the parish, a man by the name of Banners... his great desire was to marry a girl who lived in Congleton, and her condition of marriage was that he would build her a house exactly the same as the one she lived in in Congleton, and that was the Quinta. Well, we changed it quite a bit. The house with the same name in Congleton has now been taken down and built over but in the nearby town of Congleton, there are various roads and a school called The Quinta.
Now, here at the Quinta, we bought it and it was about four acres and I began planting and we gradually acquired more and more land, and throughout the whole of my life after the war the planting of trees and shrubs has been a tremendous relief. In fact, as you know, I gave the BBC Reith lectures in 1958 – I think it was – and the kind reviewer said that they'd been written over the spade, a truism, because mainly one sorts out many difficult and intellectual problems when one is not thinking about them. Anyhow we gradually extended the arboretum here and at the present time it's about 40 acres, contains three national collections of the genus pine, a fraction of the ash, and the oaks. And about ten years ago... in fact when my wife died, I wanted to... I couldn't bear to think that when I died that a bulldozer will come in and uproot all those trees, so I handed over all but five acres to the Wildlife Trust, and they in turn shared it with the Tatton Garden Society, of which I happen to be President. So at the present moment I am really in charge of only this house and a few acres around it, but nevertheless, I'm deeply involved with the arboretum and now I like to walk in it and plant every day, and that is my habit now. I like to work in the garden in the morning and go to Jodrell in the afternoon. So that's the sort of background which I've enjoyed and very glad to have done so.
I also, having lived through so long and for so much of the 20th Century, in spite of all its troubles and difficulties and near disasters, some of which I'm still going to talk about, which happened after the war... nevertheless, it's been a privilege to see such an enormous developments. Look, I was in my youth as a young boy happily sitting on an edging stone playing five stones, rolling hoops along the village lanes, no motor cars, one aircraft and absolutely rarity and now look at the world. I mean, in my village you have to be very careful to cross the road, and the aircraft has a monopoly of life, but to have lived from the time when those things did not exist, to this age, this technological age has been quite a remarkable experience. Now, my own children, they're... alas a year ago my eldest daughter died. She was the matriarch of the family, but the rest of them are still alive and well. I've got no... there's no scientist. My eldest son, he became a geologist and, in fact, still divides his time between the Bullard Geological Laboratories in Cambridge and is still working for one of the oil firms, BP. And so that has been the background to my life and all that I'm talking about. All that I have talked about so far and all that I'm going to talk about now.

I was released from the war in June or July 1945, and we bought a small house in a suburb of Manchester called Timperley. It had a nice garden with a brook running through it and I returned to the university and went into the room where my cloud chamber, which I'd used six years earlier was there, still the dust sheet over it, so I pulled off the dust sheet and thought, Oh my goodness, I must try to get this device working again. Well, what a change. I wanted a screwdriver and there was no money to buy one, when a few months earlier I could just pick up the phone and have a Lancaster Bomber delivered. The change was dramatic but it was not the sort of life one had left before the war. During the war, pre-war life seemed idyllic, but after the war was not. There was still... bread rationing did not occur until after the war, petrol was short. In Manchester there was water rationing and money was short. Money became important. During the war, money was never mentioned. It was whether one could do things not how much it would cost.
So I fiddled about for some time with this cloud chamber and then Blackett, he'd resigned from being the Director of Naval Operational Research, and had come back to Manchester and he came into this room and said, 'Whatever are you doing?' I said, 'I'm trying to get this cloud chamber to work again', and he said, 'Why, I thought you were going to try this new method of detecting extensive air showers'. I said, 'Oh heavens above. I'd completely forgotten of that, in the cauldron of the war', and he said, 'Look, go into the library. Put the sheet back on that cloud chamber and see what you're going to do'. He said, 'Have a go at this new method'.
So I went into the library and the few papers I've had, and I realised that in order to have any hope of detecting these great showers by radar, I needed... I needed a long wavelength, but I'd been working of course for most of the war with a very short wavelength and, of course, in all the war 1.5 metres and then in the centimetric region. So I did a few calculations. Blackett reminded me. I'd forgotten about the paper that bore our names, so I got hold of this paper and did a few calculations, and realised that I really did need a radar working on a wavelength of several metres not centimetres. I knew JS Hey, who'd been with the army operational research group in Byfleet and I know he'd been associated with the four metre equipment which had been used for helping the ack ack guns around London. So I phoned Hey to see if there was any chance of borrowing four metre equipment and he said, 'No problem'. They said, 'We're only too glad to dispose of it. It's being tipped down coal mines because no one wants it'. So he arranged for the army to bring to Manchester a 4.2 metre, I think it was 36 megahertz, mega cycles in those days but megahertz now, and this was brought into the Coupland Street opposite the physics department. And, of course, it caused an absolute sensation in the university, because people in the university had been there all through the war and had never seen any big equipment, and with the army, a couple of chaps of the army we set up this equipment outside what is now the Schuster Building, and erected yargi aerials on top. The diesel generator, a transmitter in a separate cabin and then the receiver cabin with the yagi aerials on top.
So I... eventually the army left and I got acquainted with this equipment and with all the instruction books and switched it on and hoped to see the echoes from these big air showers. Well, what I saw was what turned out to be a massive interference on the cathode ray tube and in those days, electric trams were still running down Oxford Street and only a few yards from where my equipment was. Furthermore, they were extraordinary, direct current supply. It was all over Manchester, and in the university and the trams were running on direct current, so I showed this to Blackett and I said, 'The only hope is to find somewhere away from this interference'. So he... a few days later we... I met the Bursar called Rainford with whom I had much to do. He was then the Deputy Bursar but he became Bursar later on and became a very important factor in my life, and he seemed to be the only person there who seemed to have any interest and was pleased to see one come back from the war. All the people remaining there had been busy with piles of sand and buckets, doing their best to put out the fire bombs and they were not in the slightest bit interested in those of us who returned to the university after six years' absence.

I asked Rainford, who was then the Deputy Bursar if the university had any land away from the university with no electrical interference. So he said, 'Yes, we've got a place near Hodgekiss. We've got a place at High Legh. Why don't you have a look at that?' So I went to High Legh. This was in the autumn of 1945, and it was a day of misty rain and I immediately returned, because there are high voltage lines over this particularly piece of land in High Legh, and they were already sizzling with electic sparks. So I returned, and the next day or the day after, again I said to Rainford, 'No good. Do you have anywhere else?' And he said, 'Well, there's a man over there, you see that man smoking a pipe? He is in charge of the... the university botanic grounds of a place called Jodrell Bank. See if you can interest him'. His name was Sansome.
Now, another remarkable piece of good fortune. Sansome, I hadn't met him before but I told him that I'd just arrived back with this apparatus and he was fascinated. He'd seen that and wondered whatever it was. He turned out to be a keen radio man, and I said, 'Look, I understand you have some land about 20 miles south of Jodrell. Is there any chance of having your permission to take this equipment out there where there is no electricity and seeing if I can free myself of interference?' I reported this to Blackett and Blackett spoke to the Vice Chancellor who was then Sir John Stopford, later Lord Stopford, fortunately a very distinguished scientist, a medical man in fact, another piece of good fortune, having a sympathetic Vice Chancellor.
Now, Stopford quite reasonably thought and had anxiety that those of us who had been away dealing with massive things for six years probably would never be able to return to research and teaching and university. Furthermore, he took the point of view that... that the main point for those of us coming back would be to help restore teaching and get on with the university. So with some reluctance he said to Blackett, 'Why don't we agree that Lovell can take these trailers there for a couple of weeks and then find out what he wants and then come back into the university?' So I again summoned Hey and he arranged for the army to come back and tow my trailers out to Jodrell Bank.

Jodrell Bank then consisted of two fields converted to botanical, growing various things, two old wooden huts in which there were two gardeners, Aif and Frank. And so I joined up with Aif and Frank, and they had a coke stove and we ate sandwich lunches together and they knew... and I tried to start, the army again set the gear going and then left, so that once more I was left with this equipment about which I didn't know very much, I didn't know how to switch it on. But I had the problem of... there was no electricity anywhere near Jodrell Bank or anywhere in this district then and Aif and Frank were very friendly with the local farmer, called Moston and he had a diesel tractor, so he knew all about diesels. And he was summoned and discovered that the reason my diesel would not work was that it was that the diesel feed pipe was blocked with ice, so he dismantled it, got rid of the ice, we started up the diesel. So every time I wanted to work at Jodrell, I had to... and for a long time thereafter, we had to... this rather heavy business of winding the diesel.
I switched on, I suppose, in mid-December in a most extraordinary coincidence. So the... I anxiously looked at the cathode ray tube. It was free of this interference, but full of transient echoes, and I thought, marvellous. These must be the radar echoes from huge cosmic ray air showers. Then I had a few moments of doubt and I thought: no, it can't be, there can't be as many huge air showers as that. So I reported this to Blackett and he advised me to consult Hey, which I did, and then the truth was revealed. Hey had used the equipment first of all to detect aircraft and then when the V2 rockets began to fall on London, he was asked to alter the direction of his yagi aerials, to see if he could detect the incoming V2. Now, he did this and began to give warnings of approaching V2s, when it was discovered that no V2 had been launched and no V2 fell on London, so Hey had been... on the other hand, he did eventually detect the V2 rockets with this equipment.
Now, Hey then studied the literature and he came across the papers of Schafer and Goodall in America who had apparently with equipment had found a similar phenomenon and they had carried out a minor investigation, and had suggested that the echoes they were obtaining were from the ionisation caused by meteors, shooting stars, burning up in the 80-100 km region of the atmosphere. And Hey sent me the paper, which was then highly confidential and that seemed to be the situation that what I'd been observing were the radio reflections of meteor showers and the reason that there were so many of them was it transpired later on that I was switched on in the very middle of a famous meteor shower, the Geminid or Geminid meteors which come to a maximum every mid December, and provide visible meteors at about 60 an hour.

Christmas came and I think I went away for the New Year, and I went back to Jodrell and started up the equipment again. I wanted to get away from the Botany department. I had then obtained one of my... someone who had been in TRE but not in my group called JA Clegg, and together we ordered loads of stone and made a track, so that we could get into what is now near the powerhouse. And we then towed the equipment over that, and I set it up near the powerhouse, in what is now recognised as one of the entrances to Jodrell Bank and thereby we got power by winding the diesel and then a series of interesting things occurred. Why wasn't I summoned back into Manchester? Two weeks had elapsed.
The answer is that Blackett had become involved in a bitter dispute with the inner cabinet of Attlee's government over the development of atomic energy and atomic bombs by Great Britain, and he had sent in a minority report to the Cabinet, opposing this and giving his reasons for opposing it. Now, Margaret Gowing subsequently wrote two wonderful books on the development of atomic energy in Great Britain, and she reveals there that this minority report of Blackett went to the Prime Minister Attlee and he and he sent it to the Head of Defence and they scrawled most incredible remarks over it, such as... This man is a scientist, he knows nothing about defence. And this is just after the Americans had awarded him a medal for his help during the war, incidentally. And Blackett became... he became very angry and he began writing the military and political consequences of atomic energy and this completely diverted him, and he became angry and... and bitterly... in a very bitter way involved in this dispute about the development of atomic energy in Great Britain, and the book had a world circulation. He became excluded from America. In fact, he had once in that year had been in an aircraft which had to make a forced landing somewhere in New York and he was arrested and spent an unpleasant night in prison on his way to Canada. So it's understandable that he had completely forgotten about the young man Lovell that he'd allowed to go to Jodrell Bank for two weeks.
Well, when he calmed down in the summer of 1946, he came out... he realised that this man Lovell was still at a place called Jodrell Bank, so he came out to see what was happening, and by that time we had understood that this equipment was studying not cosmic ray air showers, but meteor showers. Now, Blackett... he immediately became fascinated and there was never anymore talk of us moving back to Manchester, so that's how Jodrell Bank began.

We've reached the stage in the story of Jodrell Bank where, in 1945, I had borrowed this gun-laying four meter radar equipment from Hey, and the army had deposited me, in December 1945, in the grounds of the Botanical Department, and the old huts, they still exist there. I had... in the early part of 1946, I had with me JA Clegg, who had been in Telecommunications Research Establishment, but he was not a member of my group, but he had been... he had become an expert on aerials, and his aid, during the next few months, was vital to what happened subsequently. I also acquired another young from TRE, named Bandwell, and he was a New Zealander. I had nothing to do with him during the war, but he also came to work with me at Jodrell.
Now, we moved the... we got a load of stones, and built a track, which now leads into the powerhouse, and moved our radar system over to somewhere where the powerhouse now exists. And then we decided to get more spacious accommodation, and Clegg was sent to drive away what we called a Park Royal. Now, in those days, there was so much disposal of equipment going on that there was no problem in ringing up previous colleagues, and asking if they could give us some more radar equipment. So we sent Clegg away, to drive a very large vehicle, which we called the Park Royal. That was the official name of it. And we drove this system into the field, until it just became stuck in the mud, and we couldn't drive any further, and we moved our radar equipment into this Park Royal. It is somewhere, as far as location is concerned, it is close to where the Mark Two Telescope is now, and that building, the control building of that telescope, I don't know, but we called it for a long time, the Park Royal. Anyhow, this vehicle was close to that site. And it was there in 1946 that we carried out our first researches on the meteor phenomenon.

Now, though I had observed large numbers of transient echoes when I first turned on this equipment in the middle of December 1945, it was still uncertain as to what they were. The only evidence was from Hey's memorandum, which was still classified secret, which he sent me, when he was ordered to try to locate the V2 rockets. He gave false warnings because of these transient echoes, and it was he who had referred to the work of Schaeffer and Goodall in America, who had also observed these echoes, and had rather loosely associated them with the ionisation caused by meteors burning up in the 80-100 kilometre region of the atmosphere. So the problem still really existed as to whether, in fact, amongst this mass of echoes, there were any of any kind of durational strength, which might be what I was looking for, that is, the ionisation from the very large cosmic ray air showers. And I think, for the first month or so, when we were working from the Park Royal in this new situation, I made quite a long list of the echoes and the various types of echoes, still hoping that some of them might be associated with the cosmic ray air showers.
And then, at about that time, Blackett, who had recovered a bit from his quarrel with the inner Cabinet, over the atomic energy problem, he arrived one day, and said, 'Oh, by the way, you might like to read this letter.' Now, this letter was from TL Eckersley, who was the chief scientist of the Marconi Company, and now Eckersley was one of the great authorities on the ionosphere. The letter to Blackett, which I believe is now in the archives, said that he had been interested to read the paper by himself and me in the Royal Society in 1942, and he agreed with the calculations, but would he suggest to Lovell that he looked into the possible effect of the damping factor? Now, the extraordinary thing is that I thought that Blackett had just received this letter, but in fact, when I looked at it, it was dated 1942, so Eckersley had written this letter to Blackett in the hectic time of the war, in 1942, and Blackett, naturally, who was then, I think, the Scientific Advisor to Coastal Command, just put it in his pocket and forgot about it. Understandable, I mean, if he'd given it to me then, I would not have recognised it, because I was deeply involved in other matters.
Now, I of course knew nothing about damping factors, and hastened to the library to try and find out what Eckersley was referring to. And that led to a very great shock because the problem was in effect, in essence, a very simple one, that Eckersley said the movement of the electrons would not execute a simple harmonic motion in the atmosphere, they would collide, and the rate of collision would depend on the height in the atmosphere, and would vary, a greater damping at 80 kilometres than 100 kilometres, and the effect of this would be to lessen the... to make it even more difficult to detect the showers because it would reduce the intensity of the reflection from this stream of electrons. The trouble, I found out, was that on the frequency, which I was working then, about four metres, the effect was really colossal, and it depended on what assumptions one made about the nature of the shower, and the altitude at which the shower was developing, but it was a very large factor. I think something at least of 1,000 or more. And that set the tone for the developments, which then occurred at Jodrell.

I'd like to say that in July of that year, when we were observing the meteor phenomenon one day, in the Park Royal, the cathode ray tube was suddenly ablaze with noise, and there was no... nothing to do with the transient echoes, but the noise level on the tube increased to...  oh, greatly, and there was no obvious reason for that, and we soon realised that this was a solar flare. And so, now, Hey... the history of that, again was quite recent. In 1942, the German battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau in February had made a most remarkable escape to their home ports, from Brest, through the English Channel. And they were scarcely attacked, and this caused consternation and great depression in the country. And one of the main reasons was that the radars had been jammed.
Now, many, many years later the person who... the German who designed the jamming sent me all the details of that, and I believe those details are also in the archives. But that is by the way. The real point was that a few weeks later, a similar jamming, apparently a similar jamming, occurred on the four metre ack... ack defence radars. The four-metre-ones are the type which I now had from Hey, and he was given the job of investigating this. Well, Hey discovered that there was no obvious enemy activity, which could have led to this jamming, but he made the critical observation that not all the GL radars reported the jamming, and that those that did so were pointed in the direction of the sun. He then investigated with the Royal Greenwich Observatory, and found out that at that time, a giant solar flare was on the solar disc.
Now, many people refused to believe, after the war, that this was intense radio emission from the sun. Even Sir Edward Appleton disputed it. But, in fact, Hey had discovered the radio bursts, which later became investigated in great detail from the groups of sunspots and solar flares on the solar meridian. And we had observed one of these. I think it was in July 1946, and that, in fact, I think, was the first paper that ever was sent out from Jodrell. I think it was written by Bandwell and myself, and published in Nature. That is an interesting comment on the ways to the first scientific paper emerging from Jodrell. It had little relevance to our main aim, but nevertheless was rather encouraging for us.

When I realised the consequences of the letter from Eckersley to Blackett, that we had absolutely no hope at all of detecting the ionisation from the cosmic ray air showers with the equipment, which we had... And we had to make an enormous improvement in its sensitivity before we had any hope of doing so. I did quite a lot of calculations; I can't remember what happened to them, they may or may not be in the archives, because the answers depended on the nature of the distribution of the electrons in the air showers, and I consulted with Jånossy, who was just in the middle of writing a very detailed book on the theory of cosmic rays, and the answer depended, amongst other things, on a great deal as to how spread out the showers were, and so on. But in any case, even in the most optimistic case, we had to make an improvement of a very great order in the sensitivity of our equipment.
Now, there are three possible ways of doing this. One can either get a much more powerful transmitter, one can either improve the receiver sensitivity, or one can build a bigger aerial. Well, in the first case, we had absolutely no means, or money, of getting a more powerful transmitter. In the second case, improving the sensitivity of the receiver... This was... we were already at that limit of what was possible because of the what later became the main occupation of Jodrell, the cosmic radio emission, and if we had improved the sensitivity, we would have simply been measuring the cosmic radio waves, and not achieving any additional sensitivity. So our only option was to build a big aerial.
Now, I was then fortunate in having Clegg because he had spent a good deal of his time during the war lecturing on aerials, and I think he had some practical experience, certainly of yagis, and we started to build ourselves a great broadside array. Now, we were alone; we had no one to help us, and we... everything was rationed, we couldn't get any timber, and so we hired large numbers of scaffold poles, and bolted them together, and we built a broadside array, or began to build a broadside array. We mixed the concrete for the original pillars by hand, and... and... but we got... I suppose we got this broadside array to a height of about 20 or 30 feet, and then we became frightened. We were really... we were not scaffolders, and we had no experience of working at high altitude, and furthermore, we had little time to do all this because we were teaching at university, simultaneously. And I'm afraid that in the end we abandoned our attempts. I think we had reached a more broad, quite a big broadside array of maybe 30ft high by about 30 foot long, with... but I don't recall that we ever tested it.
And it was then Clegg, who suggested that we might try to build ourselves a paraboloid. It might be easier. And so we set about building what became the 218 foot transit telescope. Now, we did this, again, by processing or borrowing enormous numbers of scaffolding poles, and the ordinary clamps and so on, which are used by the scaffolders. I, at about that time, was fortunate enough also that someone in the university suggested that a person called Ted Taylor, who was an engineer, had applied for a job at the university, but this kind person in the university thought he might be more useful to me at Jodrell. So at that critical time, Ted Taylor came to see me.

Now, he was an incredible man. His... before the war began, I think his father had given him a bag of tools and sent him to America. And in America, he had become Head of one of the big air... big aeroplane workshops, and had returned to England. Well, he... he was marvellous. He stayed with us for the rest of his life, and became Head of our Workshops, but at that time, he said, 'Look here, we can't mix all this concrete ourselves, we've got to buy a concrete mixing machine'. And so we made much more progress in putting it round the massive foundations, which we required to hold these scaffolding poles. The idea was to make a series of circular scaffolding poles. The outside diameter was determined by the amount of land we had between the hedge and the road we made into the field, which is now, in fact, the main tarmacadam road, leading past the Mark II Telescope. Because on that site that we built this transit telescope, the idea was, I think, that the outside circumference of this telescope was to be scaffolding poles of about 20 to 30 foot high, and then on the way into the centre region, we would have scaffolding poles of decreasing heights, and string between these fairly... maybe a quarter of an inch steel cable, not in the form of a paraboloid, because you had a catenary, but this was accurate enough, because we were working on a wave length of four metres. In the centre we proposed to build ourselves a wooden tower, and we had hoped, and in fact, we did get the framework of one of the receiving towers on the Chain Home Stations, because the focus of this paraboloid was going to be about 120 feet above the ground. Well, again, we started to build this wooden tower, but we, again... well, we were incapable of doing so. We, I think we abandoned it after we got the tower to about ten feet, and realised that the job was beyond us, and I then was fortunate enough to be put in touch with the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
Now, this Department, the DSIR, had been formed after the First World War, to help stimulate various types of science, in Great Britain. And DSIR was then... became, for most of my time at Jodrell, the most important department for helping the development of science in the universities, and for supporting research students. And one day Blackett had brought out to see what was going on at Jodrell, one of the directors of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, and he asked me what was going on. And I said, 'Well, look, we've got the... building this', told him why we were building this, what was to be known as the Transit Telescope, but we were in trouble with getting a mount to hold the aerial at the focus, which was 120 odd feet above the ground. And if we could... it might be easier if we could get a tubular steel mast to do this. And he... I can remember him saying, 'Now, well, you know, that is exactly the sort of problem that my Department would like to help with'.
And so that is how we procured from Coubro, a firm called Coubro and Sutton, or Coubro and Scutton  a tubular steel mast, which was held by a series of stays, which we could mount at the dipole as the focus of this paraboloid. That contact, particularly with Cooborough and Scutton, and the person from there, who came to see us, by the name of Roberts, became of great importance later on, as I will mention. Anyhow, that time, that solved our problem of the focus, and the plan was we build a small array of dipoles on a wooden pole, and, using a Bosun's chair, would send to the top of the steel mast, and push the wooden pole into the mast, and then the cable would come down to our receiver. The original idea was to wind about 60 gauge wire around the catenarys held in these posts radiating from the centre, to form the reflecting surface. And since our wavelength was, as I say, four metres, it was not necessary to make these very close, and I think the original spacing was about four inches. I know that originally we intended to make a mesh, but I don't think we ever did that.
In the end, we were content with just one ring, separated by about four inches, right from the centre of this, rising to the circular poles. And the winding of that wire... there was 16 miles of it, we hired our families to wind the wire around where they could reach from the ground, and at higher levels we drove around a van, and from the top of this van we would wind the wire as the van slowly rotated... drove around underneath the paraboloid. I believe that it was... I believe that it was 1948, in the autumn of 1948, when we had completed this. It might sound a long time, but you have to remember that we were spending a lot of our time trying to teach in the university as well as operating at this place, Jodrell Bank. And I think in one of my notes, it was in October, of that year, that I first connected the transmitter to this 218 foot telescope, and hoping to observe new types of echoes, which could be associated with the large cosmic ray air showers. I don't think that much happened. I believe I observed a few echoes, but nothing of sufficient encouragement to make me believe that this was... these were anything to do with the cosmic ray phenomenon.

At that time, I had my first research student, who came to work for a higher degree, and he was a young man called Victor Hughes, and he used the receiving part of this device simply to record the intensity as the Earth rotated across the heavens. And he produced this wonderful picture of the variation of intensity as the broad beam of this telescope swept across the heavens, and as it did so, the intensity in the region of the constellation of Cygnus reached a very prominent maximum, even although the sensitivity of the equipment was of a very low order. Now, simultaneously Hey had used this equipment when the war had ended, and filling in time from Richmond to carry on the observations of what became known as the Cosmic Radio Emissions from Space, and we were clearly repeating his observations, and then this completely changed our outlook on the telescope.

The Transit Telescope became an excellent instrument, but not for the purpose of which we built it. I think the time... I'm now talking about 1949, and I had a telephone call from FC Williams, who was then developing his computers in Manchester, and whom I'd worked with during the war, and he asked me if I remembered Hanbury Brown. Well, of course, I remembered Hanbury Brown, and he said, 'Well, Hanbury Brown wants to come back', and... he had left the organisation after the war, and was then working with Watson Watt on a commercial development. But he wanted to come back and complete his studies in the university, which he had left in 1938, in order to help EG Bowen with the development of radar. It was airborne interception. And FC Williams kindly said that he thought that Hanbury Brown might be more useful and more interested in what I was doing than what he was doing on his computers. I mentioned this to Blackett, and Blackett was very keen to supply me with students when he saw that we were beginning to developed, and we obtained for Hanbury Brown an ICI Fellowship.
So it was in that way that Hanbury Brown came to me, and his presence in the next few years was absolutely vital to the development of Jodrell. He came to me, and I suggested... I showed him the Transit Telescope, I showed him the results, which had been obtained by Victor Hughes, and I said, 'Would he like to take over that instrument and use it for the study of the cosmic radiation from space?' He did so, and he acquired another research student, Cyril Hazard, and together they started work on equipping this Transit Telescope with a suitable radio receiver. Hanbury Brown was then one of really one of the world's experts on electronics, and so the building of sensitive receivers was of no problem to him whatsoever, and he produced an excellent receiver. I think we were then working on a wavelength of about 160 megahertz or 200 megahertz, in that order, anyhow.

He began these observations of the radiation from space, which had been discovered by Jansky in 1930, '31, and had really only been studied much further by Reber, in America during the war. All that was known then was that from somewhere in the galaxy, radio waves were being emitted. Hey, in his work, had located the general distribution of these radio emissions, this radio emission from space, and had indicated that there might be some specialised sources of it in the galaxy, and the only thing we knew then was that the main radiation appeared to be emanating from somewhere in the galaxy. Hanbury Brown and Hazard discovered that by laboriously slackening and tightening the stays, which held the tubular mast to the telescope, they could change the direction of the beam up to about 15 degrees from the zenith. And so, by great good fortune, the great spiral of the... in Andromeda M31, one of our nearest nebulae passed through the beam, within that region of space, and it was their work, which I must say, it was unbelievably laborious because they had to work under frantic conditions in slackening this aerial and changing it, changing the beam. But they did produce a complete map of the sky covering about plus or minus 15 degrees from the zenith. And in that gap, they isolated the radiation from the Andromeda Nebula M31. Now, this was, I believe, almost certainly, the first proof the at least some of the cosmic radiation was emanating form outside the galaxy. I think this paper was published in 1950, '51.

I must now begin the story of the steerable radio telescope. With that even, with Hughes' map of the galaxy, it suddenly became clear to me that it would be marvellous if we could have a telescope of the size of the 218 foot Transit Telescope, which we could direct to any part of the sky. It seemed that we would stand much more chance, we knew very little about the great cosmic ray air showers, what effect the specular reflection would have, and whether it would be more profitable for us to look at lower elevation than in the zenith. And one day, with some trepidation, I mentioned this to Blackett, and I thought he would think it was a crazy idea that we would be able to build a telescope of that size, and move about and direct to any part of the sky. On the contrary, he was... became immediately excited. He was always, as I might have said earlier, fascinated by anything to do with the exploration of the universe, and having been possessed, as we all were, by the quite unknown... quite unknown where these enormous energies of the cosmic rays, not the cosmic radio emission, the cosmic rays, emanated in the universe. And he simply said to me, 'Well, look, if you can find somebody who could, might be interested and capable of building such a telescope, we'll think about it'.
And I think it was in 1949 that I first made some enquiries. Now, it didn't seem to me then to be all that difficult. I remember I had been putting six foot aerials under the fuses of the bombers, and flying them at 30,000 feet, and I thought, well, if it was possible to do that, surely it would be much easier to build a very large telescope fixed on the ground? I'm afraid I was mistaken. My initial enquiries to some of the firms that I'd been engaged with during the war received a very negative response. The responses were of two kinds; either that they were too busy on work of national importance, or that it was impossible to build the sort of instrument that I had in mind.
Then I had the idea of approaching Sisson, who was then the Head of the Grubb Parsons Newcastle works, dealing with the manufacture of telescope mirrors, and in fact, he had constructed most of the telescope mirrors of... which were then working in various parts of the world. Now, Sisson, he came to see me at Jodrell Bank because I had got to know him pretty well, and for other reasons, and I told him what I had in mind, but I said, 'You know, so far people say it's impossible. And he said, 'No, I don't think it's impossible'. And I said, 'Well, are you and your firm, Grubb Parsons, will be interested in looking into this?' And he said, 'No, we couldn't do... we're not equipped to build that sort of instrument'. He said, 'But we will be very interested in making the control system for you'. He said, 'But on the other hand, I do know a firm who might well be interested in your project'.

This was the firm of Head Wrightson. So I got into touch with Head Wrightson. Got an immediate response. They had a Special Projects Department, at Slough, and the man in charge was a man called Dean. So I got in touch with Mr Dean, and went to see him, and told him what I wanted, and he said, 'Oh yes, we're very interested in that. We'll look into it'. And he eventually produced a beautiful model of a 200... I think it was a 230, 230 foot telescope, and he said, 'Would you like to come and see it?' So I went to see it, and then I said, 'Do you mind if I bring Professor Blackett to see it because I'm very dependent on him for progressing with this sort of thing?'
Well, now Dean's telescope was built in aluminium. It was... his model on the desk was beautiful to look at, and I, one day, arranged to meet Blackett in London and take him to Slough. That afternoon was an utter disaster. Blackett took an instant dislike to Dean, and particularly when he asked how much the telescope would cost, so far we'd been talking about £50,000, and Dean said, 'Well, of course, you know, there's a mass of aluminium in this telescope. I'm afraid it will cost maybe £200,000'. And so the... that was the end of that day, and Blackett was rather annoyed with me, but we arranged for Dean to come, a few months later, to Jodrell Bank, and discuss with us the possibility of reducing the size of the telescope, to making it more economical.
Then another awful thing happened. On a summer's day, I'd arranged for Dean and Blackett to meet at Jodrell Bank. Well, Blackett turned up, on the time arranged. Dean never appeared. He... and Blackett left as an angry man. He was very busy and he was not particularly pleased at being brought out to Jodrell Bank on what he then thought was a fool's enterprise. It was some time before I found out what had happened. Head Wrightson had closed their Special Projects Department at Slough, and had disposed of Dean. Now, I know nothing of those details, but I was told by the people in Head Wrightson that I should have had a letter, explaining to me that their Special Projects Department no longer existed. I do not recall every having... ever had the letter. In any case, that was the end of the... my contact with Head Wrightson, and with the Special Projects Department and Dean, and it was a very, very bad beginning to my idea of building a steerable telescope.
In the mean time, I had asked Roberts from Coubro and Sutton, Coubro and Sutton, I think it was, who had supplied us with the tubular steel mast for the 218 foot telescope, if his firm would be interested in building such a telescope. So he came to see me again, and said he had consulted with his firm, and they were unable to undertake such a project, but on the other hand, they were well in touch with a consulting engineer, Husband, of Sheffield, and he might well be interested. So I arranged for Roberts to bring Husband to see me at Jodrell Bank, and it was in September of 1949 that Husband appeared at Jodrell Bank. And I remember standing with him under the surface of the Transit Telescope, and he said to me, 'What is it that you want?' And I said, 'Well, I want a telescope of this size, of at least this size, mounted so that we could steer it to any part of the heavens. Is it possible?' And Husband said, 'Well, I don't know. It's about the same problem as building a swing bridge over the Thames'. And that was the beginning of the 250ft radio telescope.

What I did not then know is that Husband had been engaged in the war with the Ministry of Supply, and after the war had set up, his father was a Professor of Engineering in the University of Sheffield, and Husband had set up a consulting firm in Sheffield and that he was an expert on building bridges. In fact, when the bridge over the Menai Strait was subsequently destroyed in a fire, Husband was immediately sent for... and rebuilt that bridge, which is just now.
Anyhow, I reported this to Blackett, and Husband... we asked Husband how much he thought the project would cost, and he said, well, without a proper investigation it was difficult to say, but he thought it might be in the region of 50 or £100,000. So Blackett said, 'I think my instinct would have then have been to go to the DSIR and ask for some money', but Blackett had different ideas, he said, 'Look here, if you're going to engage in a project of this magnitude, you'll get a negative straightaway if you do that'. He said, 'You must do two things. You must get everybody in the country, who has any interest in astronomy, to back this project. And in particular you must persuade the Astronomer Royal', who was then Sir Harold Spencer-Jones, and in those days, the Astronomer Royal was a person of great astronomy... of great authority, in anything to do with astronomy.
And so I did two things. I asked the Royal Astronomical Society if they would have a special meeting, and they persuaded Martin Ryle, who was beginning his developments in radio astronomy at Cambridge, and JS Hey, who was then moving from the Army Operation Research Group to Malvern, to attend. And we were asked to explain each of our proposed developments in this new science of radio astronomy, which had in fact only just been named as radio astronomy. I think I had referred to it in an article in The Guardian, in 1948. And we... at this meeting, in Burlington House, we each put forward our plans. Now, Hey was not interested, because he had moved to another project in Malvern, and Ryle was interested in building his own interferometer in Cambridge, and so I got complete support in a minute from the Royal Astronomical Society recommending this project be explored.

I went to... I think at that stage, I did two things. I first of all went to see Sir Ben Lockspeiser, who was the Chairman of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, and it's... at some stage he said, 'Well, look here, how much is this going to cost?' And I said, 'We don't know, it might be £50,000, £100,000'. And he said, 'Well, look here, young man, I'll give you a small sum of money, and go away and find out how much it really would cost', a very wise statement.
At the same time... and so we then employed Husband to do a proper design study of this telescope, and I... which we had then agreed should be 250 feet in diameter. At about that same time, Blackett said, 'Now, we must get together the Astronomer Royal, Sir Harold Spencer-Jones, and the Astronomer Royal of Scotland, and Sir Edward Appleton', who had one of the foremost scientist, he had formerly been associated with the government administration of scientific research, and I had got to know him during the war. He had come to see some of my work. He had just been appointed Principal and Vice Chancellor of the University of Edinburgh.
And it was agreed that in order to obtain support for my project, Appleton agreed to hold a meeting in his rooms in Edinburgh. And one winter's day, in February, we assembled there – it was Blackett, Graves, who was the Astronomer Royal of Scotland, Spencer-Jones, and Hey, and Ryle sent his apologies, but nevertheless gave his support, and Ellison, who was then the Secretary of the Royal Astronomical Society, and one or two other people – and we explained to... I had sent a memorandum and circulated the memorandum on what the telescope might do, based on the work which I was supposed to do on the cosmic ray air showers, but also, then, picking up that threads of the cosmic radiation, which was then being rapidly developed, the study of which was then rapidly developing. I had also made calculations on the possibility of studying the moon and the nearer planets by radar, and we... Appleton said, 'Now, we will go around the table, and hear what everybody thinks of this project, and what's it going to do'. And we did that, and as the... we rotated again to the Chairman, Appleton, I held my breath, as to what he was going to say, and he said a most remarkable thing. He said, 'Well, I'm impressed by what Lovell says that he might be able to do with this telescope'. He said, 'But I am even more impressed by the future discoveries, which such an instrument might make'.
Well, that was an amazing statement. So we had at that time full authority, all the authority we could get for building this instrument. The question arose as to... Blackett warned me, on going to that meeting, he said, 'Now, look, remember, you are proposing to build a telescope for the country, not for yourself at Jodrell Bank. So just bear that in mind when you speak'. So I said, to the meeting, I said, 'This is a project for the United Kingdom', and the reaction was immediate. If we're going to build a telescope, we should build it where you're working, because, you know, you're the person who wants it. So that's how the telescope became eventually sited at Jodrell Bank, which was then, in fact, regarded as quite a good site, both climatically, and there was no electricity supply anywhere near it and very little traffic.

Now, the sequence of events then are really very confused, and they cover the years from about 1950 to about 1952. Husband was given a contract to make a design study of this telescope. My specification was perfectly straightforward, that it should be a paraboloid with a mesh of four, with a bowl... a reflecting bowl with a mesh of four inches, and that it should be rotatable, so that it could be moved to any part of the sky. So the beam could be directed at any part of the sky. Husband got his father to – who was then the Professor of Engineering in Sheffield – to make a sketch of what was possible. And in fact that... the original of that sketch is hanging in the room from which I'm speaking at the moment. It shows quite a marked resemblance to... with many... much imagination of what eventually evolved.
Now, the various estimates as to how much was this was cost... this would cost, began to increase. I think first of all it was somewhere in the order of £100,000. Then various modifications, which I put in, and which Husband put in, increased the cost, until in 1952 I finally applied to the DSIR for the construction of this radio telescope at a cost of £300 and... I think it was £330,000.
Well, now, now this was in 1951. In 1951, I submitted this application with what became known as the Blue Book. And compared with the glossy and expensive publications, which would accompany such an application today, this was a book, which we had stencilled on... ourselves, on paper, and contained a number of chapters by myself and by Clegg. I wrote on what it would do, Clegg wrote, and I then had JG Davis working with me, and he wrote on the possibility of control mechanism. Now, this Blue Book... a few copies still exist, and it must be rather precious, I think, because we circulated about two dozen copies, which we had hand stencilled at Jodrell Bank, and got somebody to bind. Now, I do not know the exact proceedings, which went on behind the scenes, after DSIR received this application. The plain fact is that I was asking for a very, very large sum of money. And I do not want to constantly repeat this figure, but any sums I might mention now, compared with today's prices – I'm talking about 2007 – you have to multiply by a factor of something between 25 and 30, just to allow for the official index for the increased cost of living and so on. So in asking for £330,000, in 1951, it was the equivalent to asking for several million pounds today.

Now, the point about the DSIR is that I have made many appearances before their Council in dealing with this instrument, and explaining what it was. And now on that Council is one of the... my good fortunes. There are people, Chairman had been with me in the war, and many of the other members of the Council had been in my group during the war. The sort of thing, you see, that could not happen today. And the Council of the DSIR... they were quite keen on getting on with this project, but they simply did not have the money. I mean, they were used to giving grants of £1,000, not of £300,000.
And then there was another piece of good fortune. Sir Henry Tizard, who, of course, we've already mentioned in connection with the development of radar in the war, he... after being deposed during the war, he was reinstated to favour in the Attlee Government, and became the Director of, I think... the Scientific Director of the country's work, more or less. And he... he became involved in this, and I remember him saying to me, or writing to me, and saying that... warning me, you know, that it might not be possible or find the money to build this telescope.
The reason for my good relations with Tizard go back a long way. After I'd graduated in Bristol in 1936, I was demonstrating in the laboratory, and I was demonstrating to a young man, this young man turned out to be the son of Sir Henry Tizard. And it just so happened the at the time, Tyndall was showing Tizard around the laboratory, and from that moment, Tizard, right throughout the war, and thereafter, had always been a very keen supporter, and a great friend.
Now, Tizard had warned me that this project might be beyond the capability of finance by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. Then another piece of good fortune happened. Our Vice Chancellor was Sir John Stopford; he became Lord Stopford, a very eminent medical man, a Fellow of the Royal Society, who understood science and the scientific development. And by the sheerest of good fortune, he was then the Chairman of the Nuffield Foundation, and this led to negotiations between the Nuffield Foundation and the DSIR, and in the beginning of 1952, they had agreed to share the cost of building this telescope. And it was on... at Easter of 1952 that Blackett had said to me a few days earlier, 'I think you're through'. And at Easter I received an official letter from the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, and I hope that letter still exists in the archives, but I'm afraid I can't be sure of that. The letter... I remember it vividly. It agreed to provide this money for the construction of this radio telescope, but it made the condition that they would expect me to stay in my post at the university to see the job through. That may seem remarkable now, but in fact there had been a number of examples, particularly in the development of high energy and nuclear machines, in which one or two individuals had obtained money, large sums of money, to build accelerators for nuclear work, and then left their posts and gone elsewhere. Well, I had of course, in any case no intention of leaving before the job was completed, and so the warning to me, or the request to me, was quite unnecessary. Anyhow, it's interesting that it was made, in this official letter. In 1952, we were free to proceed, in... from Easter of 1952 we had authority to proceed.

We started, first of all, with land trouble. I wanted to build the telescope where it is now. The land did not belong to us, so we proceeded to bore for the foundations, first of all in what is now the car park, belonging to the Science Centre, next to the Arboretum, and then into a part of the Arboretum. I had involved, or got involved, in a severe dispute with the owners of the farm who owned that piece of land. The university were willing to buy it, the old lady who owned the farm was living – and the son, one of her five sons – was living with her, and using... and doing the farming. She died, and the opportunity arose for buying this farm, but the details are not really relevant to this story, because it's a not infrequent dispute between the ownership and who we were going to pay the money from the five brothers, and so on.
Anyhow, we eventually got a High Court decision that the university could buy this field. They did so, and in September of 1952 loads of machinery began to arrive at Jodrell Bank, and the piling began for the foundations. The first thing that happened is the farmer threw all the mechanism back over the hedge and put a bull in the field. That was the sort of attitude in which the foundations began for the radio telescope. The piling of the telescope began without incident, and I... The one trouble that arose was that the previous borings made by Husband in the area of the car park showed that the depth of the piling would go down to about 80 feet before it reached Keuper Marl. I ought to say the preliminary study had shown that the top foot or so was soil and clay, and then there was running sand until one reached the ancient Keuper Marl.
Now, the... when we came to build the 320 foot track foundations for the, for the 320 foot track for the radio telescope, we found that indeed the Keuper Marl was reached at one part of the diameter at about 80 feet, but alas, the Keuper Marl then sloped steeply, and we had to go down to over 100 feet the other side. This led to the first increase in the cost of the telescope, but that was not of great significance. It was regarded as being acceptable, and we were left, after about a year or so, with a ring of concrete, six foot reinforced concrete, built on a bed of 160 piles, going down to the Keuper Marl, on which was to be a double railway track, to carry the load of the telescope. So, in 1953 or thereabouts, we were left with a muddy site, a ring of concrete, which had cost us something like £100,000. But no one was particularly worried about that.

United Steel Company had been employed to manufacture the steel for the telescope, and I... there is... I had the instinct to dictate every day a day-to-day diary of the proceedings in that year and thereafter, and that diary still exists in my office at Jodrell Bank. It's a great thick book of typescript, if anybody's ever interested to review what happened in those years.
In 1953, the building began. The trouble was that no cranes existed of... sufficient to deal with the mass of steel and the height of steel, which were being involved. So Husband had arranged to build his own cranes on a series of gantries. He first built one big gantry, using an available crane of about 20 or 30 foot high. And on this he mounted that crane to build another crane on another gantry, until he got a crane on a huge, massive scaffolding, which could be rotated and... around the circumference of the telescope, and which would be capable of handling masses of steel to a height of 180 feet or thereabouts.
Now, of course that was a problem in those days. Today it would be no problem. Such cranes for commanding such heights and loads are very easy to obtain. It's just indicative, though, of the difficulties, the engineering difficulties, which were faced, of... which were entirely unforeseen in the original estimates for building this telescope. The work continued. The scaffolding was erected, and first of all, the great concrete block for the central pivot had also been supported on reinforced concrete to the Keuper Marl, and the central bearing was to carry a diametrical girder on which the outrigging bogies bearing the main structure could be rotated. But the only actual location of the telescope to the ground was by the central pivot. It was to move freely, on its bogies, on the 320 foot double railway track. The details, day by day details, of the construction are recorded in my book. It would be quite unnecessary to go into the details now, except in general that the steel work, I'd been taken to Scunthorpe, and where I actually saw the great masses of steel pouring out of the furnaces, which were then welded into the girders for the telescope.
By 1950... nothing much happened in 1953, until in 1954 the structure began to ascend, the diametrical girder had been constructed, and the two towers, now known as Green Tower and Red Tower, had moved to a height of 20 to 30 feet. It was at that time in late 1953 and 1954 that I wanted the design, I made a change in the design, and the reason for that change was a purely astronomical one. The telescope that was being built had an open mesh bowl of four inches.
Now, in... I think it was 1952, 1953, the... what was a remarkable discovery of a prediction made during the war by van de Hulst and Oort hiding in secret from the Germans, in Holland, they had worked out that there should be a high frequency spectral line from neutral hydrogen, and this might be detectable on the wavelength of 21 centimetres. Well, at about this time, the exact date, I'm... it was '52 or thereabouts, simultaneously in Holland, in Australia and in America, the work on the attempt to detect this important spectral line from neutral hydrogen had succeeded, and there was in fact a simultaneous publication in Nature from these three sources about the discovery of the neutral hydrogen line. Now, of course, this was recognised to be of immediate importance in the attempts to unravel the nature of the galaxy, and it was evident to me that a telescope with a diameter, with a mesh of four metres would be no good on this wavelength or frequency. You must recall that I was still primarily interested in long wavelengths, because of the cosmic ray air showers. And so I asked Husband to change the mesh, to first of all the smaller diameter and then to make the inside internal 100 foot diameter of the telescope, I think it's a mesh of an inch or two inches, so that at least the centre 100 foot could be used on a wavelength of 21 centimetres. This, of course, increased the windage, and led to the introduction of a considerable strengthening of the bowl support, and at that time the idea was to build the bowl by a series of girders moving out from a cylindrical axis moving between the two towers. That was all right. The redesign was made with this girder stretching between the tops of the two towers and both carrying, this single, massive girder carrying the structure of the bowl, and the deflections were then calculated to be quite compatible with the new accuracy on which I wanted the telescope to work.

When this was... the cost of this was worked out, we ran into our first financial crisis. The trouble was not only that the redesign had cost a lot of extra money, but the cost of erecting steel, which had begun, which had been about £80 for a ton, had begun to rise sharply, so in any case, the original costs of £330,000 would be quite inadequate. Now, that did not cause a great deal of trouble. I... first of all, the DSIR were quite used to dealing with increases of costs, just sheer increases of costs, and the particular factor that the cost of erecting had gone up from £80 to something like £90 for a ton was not of particular importance in this increased cost. What I had asked to do so, though, was... and it became desperate, as I say, to save money, I did so at that stage by abolishing the original idea of making access to the focus.
We... when we had discussed how we would make access to the focus of this telescope, the bowl was to be... to have the focus in the aperture plane, that is the focus was to be carried on a steel tube rising up from the apex of bowl, a quarter of the diameter, that's 62 and a half feet. We had decided that the – in consultation with Husband – the easiest way of doing this was to have an arrangement where we could invert the bowl, and reach the focus by having a movable structure on the diametrical girder, moving on a track, which would... we would invert the bowl, and then drive this tower out to the centre of the telescope and climb up the tower, and have easy access to the focus. Husband never liked this idea. I'm never quite sure why. After all, the tower was to be quite high. He was probably a bit worried about the safety of working at this height on a slender tower running on the diametric girder. Anyhow, I said, 'Look, I'm going to save £20,000 or £30,000 by abandoning this idea. We will... instead we will have an arrangement that we will lower the tubular steel mast to the ground. We will invert the bowl and have a device to lower the tubular steel mast to the ground, and we will change the focus and then that is that'. So we did overcome this 1954 financial crisis without too much trouble.

So the construction of the telescope proceeded, and then in 1955, a series of great troubles emerged. 1955, as far as I remember, opened fairly calmly, the bogies began to arrive, the centre pivot was in position, the two towers rising from this diametric girder had been assembled nearly to the height of the trunnion bearings, and all orders had been placed for the trunnion bearings and so on. Well, in 1955, two or three things happened, which led to deep troubles.
I was... It’s difficult now to not interweave several things that were now occupying me. I ought to say that in... shortly after we began the construction of the telescope, I had a letter from Sir Harold Spencer-Jones, whose support had been absolutely vital in making it possible to begin the building of the telescope. And the letter surprised me. It ran something like this. 'Dear Lovell, I am the Chairman...' This is the Astronomer Royal writing to me. He said, 'Dear Lovell, I am the Chairman of the Aero Navigation Committee of the Department of...' I've forgotten what it was called them, it changed so much, anyway it was the Department of Defence. And now what could I do? I had left TRE five or six years earlier and I had hoped that I would be... entirely concentrate on the defence and war behind me. Unfortunately, or fortunately, it happened to not be the case, and the calls was this letter I received from the Astronomer Royal. He had said, 'We need your help'. And there was every reason for them to think that I could be helpful, even if I couldn't be, because I had been very much associated in those critical years of the war, with the device, which was not only a bombing device, but an accurate navigational device. So I had, the only decent thing I could do, was to... Spencer-Jones had helped me, was to agree to help him.
Now, that began my association, during the construction of the telescope, with an entirely different matter. I mean, first of all I served for quite a long time, on Spencer-Jones’ Committee. I became his Vice-Chairman, and then I became the Chairman. I was then asked to join the Air Warfare Committee belonging to the Ministry of Defence, and there were various reasons put to me again that I could not refuse. And then also the Aeronautical Research Council itself, so I was heavily diverted, and spent much time in London, as well as at Jodrell.
Now, during that period, and at about 1955, I was asked to see the Scientific Advisor to the Air Ministry. He was Coburn, whom had been... I knew... I had known very well during the war because he had been head of the Countermeasures Division in TRE. And I... when he... his office was then opposite the Houses of Parliament, and I said I would call on him on my way home from a meeting of the Royal Astronomical Society, on a Friday afternoon, but I had to be at Euston to catch a train at six o'clock, or something like that. I went to see Coburn, in this office. He had a splendid view of the Houses of Parliament and of Big Ben. And as he told me the hands of the clock crept round, and I simply could not leave him, what he was telling me, and what he was asking. I lost that train and many subsequent ones.
His request was, in essence, very simple, but very worrying. He told me that they had information from their agents that the Soviets were well advanced on the development of ballistic missile, and that there was absolutely no means in the West of detecting the launching of such a missile. And that he asked me to make modifications to the telescope, which was being built, so that in any emergency this could be used to help the West in the detection of the missile. Now, I said, 'Well, Coburn, I'm sorry, I'm willing to help, but what you’re asking is impossible. We're already in debt, and who is going to pay for this?' And he said, 'There'll be no problem'. He said, 'The Air Ministry will bear the cost of the alterations you're being asked to make'.
So I returned to Jodrell Bank. I immediately got hold of Husband, and I said, 'Look, for various reasons I want to change the design of the bowl. And I want to change the... some aspects of the driving system'. So he said, 'What do you want?' I said, 'The first thing I want to do is to make the telescope operate on a much higher frequency'. And I said, 'This means reducing the mesh to something like half an inch', and so that was that. I had acquainted with the Vice Chancellor of this contact, in general outline. Well, that was one thing, which led to the drama of 1955, and the trouble was made much worse by two other factors.

I will deal with the strengthening of the bowl, to begin with, which was a major factor. I had asked for really the whole bowl to be made of small mesh to increase the efficiency of the telescope on a very much higher frequency of which it had ever been originally designed. Now, the trouble was that the use of such a small mesh, you had to then to assume that the bowl would become completely opaque to any storms, and this led to a profound change in the design of the whole structure, which was to be elevating. Instead of building the bowl on a cantilever stretching between the two trunnions on the top of the 180 foot towers, we had to reside, in putting on this extra loading, there was no further point in strengthening the cantilever because it was itself then not strong enough to bear what we were asking. In other words, we were in a fix. So Husband's answer was the one that now exists, that was for us to redo, to do away with the cantilever and build the cylindrical structure, which is now the foundation of the telescope, and exists. And thank heavens this happened, otherwise the telescope would have been no good by this time. Now, the other thing... That of course led to considerable increase in cost, but I was not particularly worried about that because I had assured both the Vice Chancellor and Husband that the Air Ministry would meet this extra cost.
Now, two other things happened in that year. First of all, we had obtained from Metropolitan-Vickers an estimate of, I think, about £30,000 or £40,000 for the manufacture of the bogies, and for the manufacture of the electrical system, which was going to be a metadye system, to drive the telescope. And when Husband asked them for an estimate, in 1955, to our amazement, the cost, which they had previously given of £40,000, turned out to be at least double.
That was not the end of our troubles. I had given a lecture at a National Physical Laboratory, and after the lecture, this man called Saxton, who was the Aerodynamics expert came to me, and said, 'Lovell, have you...', he said, 'You've tested your design in the wind tunnel, have you?' And I said, 'Oh yes, it's perfectly all right. We have the... the structure will be safe to wind speeds of 80 miles per hour, which, according to the Meteorological Records, is the highest which can ever be contemplated on a Cheshire Plain'. He said, 'Yes', but he said, 'Have you heard about the disaster, which has afflicted the Tacoma Bridge, over Washington State?' So I had heard nothing about this disaster.
Now, the Tacoma Bridge across the... across Washington State had been built to withstand quite high winds, but it had recently been completely destroyed in quite low wind speeds, with... of a certain frequency. In other words, it's all right for a steady wind, of... that bridge was all right for a steady wind of maybe 80 or 100 mph, but with wind speeds as low as 30 or 40, with certain types of gusts, it was wrecked. And Saxton produced a film of this happening, and it was horrible to see the build... bridge suddenly twisting and then fracturing in the middle. So I reported this to Husband, and he was severely displeased because, you know, he severely, like I, and like many other people, had not yet heard of this disaster. So he said, 'Well, there is only one thing we must do. We must build a small scale model, a tenth scale model of the telescope, and we will simulate the driving racks and trunnions with springs, and we will take them to the wind tunnel at MPL, the low speed wind tunnel, and see what happens'. So we did this.
And the result was alarming. At high, steady wind speeds, the structure was perfectly stable. The steady wind speed was then reduced, and gusts, simulated gusts, were put in. Oh! With low wind speeds of 30 or 40 mph, and with certain types of gusts, which are normally associated with those wind speeds, the whole structure of the connection of the bowl to the trunnion bearings was shattered. You know, this was a most alarming situation. So in other words, these gusts were making the bowl oscillate and thereby wrecking, in those cases, the springs, but they would certainly have wrecked, in practice, the great gun racks on which we were proposing to move the telescope. So those were three major troubles that beset us in 1955.

I'll first of all deal with the problem of the oscillations of the bowl. I was, of course, in constant daily contact with Husband, either in Sheffield, or he would come to Jodrell Bank. And the various problems were solutions were thought. We first of all... Husband thought we could put additional loading on the ends of the... near the trunnians to stop this, but the final solution was to build a circular, stabilising girder running from the extreme diameters of the bowl, and to build on top of the diametrical girder an enormous... well, not enormous, it was a very large system of hydraulic rubber wheels, like great tractor wheels, on which this stabilising girder would rest, and would move, and this would take out the oscillations. And this is how the telescope was, in fact, built, with this rather slender, stabilising girder, not load-bearing, but stabilising, and later on the drainage, it also included a method of draining the bowl. It had an internal channel through which holes in the bowl would take the water, and they would overflow on to a trench drain around the diametrical girder.
Now, of course, this led to a considerable increase in cost. The other trouble was that the... I mentioned the Metropolitan-Vickers estimate for the driving system had doubled, and, worst of all, when the project was put to the Air Ministry, when the Scientific Advisor, they had refused to pay because... not because they were not willing to do so... I mean, they... the Air Ministry in principle were fine. The point is that someone in the Treasury had spotted that two different... two different parts of government were about to give money to the same project, namely the Air Ministry and the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, and they absolutely refused to do this. And so by the end of 1955, we were facing an enormous debt. In fact, in the autumn of that year, when the Bursar and Husband had investigated in what detail they could, we were faced with a deficit of the order of a quarter of a million pounds, and bearing in mind what I said about, that was a vast sum of money in those days, as it would be today.
So the Chief Finance Officer of the DSIR was brought to Jodrell, and I remember taking him into the control room, and I said, 'You know, I thought they would cancel the project', and I said, 'It was a chap called Joliffe, whom I knew, got to know very well, later on', and I said, 'Well, what are you going to do?' He turned to me he said, 'I don't know, Lovell'... he said, 'I don't know, Lovell, but the strength of your position is that huge mass of steel that I'm looking at through the window'. Because these towers were then at 180 foot level. Well, what actually happened was that he had in mind that there should be a pound for pound discussion, and that he... that it might be possible for the government department to pay half the costs if the university would be responsible for bearing the other half of the cost.

1956 opened in a most awful way, although I must say, worse was still to come. The condition, before any further progress could be made, was that there should be a Committee of Enquiry, under an independent Chairman, and this was convened to be held in the university, on... I think between January 18th and 19th, in 1956. Husband and I were summoned too, of course, to attend this meeting. The original Chairman was to be a retired Admiral, who, when he was informed of the details, he asked to be excused, and in the end, the Vice Chancellor of the university, who was then Professor Mansfield-Cooper, agreed to take the Chair.
It was my very great good fortune that on the Committee were people, whom, again, through my wartime experience, that I had known. One was Smith-Rose, who was then a very important figure in the Radio Research Board arm of the government, and the other was the aeronautics engineer who had told me about the Tacoma Bridge disaster. And I, in fact, had much scientific, and indeed, moral support on that committee. The members of the committee came to Jodrell on January 16th, I think. And on 17th and 18th, Husband and I waited in an ante room, the first day, and the second day, and we were independently summoned, to be... answer the questions from this Committee. There was then much agonising meeting because the final decision was that the university wished to complete the building of the telescope. This was a tremendous act of faith on the part of the university because they themselves were going to be involved with finding a very, very large sum of money.
But anyhow, with all this uncertainty, nothing seemed to stop the building of the telescope. The trunnion towers were completed, the great gun racks were put in position, and the trunnion bearings, and 19 miles of scaffolding were erected round the telescope on which the 16 cantilevers of the new, redesigned bowl were to be held. And so, while all these discussions about who was going to bear this enormous extra cost went on, the building of the telescope went on without interruption, and it became extremely exciting, in 1956, which opened in this disastrous way, one could see the great bowl of the telescope steadily taking place, supported by this huge mass of scaffolding around the perimeter.

1957, the critical year opened with work still proceeding on the telescope, the plating of the bowl having been begun, and then some of the 19 miles of scaffolding being removed so that we could test the elevation drive of the telescope. And that was indeed a very exciting moment, some time in the early summer of 1957, when we first decided to try the tilting of the bowl. And it was a lovely summer's day, and I remember that the great, general alarm then, was of the enormous number of young birds that had been disturbed, and were flying away from the telescope, because this great structure had been used for the building of many nests by many types of birds.
Anyhow, in 1957 it progressed, and in August, I went with Hanbury Brown to a meeting of the International Scientific Radio and... URSI in Colorado. And we arrived back at Jodrell in mid-September to find everything stationary. The bowl was... the plating of the bowl was, I think, three quarters, but there was a great rim near the edge incomplete. The people doing that were on strike. Every other bit of work on the telescope was ceased, because the money had run out to pay the contractors. I remember saying to... And we were being blasted by the press because the contractors had informed them that we were bankrupt, and that this great structure, of which nobody knew what it was going to be used for, had run into serious debt. I said to Hanbury, 'I'm afraid, Hanbury, we need a miracle to save us'.
Well, a few weeks later, that miracle happened. With the telescope stationery, and with months of work to be, apparently to be done on it, the Russians, the Soviets launched their Sputnik on October 4th 1957. Now, I really had no intention of doing anything about the... First of all, the bleep... bleep from the Sputnik was easy to pick up, anybody could do it with a simple receiver, until I had a telephone call from London, and the message was straightforward, 'Please, could you try to detect the carrier rocket with your telescope?' There is nowhere else in the Western world capable of doing this. And this was the... the carrier rocket was, of course, the world's first intercontinental ballistic missile.

We attended a lecture by Hagen about the proposal to launch a small earth satellite for the International Geophysical Year. It had been... 1957 or 1958 had been the year of sunspot maximum, and I had, in fact, been associated with the committees which had decided to use every possible means to follow the International Geophysical year of the 1930s with a new venture to explore all geophysical phenomena. And to everyone's surprise, Khrushchev, in the Soviet Union, had immediately announced that they would launch an earth satellite, equipped with scientific apparatus, to do this study. And the next day Eisenhower, the United States President, said that also they would do so. Nobody... everybody believed Eisenhower, but nobody believed the Soviet Union.
Well, I had read in The New York Times, when I was at Colorado, that Khrushchev had issued a warning they had perfected a missile against which there was no defence, and I realised immediately – I had had previous information from a colleague in Moscow – that the Russians were about to test their intercontinental missile, and my astonishment was that nobody else in America seemed to have any belief that the Russians were going to do this. So I said to Hagen... after the lecture, I said, 'Hagen, you know, you were going to launch your satellite. You've now postponed it for two or three months. You're going to be beaten by the Russians. They're about to launch a satellite'. And he said, 'Oh, nonsense. They've no capability of doing so'. They had. And the consternation all over the world was enormous, particularly in America.
But to go back to the Jodrell story. I had this message from London, and I... at the same time, Jodrell, for reasons which I never understand, suddenly became full of people from the press, and the media, from everywhere, all over the world, and I had no idea why they were there. And for some reason, a dramatic event had happened by the Russians launching this Sputnik, and they seemed to think that this huge device at Jodrell would also have some purpose to play. Well, indeed I got hold of Husband and I said, 'Look, if you're prepared to persuade all the workers to come back, and complete the work on the telescope as quickly as possible, I'm prepared to have a go at detecting, not the Sputnik', I said, 'It'll be easy for me to put, use the telescope and put the receiver on and get the bleep-bleep, but I'm not going to do that. It's a waste of time. I'm willing to try to detect the missile that launched it'.
Well, the result was extraordinary. I mean, he got everybody back to work, and the... I think I then said that work, which we'd anticipated to take months, was completed in a week. The driving system, which had then been handed over to Brush, the man from Brush, came and first of all the telescope could be rotated from the Ward Leonard Room. We'd turned over to Ward Leonard system, and not a metadyne and I... but it could not be driven from the Control Room. And the Brush engineer was there, and we were standing by him, and eventually connected up the analogue computer, as it then was to drive the telescope, and it went backwards, and we sort of made a guffaw, and he immediately walked out. He said, 'I'm not going to continue to work here with all you people around'. And so, we then retired and left him to himself, and he eventually got the system to work properly.
So within a few days of this drama, we had the telescope under control, with the analogue computer form the Control Room, and I had intended to use... I will return to what had been happening on the research front later on during this period. But it happened that by that time we had a radar system capable of working, capable of detecting echoes from the moon, working on a frequency of 160, 180 megahertz, something like that. And we connected this to the telescope, and a few days after the launching of the Sputnik, we had the telescope in automatic motion, with... receiving echoes from the moon. Now, when you think of it, that was surprising. I think there was no... everybody thought that the work to be done, once, if work could be restarted, would take several weeks, and everything had been done in a few days. We then had the attempt to... made the attempt to detect the missile.

Unfortunately John Davis, who was then one of my senior colleagues, who new everything about orbits... we had asked him to go to East Germany, for a reason, which I will go back to later on, because that was entirely scientific thing concerned with fireballs and their orbits. And so, at this critical time, the one member of my staff who could have helped to decipher the orbit of the missile was away, and not... and out of communication in Eastern Germany. I had another young man, also by the name of Davis, who subsequently went to Australia with Hanbury Brown, and I had an enormous map on my wall, and we, together, with the help of pins and string, got some idea of the orbit of the missile.
And then another trouble happened. The radar apparatus, on which we were getting echoes from the moon broke down, and Jamie Evans, a brilliant young man, who was responsible for that – and I'm going to talk about his work later on – could find absolutely no reason for why it had gone wrong. So one day I was disconsolately walking down to where this apparatus was in one of the Orlit Buildings, and I was encountered by Greenhow, who had a four-metre radar system working on measuring the heights of meteors. And he produced from his pocket an envelope on which he had scribbled some calculations, and he said, 'Look here'. I said, 'What do you want?' He said, 'Look here; if you'll transfer my transmitter, my four-metre transmitter, to the top of the towers, and connect it to... and modify the telescope, I think you'll have enough sensitivity to detect this missile'. So we did that.
And the next night or so, we tried the telescope on... using this four-metre transmitter, and directed it to where we thought this missile might be. Well, we got some vague sort of echo, but it was nothing conclusive. However, on the next night, I was in the laboratory, which is something we called the radiant hut, which is where the receiving apparatus was, and suddenly, before midnight, I saw the usual number of transient echoes from meteors and so on, on the tube, and suddenly a most dramatic echo. A huge echo, starting on one side of the time base, and moved, fluctuating over, moving and moving along the time base. And fortunately, it was photographed. That was the echo of the intercontinental missile travelling over the Lake District at a speed of 17,000 miles an hour.
Now, the Jodrell – the Control Room, the Control Building – was packed with the press. You had no means of getting rid of them. And so they assembled, and we developed this photograph, and I projected it to a packed media, cameramen, newspapermen, in the small lecture room, after midnight, on that day. This wonderful echo is reproduced in many of my books. The only instrument in the Western world, which could detect the launching of the Sputnik, and the press recognised it immediately, that this was the intercontinental missile. Well, the next day, the media, instead of regarding us as wasters of money, and a wastage of public money, they reversed completely, and we became front-page news, and solutions had to be found.

The Russians had launched the Sputnik and we had succeeded in detecting the carrier rocket. Well, one factor of major importance then was that the media all over the world, they turned in our favour and instead of being critical and saying we were wasting money... Now, you, you might think that this was a very happy time. Well, I'm afraid it wasn't, for the following reason; the... the cost of building the telescope had been assessed at this meeting in January 1956. The excess cost had been assessed as being about £200,000.
Now, the... the most... most awful thing had happened at about this time. The... because... because of the money that the DSIR were putting into the telescope, the Public Accounts Committee had got hold of this problem. Now, in the ordinary course of events, this would have been quite routine and Sir Ben Lockspeiser who knew the whole story of what I've been talking about. He knew exactly what I've said about the air ministry. In fact, he was... he stayed here and... and was very sympathetic and he... he'd been kept completely in touch with all the details. Unfortunately, at this critical moment when the Public Accounts Committee decided to investigate the over expenditure, Sir Ben Lockspeiser had to retire under... just... just normal retiring age. He was succeeded by Sir Harry Melville.
Now, Sir Harry was a distinguished chemist from Birmingham and I think only a matter of week after he had taken office, it was a very short time, he had to appear before the Public Accounts Committee to answer these questions about the telescope. Well, he... he decided to come to Jodrell. He came very briefly for one afternoon, and remember he was a chemist, he wasn't an astronomer, he wasn't an engineer, and on the basis of that visit for one afternoon, he appeared before the Public Accounts Committee. The Public Accounts Committee published their report, a White Paper. It was a White Paper and incidentally we were... the inquisition with Sir Harry was over the expenditure of a small amount of money, £100,000 or thereabouts as far as DSIR were concerned and we were sandwiched between over expenditure of millions on one hand by the war office and, on the other hand, by the Royal Air Force. There's a famous cartoon by Papas in The Guardian showing... showing me with... with a begging bowl behind the images of the... of the army and the air force, walking away with their millions.
Anyhow, the great misfortune was not that we were being investigated, but that Sir Harry really knew nothing about all that... all that had happened during the telescope, and whereas Sir Ben would have dealt with these replies correctly and with great experience, Sir Harry was forced into talking about things he knew nothing about, and the evidence – much of the evidence he gave – was just... just simply wrong. For example, he... the one question was, so the professor lives on the site? Yes, he has apartments on site. You see, it was nonsense, but worst of all, he said, 'So there was no consultation between the engineer and the professor?' Sir Harry: 'No, there was no consultation'. Well, I mean... this was dynamite.
This was... this report was published in the newspapers and naturally... I mean look, you know I'd been in touch with Husband. I'd lived with him for five years and scarcely a day... and I... and I came home one day, I... I... just as this report had been published. Husband was on the telephone and he said, 'Look here, have you seen this report in the newspapers, there's been no consultation between us?' And I said, 'Yes'. He said, 'Well, do you mind writing a letter to The Times, telling them that that is not true and just explaining that we've had the fullest consultation?' Well, I started writing a letter to The Times and the... the vice chancellor was a lawyer, Mansfield... Cooper, and he said, 'Lovell, you cannot publish that letter in The Times. You are dealing with a White Paper', and he used legal language, he said the matter is sub-judice, so I was not allowed to write this letter saying that the evidence given to the Public Accounts Committee had been erroneous. That's the sort of thing that did not happen, you see. Well, Husband, of course, instead of being a friend, he became an enemy. He said, 'Oh well, look here', he said, 'You know, I... I'm... I'm a businessman', he said, 'My business would be ruined if I'm on record as having no consultation with my clients', so I said, 'Well, I'm not allowed to write this letter.' He said, 'In that case, I shall have to drag it out of you in the witness box'.

So Husband, at this, what should have been a very joyous time, proceeded to sue me for £1 million, and it sounds incredible, even talking about it now, this collaboration between us was reduced, this wonderful instrument, which at last was working, and there, the main partners in this were being thrown adrift. The university vice chancellor and his officers were in dismay. They summoned me to a dinner and the one trouble was: Mansfield-Cooper, although excellent, was a lawyer and was looking at all this from a legal point of view, and as the dinner closed after everything was taken apart, the conclusion was that the... the vice chancellor wanted to take contrary action to Husband, and I remember Simmons was the chairman, and he said, 'Vice chancellor, may I suggest that we do nothing'. Time is a great healer, so that saved us. No action was taken. Instead, the university, Sir Raymond Street, the treasurer and others worked very hard on Melville and the DSIR to try and get Melville to... to write to the Public Accounts Committee and... and apologise that his evidence had been incorrect.
Now, all this took a long time and those years, particularly 1958, which I will talk about later on, which should have been years of... of great, great, great relief and pleasure with the telescope working and all the press in favour, were years of... of great depression and anxiety. And what actually happened was this, that after an agonising period, Melville was persuaded to write to the clerk of the Public Accounts Committee to apologise for reasons he gave, that his evidence, which he had given on this date, was erroneous. Now, Rainford, the bursar, who had been deeply involved with us all in this, he phoned me and I said, 'Oh, good news, Rainford, that's wonderful'. He said, 'Look here, my boy, don't be too happy'. He said, 'It's true that Melville's written to the Public Accounts Committee, but there has never been any occasion as far as we know, on which the Public Accounts Committee has made a public announcement that false evidence was given to it, and Husband will not be satisfied until he can read in the press this'. And mercifully, the Public Accounts Committee, I think they must have had pressure put on them, the Public Accounts Committee did issue another White Paper containing Melville's apology.
Now, I have put both of those... both the original White Paper and the White Paper containing the apology and the... the parliamentary debates on this which... which were... were hounding the prime minister to do something about paying off the debt. All of that is now on the files. I will... I will complete this story, I think, after a break. I... I will just say this, that the university, after consultation with the Department of Science at the university, had agreed a settlement of the final debt on the telescope as being £260,000 and, incidentally, I might mention it should have been more than that, but the... the United Steel Company were... were so thrilled at getting such a marvellous press that they withdrew a subsidiary claim of something like £100,000, so the... the final settlement was agreed to be £260,000, and furthermore, the... the Department of Scientific Research, after the... this release of the trouble with the Public Accounts Committee had agreed to pay half of this and the university was left with the attempt to raise £130,000 by public appeal.
Now, again, I must remind you that that in those days is equivalent to a few million pounds today, so it was a very large sum of money and in trying to raise that money during... during the period when the telescope was constantly in the press and was doing marvellous scientific work, of which I'm going to give an account in a few moments, were years of deep anxiety during which the treasurer of the... of the university, Sir Raymond Street came to me one dark February afternoon, before, when all this was before the Public Accounts Committee and Husband was attempting to sue me, he said... came to me to warn me that the university would bear the cost of the trial but they were certain that we would lose.
Well, of course, we would lose because the... the evidence was completely against what Melville had said, so I said, 'In that case, if Husband is suing me for £1 million, I have no means of paying £1 million. What would happen?' And he said, 'Well, I'm afraid that you would have to be... go to prison', so there you are. In this great moments of the... few years of the telescope, and until this White... this contrary White Paper had been issued, I was suffering under... my... my whole family was suffering under this threat, although it was not then known generally.

I had already mentioned that in... 1957, 1958 the enormous debt that we were faced with and the troubles with the public accounts committee, and the abrupt change of deep friendship for the deep, deep enmity between Husband and myself. I... I am delighted to say that that turned out to be entirely superficial because as soon as the... the White Paper was published, in which Melville had apologised for giving false information, the... the difficulties between Husband and myself immediately disappeared, and our... our collaboration continued in the design and use of... of other telescopes, which I've talked about. In fact, he... he was quite an ambitious sailor, and he had converted a fishing trawler to about a 40 foot yacht and he once had an island off the south west coast of Ireland and he said, 'Well', I said, 'I'm just going to... to the island for a holiday', so he said, 'Well, why don't I take you in my yacht?'
So we set off from Cornwall on a Sunday evening, and it happened to be the time of the rather great Fastnet races, and the... the forecast was not good, and... and before we were halfway, we were just past the Scilly Isles, the... the seas became horrendous, and Husband, who was quite an experienced sailor, estimated them to 24ft waves, and we eventually survived. He... he was a good navigator, but we had intended to... to go round the Fastnet Rock on to the... the bay in which my island was, Bantry Bay, but... but two hours after we should have reached the Fastnet Rock, Husband said, 'Ah, yes, there it is at last', and I said, 'No, Husband, that is not the Fastnet, that is the bay and unless we turn east, we shall soon be in mid-Atlantic'. The navigation was so poor in those days. The GPS did not exist and not been thought of. Anyhow, so our relations were restored immediately. Unfortunately, he is no longer living. He... he died and his firm, in fact, has... has disintegrated. It was bought over. It was for a time carried on by one of his sons, but it was then assimilated into another organisation.

Well, I've been concentrating on the building of the telescope and what happened immediately afterwards with Sputnik and the debt we'd incurred. Now, throughout the whole of that time of course, scientific research was going on at Jodrell, and I'd like to say a bit about that. I think I spoke about the work of Hanbury Brown and Hazard on the transit telescope when they had discovered the radio emission from M31 and certainly one of the first definite proofs that the radio waves were not confined to the galaxy as we had thought for a very long time. I did, also, myself, as a student, a few measurements on the transit telescope on the low... low frequency spectrum of signals but my... my main concentration in those days continued to be on meteors and I had particularly Clegg, John Davis, JG Davis and a New Zealander, CD Elliot... Elliot.
Now, Blakett had said to me, 'Now you must read up. If you're going to study meteors, you... you must find out about them'. Well, remarkably compared with the situation today, there are almost no astronomical books published in England. There's one by the Astronomer Royal, Spencer Jones, on spherical astronomy and... and there's almost... almost nothing about meteors. The... the flood of books from America had not yet then arrived and Blackett, he had contact with a lot of people various parts of the world and one day he said he had a young man who had escaped from Norway during the war, Herlofson, and Herlofson was a meteorologist.
Now, whether Blackett was so confused that he thought a meteorologist would know about meteors, I know not. Anyhow, he said he thought Herlofson might be useful to me, so Herlofson appeared. He... he was... he had then been useful during the war I think somewhere, as a meteorologist, and I think he was then going as a student to... in Oxford University, but he was a tremendous help and the first thing he did was to tell me about the people who really knew about meteors in this country and they were not the professionals. They belonged to the British Astronomical Association, the amateur body, and he put me in touch with the... the director of the meteor section of the Astronomical Association and this was Manning Prentice.

Now, Prentice was a solicitor in Suffolk, but he was a remarkable observer. He was a desperate observer of... of meteors and he... he was also quite famous for having discovered new nova, Nova Herculis, I think in, in the 1930s, and I said, 'Well, what happened, how did you discover that?' He said, 'Well, I was taking a rest from observing meteors and then after a few minutes, I began to sit down observing again, and I noticed there was something wrong with the head of Draco'. And he then phoned the Royal Greenwich Observatory in the middle of the night and they observed the early stages of the nova. I mean, this generated enormous interest and a leader in The Times about the value of amateur astronomers.
Anyhow, by that way I was put in touch with Prentice and thereby hangs a very important part of our early history at Jodrell because Prentice... he... he said that he would... could he come up and see what we were doing? He would come up in... in August when there was a very important meteor shower, the Perseids meteor shower, so I said I'd be delighted to see him, and you know, I expected him to arrive with a lot of equipment and was amazed when the... when the nice man drove up, he stayed here, he drove up in... in an open Morris car and in the back of the car was not an expensive lot of apparatus, but an enormous globe and... and a flying suit. So that was the beginning of an important series of observations and the first thing we did was to observe the... the Perseids meteor shower in August of... 1940, 1946. Well, I... I would sit in the trailer and looking at the cathode ray tube and Prentice would sit outside in the deck chair, wearing a flying suit with a big board in front of him and a piece of string and a pencil, and he... he would shout when he saw a meteor and I would also shout when I saw an echo.
Well, now, Prentice was a brilliant observer. He... I... I did not know and never have known a more successful obsever. He... and in those days there was very little ambient light about and on good nights we could observe meteors down to the sixth magnitude. And I... I was soon out with Prentice, also wearing one of the flying suits, sitting in the deck chair and that is how I learned about the sky and, you know, he... he would tell me everything or he... he knew every... nearly every star, down to the fifth or sixth magnitude and his method was when he observed a meteor streak, he would stretch a piece of string along the line of the meteor and record on... in his notebook, the... the star near which the... the streak began and where it ended.
Well, as you know, the... the meteors appeared from what appeared to be a radiant and this was in Perseus and rose about... I suppose, just before midnight and there was a wonderful, memorable experience taking part with Prentice sitting out on those beautiful, warm nights and learning about the stars and helping to observe the meteors. Well, the answer was that most of the meteors we were observing were associated with echoes on the cathode ray tube and you will find a paper in the monthly notices dealing with... with that work.

Prentice then had to return to Suffolk because his family I don't think particularly liked him observing meteors. They wanted him to get on with his business, but he said that we must be certain to watch the... in October, when there was going, there was probably going to be a great... a great meteor shower. Now, he had discovered in the 1930s a very active meteor shower called the Giacobinids and he... this belonged to a comet, the Giacobini-Zinner Comet with a period of about six years, and Prentice said that the... the meteor stream was very closely associated with the head of the comet and that he predicted that... that although there hadn't been a quiescent number of years when the... when the earth crossed the orbit of the comet, when... when it had not, where there was a few meteors, in October 1946 he predicted that there would be a... a really big meteor shower. So we were actually watching sky in October 1946 and I might say that by that time Clegg had built a marvellous steerable array of yagis and this was... I borrowed a... a searchlight mount which I never returned. I'm not sure if the remains are all down still at Jodrell, and on this we mounted this... this considerably sized yagi aerial, which had a narrow beam, which we could rotate to the sky.
Now, the night of October the 4th 1946 must surely live in anyone's memory who was awake and had a clear sky on that night, and fortunately we did. Until about midnight there was only occasional meteor activity and then suddenly about an hour later, the activity began to grow, and by... by 3 o'clock, 3 am in the morning, it was quite dramatic. It was as though one was being showered from space with vast numbers of... of missiles, which suddenly disappeared before one's eyes as they burnt up in the high atmosphere.
We had... we did two important things during that shower. First of all, it was impossible to go on counting the meteors on the cathode ray tube and so we had foreseen that might be possible on a mounted camera so that we could photograph the tube, and we estimated that within a few minutes of the maximum, which was very sharp, there were a thousand or so meteors per minute. Now, then we did an extremely important experiment. Near the peak of the shower, we turned the searchlight aerial in... into the radiant. We had been observing them with the... with the beam of the aerial pointing 90 degrees from the radiant and because we were getting a specular reflection from the trails, but as soon as we turned the... the beam of the aerial into the direction of the meteor, as though the... the meteors were coming down the aerial itself, then our echo rate collapsed instantly and we had no echoes. Now this turned out to be an extremely important experiment because it did reveal that... that with the sensitivity we... we had, that all the echoes we were observing were... really were associated with meteors. That... that is one of the... you... you will find the paper describing that also in the monthly notices.

There was a great dispute about the origin of meteors. It was well known that the... the so-called meteor showers, like the Perseids, were associated with the... with the comet in orbit around the sun of various periods, and... and in many cases, the debris from the comet was spread out around the orbit, such as the Geminids in mid-December. They're pretty regular. They give a... a rate of about... a visible rate of about 60 an hour and... and the Perseids are also pretty well spread over the orbit but in the case like Geminids and Leonids in November, the... the cometry debris is still rather closely associated with the comet, so they are relatively infrequent. In the case of the Leonids in November, I think their period is about 33 years. In the Geminids, it's about six or six and a quarter years.
Now, apart from these well-known shower meteors there is always a background of... of so-called sporadic meteors, and there was a tremendous dispute going on as to whether these shower... these sporadic meteors were confined to the solar system or were in hyperbolic orbits and visitors from in the solar space and I think, perhaps, apart from the Geminids observations, one of the most important things we did in those early days was to settle that dispute.
Now, it was Herlofson who suggested to us that we had the possibility of... of an accurate means of measuring the velocity of meteors because, of course, by eye is very difficult to... if you want to get them approximate velocity. So he said we... we were sending out 600 or 1,000 pulses per second from our radar and we should be able to observe the... the passage of the meteor through the Fresnel zone if we had arranged to spread out the pulses on a time base. Well, we made the necessary equipment to do this, in which the echo would trigger the camera and we would get a... a film, not just of the meteor streak but of the formation of the ionisation as it passed through Fresnel zone, maximum, minimum. And since we also had a measurement of the range, it was a perfectly simple matter to make a fairly accurate... well, a really very accurate measurement of the velocity of the meteor.
Now, the dispute arose because Öpik, when he... I think he was an Estonian and he had both in Estonia and when he had moved to America, had used what he called a rocking mirror method to observe the velocity of meteors and he had developed an enormous literature and quite... quite an abstract theory, in which he proved that all the shower... most of the sporadic meteors were moving in hyperbolic velocities around the sun and were therefore... that was therefore debris from interstellar space.

Now, he was opposed, he was... he was... opposed to a certain extent by... by Porter, an amateur in this country who, I think... he... he was working at the Royal Greenwich Observatory and he was convinced that the shower meteors were... were moving at parabolic velocities around the sun, and then I became associated with Fred Whipple, the Smithsonian, and I... I think at that time he was fairly neutral about it. We had one of those early conferences in Manchester, arising from this work at Jodrell Bank and there's one... one occasion when at Jodrell Bank an enormous argument was taking place between Whipple and Öpik and Whipple turned to me and said, 'Well, if you can measure the velocity of meteors, you have a... a perfectly clear case of making a decision which has no ambiguity', and so we set about doing that.
Now, the first successful measurements using the Fresnel zone method was made, not on the shower meteors, but on the Geminids meteor shower, one December and with JG Davis and Mary Almond, who was one of my first girl research students at Jodrell, we set ourselves a task of studying the... the velocity of the stradic meteors. The... the situation was this, that if the... the movement of the... the rotation of the earth, movement of the earth in orbit around the sun, if it... if it... you meet a body in space, a interstellar space, then the maximum of loss you can get is if you were looking at the apex of the earth way in which the... the velocity you would record would be the velocity of the rotation of the earth, plus the velocity of the earth in the solar system, which amounts to 72 kilometres per second. Therefore, any meteors, which have velocities of greater than 72 kilometres per second, must be moving in hyperbolic orbits, but if there are no meteors of losses of greater... of less... of greater than that, then they must be all combined in parabolic losses around the sun. And similarly, if you directed your observations, your... your aerials or beam of the radar to the... antapex of the earth's way, then you would get the... the maximum velocity would be the difference between the velocities through the solar system and the rotation of the earth. Well, we simply did that.
We... we set about a considerable series of measurements in which we directed equipment of various sensitivity, first of all, into the apex of the earth's way and then into the antapex of the earth's way, measured velocities of many thousands of sporadic meteors. The results were pretty conclusive. We... we had no evidence whatsoever of any hyperbolic losses or of... of any meteors moving at a velocities greater than 72 kilometres per second. We began publishing this work in a series of papers, I think, the monthly notices and then it was pointed out that our greatest criticism made of us was that we were recording only visitors, meteors of considerable magnitude and so we dealt with that by... by using another radar equipment, I think this time, on a wavelength of eight metres in which we had a greater sensitivity. And I think we ended up after several years, in measuring the losses of sporadic meteors of up to magnitudes which we estimated to be plus eight, so we reached a definite conclusion that at least down to that magnitude, all the sporadic meteors must be in parabolic, moving in parabolic velocities around the sun. Well, Öpik... he made several objections, but I don't think they were... they were real and I... and I do not know what happened. I... I... presumably, if you... if you had enough sensitivity to get down to very faint mangnitudes, then... then there must be dust from interstellar space, but at least all the meteors that had so far been observed and which were visible and just below the... the visible limit, down to a magnitude of plus eight, were confined to the solar system moving in parabolic orbits around the sun.

The other thing that happened during that period – I'm talking about the early days at Jodrell, this is before we began serious work on building the telescope in 1952 – we... we had measured the... we could measure radiant position of meteors by altering the position of Clegg's steerable aerial, and in order to do... make a continuous observation, we built a... a series of yagi aerials, two groups, one, one each side of what we called the radiant hut. It still exists at Jodrell, and each side of that hut we built an array of yagi aerials inclined to the... inclined to one another and we... the continuous photography of the tube and we could observe meteors with... with no need to note down in a notebook, note in a book every time we saw a meteor. We would simply photograph them and record it on film. And by that means we could record automatically not only the shower meteors, but all the... the meteors moving in... in groups, so to speak, and all the regular meteor showers showed up very well, beginning with the Quadrantids, the short period of time in January and moving on through the Lyrids in April, Perseids in August and... and the Taurids there, and it's in November and the... and the Quadrant... and the... and the Geminids in December.
We also investigated quite a lot of very minor meteor stream. Just before Christmas each year, Becvar meteor stream, and... but the... the extraordinary thing was this, that after the Lyrids in April, there was no record of any significant meteor shower until the Perseids in August, but to our amazement on this automatic recording device, after the Lyrids had gone, the... the occasional sporadic meteors, about a few an hour still occurred, but suddenly there emerged enormously powerful streams of meteors and these were... had never been observed by eye for the simple reason that they were occurring in daylight, and so we had the good fortune to discover the daytime meteor showers, most powerful showers, one of which was important because it was the equivalent of the... the daytime equivalent of the night time Orionids which occurred in October. Now, that was quite... quite important in those days and, again, you will find a series of papers about that in the... in the monthly notices.

We had various other pieces of work going on in... in meteors. Greenhow, Dennis Greenhow, was using... we... we laid down at a large tarmac slab in which is now the green at Jodrell and on that, Greenhow used that as a reflecting device to produce, so that he could measure the actual heights of the meteors and he published an interesting series of papers on the... on the movement of the meteor stream which he had recorded, and published papers on... on the distribution of the velocities of the winds in the 80... 80-100 kilometre region of the atmosphere. An entirely different matter concerned the problem of the... of the radio... radio emission from Cygnus.
Now, Hey, in his first survey of the heavens immediately after the war, had not only plotted the distribution of radio emission from the galaxy, but in this distribution, he identified what appeared to be a localised source in Cygnus. He discovered that this particular source was scintillating, was... was fluctuating and he concluded from this, that the... that he was observing what he called a point source or very localised source of... of radio emission, and its position then was quite unknown. It was never... it was not known whether it was in the galaxy or... or extra-galactic.
Well, as a matter of fact, much later it was discovered to be one of the important, very powerful extra-galactic radio sources at a considerable distance, but we became interested in fluctuations because we did not altogether believe that Hey's conclusion was correct, and so we set out to study the scintillations from the source of the signals. And this is quite a simple matter to do. We had a system... two systems, one of which we stationed at Jodrell and we would observe on a paper chart, the signal from Cygnus and just observe the fluctuations and another exactly similar system, we would move about first of all at Jodrell, and then we brought it here and then we... we collaborated with Cambridge, and they... and they observed simultaneously there, simultaneously to Jodrell.
Well, the answer was perfectly clear. I remember showing them to Blackett who was working with the CG Little on this and we spread out the charts on... on the floor of this room and... and even from Jodrell... the records from Jodrell compared with the Jodrells from here, only a few miles away it was quite distinct that the fluctuations were of a... of a different frequency, and therefore Hey had reached the correct... as it turned out, he had reached the correct conclusion, but from the wrong reasoning. In fact, the scintillations were not from the source itself, but were being imposed by the transmission through the ionosphere.
Now, for an entirely different reason, Martin Ryle, who was now making great progress at Cambridge, didn't want... he didn't want... did not want to believe this. He had just published a paper on... on radio sources and he... he, I think, wanted them all to be in... in the galaxy and if you look at the publications in Nature about this, you will find there are two – they're not a joint publication by Cambridge and Jodrell – but... but two simultaneous publications, one by Jodrell, giving the definite result that they were all from the ionosphere, and one by Ryle... I'm not sure, I think by Graham Smith, I must ask him about that, also saying they did not disagree but they still believed that some of the scintillations might be directly in the source itself. Anyhow, that was an... an interesting and... and rather simple piece of work which was conclusive and Little and then another young student, Maxwell, who I still see. He now lives... he went to America, but he was from New Zealand and he... he and Little studied these scintillations and did quite a lot of work on the atmosphere and so on from that. So that's the kind of researches that were going on that we were involved in when... when we began the construction of the steerable telescope in... in 1952.

During the course of the construction, this work continued. Hanbury Brown and Hazard... they... they continued their measurements on the distribution of radio emissions of the galaxy using the 280 foot transit telescope and we also developed a system for studying the radar echoes from the moon, which turned out to be fascinating. We were not the first to succeed in getting radio echoes from the moon. Quite a history attached to that which you will find in the history books.
I think the first observations were claimed to have been made by a person called Z Bay in... in Hungary, I think. He used the walter voltometer and claimed that he heard echoes from the moon. I think he was probably correct by observing this walter voltometer. We were amongst the first to make a... a detailed study of the radio echoes from the moon, and the Australians had also done some work on this. And if one does observe radio echoes from the moon on frequencies in the meter wave band, there're two things that immediately become obvious, one is that you do not get a steady response. There are fluctuations of signal strength.
Now, there are two... you can immediately distinguish two types of fluctuation. There's a rapid fluctuation of periods of seconds or minutes and there is a long period of fluctuation imposed on this of the order of 30 minutes or so. Now, the Australians had concluded that the short periods of fluctuations were occasioned by the... by the libration of the moon in its orbit. That is the slight oscillation as it moves in... in orbit round the earth and I... we confirmed that. There was no question this was the case, and then one day, Murray, who was working on this problem, he phoned me and I think it was the weekend, I was here and he said... he... he was pretty certain he had found the solution to the problem of the long period of fading. And so we... we... I encouraged him to set up a special system in the yagis in... in Echelon where the moon... so that the moon could be observed for about half an hour or longer without moving the aerial. And it... it turned out that he was correct and it was not difficult to prove the long period of fading was not really associated with the moon itself but was occasioned by Faraday rotation in the ionosphere.
Now, I think also in the 1950s, this... when the telescope was being built, this work on the moon was extended by a young student who was JV Evans. Now, JV Evans... he turned out to be quite an exceptional young man and he took over the observation of the radio echoes from the moon. Now, he... he was quite... he was keen enough to notice several things during these observations. One important... one was that the intensity of the reflection of the signals from the moon did not coincide with what one would expect, knowing the area of the surface of the moon which our beam was covering, and he carried out quite a... quite a brilliant series of observations dealing with this matter. And he... he reached the remarkable conclusion that the... whereas if you look at the moon in... in ordinary light, it is... it is uniformly... it's a uniformly bright disc.
On the other hand, if you look at it with... on a wavelength of a few metres, it is... it is limb darkening. In other words, the effect of reflection of radio waves from the surface of the moon takes place, as Evans discovered, on only about the first third of the... of the centre of the diameter of the moon. Now, this turned out to be very interesting for another reason, and that is that up to about 1,000 megahertz or thereabouts, the... the reflection for the surface of the moon which was being limb darkened would be... would be pretty coherent and that... that is how it became possible to speak into a microphone and send a signal to the moon and hear one's voice coming back again.
Now, again, I don't think we were the first to get our voice reflected from the moon. I think it was a person called Trexler in America who did this, but anyhow, when the telescope came into use in 1957, 1958, I went into the swinging laboratory underneath the bowl of the telescope with Evans and made a recording of us saying, 'Hello, moon' and the reflection coming back as... as a recording of the... the response two or three seconds, whatever it was, later, 'Hello, moon'. And I... I demonstrated this during one of my Reith lectures, which I'll talk about later on, so that's the kind of researches that were going on at Jodrell during the building of the telescope.

Now, Palmer's job was to measure and he did this initially with Hanbury Brown and you will find an enormous series of... well, not enormous, a large series of papers published in the... in the monthly notices of the RAS dealing with these observations. And Palmer's particular job was to use the steerable telescope in conjunction with separate aerial which could be moved about so that we had a powerful interferometer. And, of course, with the great gain of the steerable telescope, we were able to get down to... to sources of... of much fainter than could have been done by Ryle and others using interferometers with relatively small aerial systems.
Now, Palmer's job, and this, although for reasons connected with the Sputnik and what followed immediately thereafter, which I still have to talk about, although according to the press we were entirely using the telescope on... on objects like Sputnik, that was not the case. Most of the... most of the research with the telescope in the... when they completely came into our hands in the years 1958, '59, '60, were on the measurement of the angular diameter of radio sources using the subsidiary aerial system which we moved further and further away, first of all, at Jodrell Bank and then in a nearby field and further away.
Now, of course, as you increase the spacing between the two telescopes, so the lobe spacing narrowed and one could, if the... if the source was... angular of diameter was large enough, then as you moved away, it would disappear, and only those sources of very small angular diameter would still show fringes as you moved away the interferometer. Well, I think it was... must have been 1959, 1960, the... the most distant we had moved the aerial was to... to the Cat and Fiddle and that gave us a baseline in which Palmer was still observing fringes from a very few sources. One of the large numbers of sources throwing fringes at Jodrell and in a nearby fields had completely disappeared and I... difficult now for me to recall exactly, but I think there were only about four or six half a dozen sources which were still showing fringes at this maximum distance. And the angular diameters then we were measuring meant that they were only of the order about a half second in... in diameter and the supposition was that they were very, very distant nebulae.
Well, at that time there... there, I think we.. we had a... a good measurement of the right ascension of these sources and I think Cambridge had measurements of the detonation and of these few sources showing this very low angular diameter, very small angular diameter, the... We were able to place their positions within an area of the sky which made it possible for a search to be made with the 200 inch telescope in America, and it was in 1960 that Maarten Schmidt and Greenstein using a 200 inch telescope managed to identify, or observe, the optical source of these very small diameter radio sources and they were completely mystified because they thought they were... they were an unusual very blue colour.
And the belief arose that we were dealing with a new type of blue star in the galaxy and that belief existed for two years until the evidence obtained by studies of... detailed studies of the spectra in America, and by one of our students who'd gone to Parkes, Hazard – who had been measuring the diameters by observing the immersion and emersion as the sources pulsed behind the moon – reached the conclusion that we were not dealing with blue stars in the galaxy, but we were in fact dealing with extremely distant galaxies which were so distant that the redshift had moved the lyman alpha into the blue region of the spectrum and that they became known as quasars. And this was an epic discovery of what was then regarded as a completely new type of object in the... in the universe and quasars, of course, became an immense field of study, not only at Jodrell thereafter, but for astronomers who began to get powerful radio observing equipment in many parts of the world. So I always think that Palmer... in fact, it was Sandage, who made the measurements in America, who announced that Palmer was the real discoverer of quasars, but he... he never had that credit.
Although if you do... if you read the early publications of... of one of the early symposia which were held in Texas in the... 1960s, you will find that in a preface to one of those, one of those books, this credit is given to Palmer for his work at Jodrell Bank on the discovery of quasars. There's no doubt at all he was the first person to actually measure the objects which eventually became identified as what we call quasars, but of course, he... he did not know at that time, until they had been identified optically and then two years later, the shift in the spectrum let us observe that he had discovered or identified a new type of object in... in the galaxy. So I... I always think that in spite of all the splendid work that was subsequently done by the telescope, that is, must be regarded as one of the most important.

I really ought to talk, I suppose, a bit about my own work. I... I could have joined in and... and, of course, I... at that time I was the director and I... I drove along all of this work. There was a tremendous lot of technical difficulties with the spacing of the interferometer. One had to adjust the speed of the fringes and in Palmer's group there was much odd mechanisms made out of meccano and so on, which made this possible. Well, I... I didn't want to get involved in this and I wanted to do... I wanted to use the telescope for something entirely different, and in... shortly after the telescope came into use, I think in 1958, in the spring or early summer of 1958, there was a... a symposium organised in Paris and we... we all gave papers at this symposium. And Hoyle, Fred Hoyle, he... he gave a paper on... on what became known as flare stars and pointed out that it would be very interesting to find out if the flare stars behaved similarly to the sun in emitting radio emission and this occurred to me to be an interesting subject to study with the telescope so I... I took on that job.
Now, the stars in question, which were known as flare stars were the M type dwarfs, stars with small diameter... smaller diameter than the sun and the occasional flaring of these stars was quite well-known. They had been observed for some years. The question was were these flares to be identified as being similar to the solar flares, or were they something entirely different. Well, I had the... exactly the right instrument to do this with the super telescope because I could direct it to one of these flare stars and... and observe it continuously. I might remind you that there were no computers in those days and we were recording on... on pen and ink, with pen and ink on... on a moveable paper chart. The problem was not only to observe the M type dwarfs as a radio emitter, but also to identify if any... if there was any particular radio emission from them, if these were in any way associated with the optical flares.

Now, by that time I had become very... got to know Fred Whipple working at the Smithsonian very well, and as a matter of fact, I had... was also... had been on the board of visitors to Harvard Observatory and saw much of Whipple. And I discussed this with him and he made the interesting suggestion that the series of cameras that he was using to observe the Sputniks, the... the satellites, could be diverted to observe a particular star if I would observe simultaneously and from America to Jodrell, of course, there were long periods of mutual visibility for stars which made this work worthwhile. And so in the 1950s, I began this work in association with Fred Whipple, and we would... he would adjust his cameras to trace... We particularly concentrated on a nearby M type dwarf known as UV Ceti.
Now, UV Ceti turns out to be a double. It has a diameter of about 0.8 of that of the sun and it was known to show flares in the optical region and Whipple would record these flares with his cameras and I would observe the radio emission as the telescope tracked UV Ceti. I think UV Ceti detonation minus 18 so we had particularly in the... in the autumn period, a period of visibility, which made this work possible. Now, you must remember that the sensitivity, possible sensitivity of the equipment we had then, is far above, or... or less than anything which subsequently became possible, and there were no computers, so I set myself the problem of... of integrating by... by hand, so to speak. I laid the successive charts out on a long table and just measured the intensity of the noise and eventually found a... a bump in the records after a mammoth integration, a bump in the records, which was statistically significant, which coincided with the star flares observed by... by Whipple.
That... that was... I think that was published in Nature, I can't remember the date, but I then found that there were other places in the world which were also observing the... the optical flares from red dwarfs and I got into touch with Chugainov in... in the Soviet Union and he had a marvellous photo electrical equipment at the Crimean Observatory, and it was... I then did a long series of observations which Chugainov, in which we compared his photo electric observations from UV Ceti and... and another star known as Ross 882 YZC Canis Minoris, and again, we found this correlation and published a paper on it.

I thought at that time that, you know, people were not really convinced that the integration of the radio records could be regarded as suspicious, and then we... when... when we developed the MERLIN System, with phase correlation, I... I joined forces with Palmer in the observation of... radio observation of one of the stars. And this Professor Mavridis in Greece also had a splendid apparatus for recording optically the... the flares from these stars, and we then obtained something which was really magnificently conclusive. Mavrodis found quite a big flare and simultaneously on this... with the... with the telescope linked, phase linked to one of the... what became MERLIN telescopes, we had a... a magnificent radio record absolutely co-incident with the radio flare.
Now, I must be moving now into the 1970s and the odd thing is that I had... I had by that time a couple of students working with me, one of whom subsequently went to... to America and continued to work there and a person, my very last student who took a PhD when I was still director and the last paper with which I was associated on... on these flare stars was published as a matter of fact, I think, after I had officially retired and oddly enough it didn't just have my name and one or two of my associates on it, but I think it was a combined paper of 15 or 20 observers because it was a relation of the flare stars over the whole spectrum, the x-ray spectrum, the optical spectrum, to the radio spectrum.
I don't think that the... the observation of these stars... they... they never became particularly popular, the cosmological problem and the study of quasars and the remote parts of the universe understandably and quite naturally began to ascend to the important objects to be studied, but I... Anyhow, the... that became my main scientific interest during the working life of the telescope, as well as... as long as I was director. I, with the development of computers and the new systems, which were then occurring at Jodrell Bank... I would quite liked to have continued that work after I retired but to be perfectly frank, the demands on the telescopes were so great that I thought it would be quite wrong of me to express any particular pressure to allow myself to do that after I'd retired so I... I really did finish my flare star work then, although I've still been interested in the results that occur. A number of papers I wrote on that, I gave my presidential address to the Royal Astronomical Society on the subject and the... the theory of the optical flares and of the radio flares is... is in that paper.
The important point about the flares of these red dwarf stars is that they are extremely powerful. We... we associated it with the violent solar flares and radio emission from the flares from the sun but the... the flares on the M type dwarfs are of far greater intensity, and there... there is... I had one of the theorists in the university working on this problem and he did publish a paper on... dealing with this problem and of the origin of this radio emission in the atmosphere of the red dwarf stars. I also became interested that K-stars might be radio emitters, but never succeeded in pursuing that work very much, although there is a paper in the... which I wrote in the philosophical transactions of the Royal Society, which deal with the magnitude of the radio emission from the M-dwarfs and the possibility of K-stars, also powerful emitters. They do have a certain relevance today to this search, which seems to occupy a lot of attention for intelligent signals from planets which are now known to be in orbit around some of the stars. And I don't think people realise that some of the stars they're hoping to find planets around on which there might be some form of intelligent life, any such intelligent life such as we have would be completely extinguished by this powerful emission from... from the... from the parent star.

The work at Jodrell... I suppose I ought to say a few words about this until I retired in 1981, in the years from effectively 1958, 1960, in the 20-odd years in which we had complete control of the telescope, the extension of the researches, was very great; the work on the quasars and the point sources and the... also the development of the radar work.
I've already mentioned the work of JV Evans on the Moon and his use of the... of the... and the discovery that the Moon was limb... the Moon was limb dark and we thought that this would be an interesting method for conversing across distant parts of the earth. You must remember that in those days, the main possibility of long-distance communication was via the ionosphere and this possibility of converting across the Atlantic, for example, was often made impossible by the great solar flare, which so disturbed the ionosphere, that it was no longer a good reflector of radio waves. And we did interest the firm of Pye in the possibility of using the Moon as a reflector and we thought this might be of great importance and interest to people who were elsewhere in Europe, or other parts of the world who communicate via the Moon, particularly when it was impossible to do so by the normal means of communication by reflection from the ionosphere.
Now, the firm of Pye... they were... I don't know if they still exist, but they were then a very big firm of manufacturers of radio equipment and they became quite interested in this and we did, in fact, build a system with them, which they were prepared to manufacture, which enabled us to communicate via the Moon. We had... we had... we did even succeed on one occasion in communicating by... communicating by voice via the Moon with Australia because remarkably enough, there... there is... a certain part of Australia, a certain... certain periods of time when... when the Moon is visible for short period, both from Jodrell and Australia. Now, of course, that possibility... the possibility, that that would have been of interest commercially, disappeared with the development of, of geostationery satellites and now, there's no longer dependence either on cables across the Atlantic, or... or on the ionosphere, particularly the new system of optical fibre cables and... and the... the use of geostationery satellites for communication have become universal.

On the radar aspects of the work, this continued for some time after the telescope came into use. I've already mentioned the work of JV Evans on the study of the Moon and unfortunately for us, Evans' work, we had frequent visitors from America and Evans attracted the attention of the Americans, was invited to America and for him, they spread out the red carpet and offered him such a vast salary that we could not possibly hope to retain him. So he disappeared into the American network and, in fact, became... became head of the COMSAT organisation. I'm afraid I... I eventually have lost touch with him, so I... I can't... history, but he passed out of research into the industrial world, world of America, and became highly placed director of one of the communication networks.
I was then left with other people who... Ponsonby and Thompson, who... alas is no longer living, and I interested them in attempting the radar detection of the planet, Venus. Now, this was a matter of considerable importance because the, the distance of Venus, the parallax of Venus was not precisely known. There had been enormous arguments about this and... and particularly about the rotation of Venus. You must remember that Venus is cloud-covered and is impossible to observe even with the most powerful telescopes, any of the surface features. So the problem of Venus had always interested me because I had grown up in the belief from some people that Venus, although cloud-covered, the clouds were like we have on Earth and therefore Venus was an abundant field for life and vegetation since the clouds must be like our own rain clouds. And there are others who argue that this is not the case. It must be an arid desert.
Well, there was also the problem about the distance of Venus and its parallax and about its rate of rotation and it's mode of rotation. For the pulse radar... the detecting Venus by radar became of considerable astronomical importance, and when Evans left Jodrell, I interested Ponsonby and Thompson on developing the system for the radar work on Venus. This required quite a powerful transmitter and I found that the nuclear physicists in the university, in the physics department, were ready to... to give me a very... very powerful klystron working on the frequency of 408 megahertz, of which they no longer had any use. So we transported this klystron and mounted it at the top of one of the towers of the telescope, and this was the transmitter which we used on the... on the radar programme in the search for echoes from Venus.
Now, in the early 1960s, this... again, in the beginning required integration and... and the close approach of Venus. It was not an observation one could make at any time because that really only became most likely when Venus did one of its close approaches. This was eventually achieved and Ponsonby and Thompson obtained an accurate measurement for the distance of Venus, but alas, the Americans by that time, had... had also caught up and had almost simultaneously built an equipment with a very powerful transmitter, which had measured the... the distance of Venus.
Now, the extraordinary thing about this radar measurement, whilst it had differed from the... what was believed to be the accurate measurements of the optical measurements on the distance of Venus, there... there are various measurements made optically of the distance of Venus and... I can't remember the exact details now, but they were believed to be accurate and spread over about a tenth of percent of what was believed to be the case, but in fact it was wrong. The radar measurement was outside the optical spread of the... of the well-known optical limits and the radar measurement was quickly accepted by the International... by... by the International Astronomy Union as... and is now regarded as the valid distance for the planet Venus. This became of extreme importance, as I will mention in a moment, when the Russians began to attempt to send a rocket to Venus.

The other important point established by Ponsonby and Thompson, remarkably, was the rotation of Venus. It was in retrograde motion, and that... I... I was very, very sad that that is really the last radar observations which were made at Jodrell bank for two reasons: we were no longer able to compete with the Americans with their possibly building large telescopes like Arecibo and the... the very powerful transmitters, which were necessary to do this work; and secondly, we had the problem of interference with the... with the purely receiving observations at Jodrell. For some time, we had a ring main around the establishment. No doubt it still exists, buried somewhere, in which the... we could protect the... the groups who were using their receivers from whenever we were sending our radar pulses on the telescope.
This became increasingly difficult and for those two reasons, I... with some reluctance, particularly because my original reason for building the telescope was to study the, the cosmic ray air showers by radar, I agreed that we should abandon the radar work with the telescope and this happened in the early 1960s. I think by 1966, we were... we were no longer using the telescope for any radar work. I mean, even... even with a powerful transmitter, which we're using on Venus, we had to be very careful that we never observed below an elevation of about 15 degrees because the radiation would... would have been quite damaging to human beings and we were also extremely careful not to get on the bowl of the telescope at any time when this transmitter might be operating.
Before I end the topic of... of Venus, I, for reasons which I still have to develop, I had very close relations with the Soviet Union and they had... had been... I will mention this separately, but they had constructed a very powerful transmitter at a place called Yevpatoria on the Black Sea coast, and the person in charge of this was Academitian Kotelnikov and I had arranged with him that we would carry out a bistatic observation on the planet Venus, that they would transmit and we would receive and vice versa. My goodness, this collaboration was extraordinarily difficult because either they were using the telescope for some other purpose, or we were using the Jodrell telescope for some other purpose. But in... in effect, we... we did succeed in carrying out these bistatic observations of the planet Venus from this place, Yevpatoria on the Black Sea coast and Jodrell Bank, and there is... there is a short note on that. I do not think it's published in England. I think it was published in one of the Russian Soviet publications.

Once we... we were released from our problems, which arose from the over expenditure on what became the MK I telescope, I had an ambition to build even bigger telescopes, and I consulted with Husband and I said I wanted to build a telescope 600 feet in diameter and he, I'm afraid, took a deep breath and said, 'Well, we'll look into it', and one of the problems was the windage on a reflector of such immensity, particularly the variation of wind with altitude because the wind has always been an important factor and still is in the... in the 250-foot telescope. And so we decided the thing to do would be to build a small model and this resulted in building an elliptical dish, about a hundred feet by 60 feet, which became the MK II telescope.
Now, I applied for money to build this telescope, to the DSIR, and they... they were the... after all, the worries had been cleared up, they... they agreed, but they would not allow me to call it a prototype because it would have implied that we were really going to build a much bigger one, so they gave us a reasonably small grant and we then built which was then the MK II telescope, which came into operation in 1963, I think, and that was interesting because it was one of the very first heavy instruments or machines to be controlled directly by computer. We had... we... we secured an... a Ferranti Argus I computer and used that to control the MK II telescope. That telescope still exists and my successor decided to... it was too difficult to illuminate the elliptical surface and... so it is now... has a subsidiary paraboloid in front of the elliptical surface and can be used as a straightforward paraboloid. That is now an instrument to be used, and was used in conjunction with an inferometer with the MK I radio telescope and is still a part of the MERLIN network.

The... the government set up... when they discovered that I was attempting to build rather fantastic things like a 600ft telescope and... had built under what I considered to be a prototype of quite a big instrument, they decided to set up a committee to investigate what I was doing. The committee was under Lord Fleck, who was then the head of... of Imperial Chemical industries. He was very nice. We got on extremely well together, but as a result of the Fleck committee, after I retired, I wrote a book I called The Jodrell Bank Telescopes, which contains all this very detailed information of what happened in my attempt to build larger and larger telescopes, and I... I had a number of proposals.
I wanted to close the road going past Jodrell and build a railway track across it and build another 200ft or 250ft telescope, so that we could use the very powerful interferometer and move it across the road. They still... that was soon objected to, unfortunately. That time there was no motorway and it was not all that traffic along that road. The result of all the deliberations of the Fleck Committee... resulted in the fact that they more or less agreed that I could proceed to design a... a... not a 600ft, but a 400ft paraboloid. Now, this proceeded.
I... again, Husband became the consulting engineer on this telescope and we wanted to build it, not at Jodrell, but in a... a valley in Wales, so that at low elevation, we... we would be screened from interference by the surrounding hills. And I searched many places in Wales and eventually, with the help of the... the person named Ririd Myddleton, who was then living at Chirk Castle of ancient descent, who knew Wales very well. He... we drove around Wales and we discovered a place near Welshpool, which suited us ideally. There was... there... there took place a prolonged enquiry, a public enquiry when, when we applied, we bought the... we bought the suitable field near Meifod, and this would have been ideal for the site of a 400ft telescope.
We, we had erected a mast and measured the wind, and had a public enquiry, held in Welshpool, which went on for nearly a week, as well the... against the people nearby, who were objecting to us building such an instrument in that beautiful valley. Well, we were... the public enquiry was in our favour, and we had permission to build the 400ft telescope in Meifod in Wales. The design proceeded under... this time, in conjunction, full conjunction, with the DSIR. We had a full committee working on it. It wasn't... not just left to me, and eventually in... I presume, must have been 1970s, thereabouts, Husband had completed the design. We had a most beautiful model of this 400 ft telescope, and in many ways, it would have been analogous to the 250ft telescope with a... with a series of bogies, not just the four bogies we had, but there’s a whole series of bogies moving on the railway track. And I think would have been a very powerful telescope. It would have been good down to X 3 centimetres, and then something happened, which suddenly led to us... not suddenly, but eventually led to its cancellation.

The Labour government was then in power, and the Secretary of State for... who dealt with science, was a lady, I've forgotten her name, but it's well-known... and she came to Jodrell and we demonstrated this model to her and she was very encouraging. And, in fact, the... this government had arranged for us to have a... a press meeting to announce that we were going to build this telescope at Meifod at the... the cost of £4 million... £4 million in 1972 or 1973 prices.
Alas, one day before this press conference was to take place, Mr Wilson, who was Prime Minister, decided to go to the country for entirely political reasons and so the... the meeting was cancelled, the... he was defeated at the election and the Conservative government achieved office and from their point of view, quite rightly, because of the financial state of the country, they suspended all large expenditures, including the expenditure, which we were going to incur on this new radio telescope in Meifod. They... they had... this must have taken place in the... in the early autumn, and by Christmas, they... they lifted the ban and we were told to get a new price for the telescope. I'm afraid by that time the price had risen well above 4 million and then began a period which I really wish to forget because I... I regret having entered into the period that then followed, because we... we still in contact with the DSIR, they suggested we reduce the size to something more reasonable, like 350ft, but... And so we did, but the escalation, the cost of living went up, the cost of materials went up and we could not get the price down to something reasonable.
And eventually the... the Germans had built their... their steerable telescope at Effelsberg and the... then interest in joining with Europe, the arguments began, that we ought to join up with Europe and use their telescope as well as the one at Jodrell, so in that way, eventually, we closed the whole project, and only the beautiful model remains. It was at Jodrell for some time, but it has disappeared and I don't know where it is now, so the 400ft telescope was never built. Now, in some ways I'm sorry because it would have been a powerful instrument on... on a waveband, which has been... was... was being very largely neglected, as the interest in radio astronomical observation moved to higher and higher frequencies. And I think in fact now, it's realised that some of the lower frequency observations...  I think the Dutch have built a new telescope, which they propose to hold to use in the region of less than 100 megahertz.

Well, we had a consolation prize, and that consolation prize was that we could build a system, first proposed by Henry Palmer, on the basis of interim metric work in the late '50s and early '60s, of what he called a four square interferometer. Well, this developed into what is now known as MERLIN, the multi element radio-linked interferometer, and in the few years before I retired in 1981, we had obtained sights in... in Knockin, and... and I was instrumental in getting that site from Lord Bradford, whom I knew. He... he owned a piece of land there, which he... which we agreed to build one of the telescopes, which it was then not... not economical to make, to make in England. It may interest you to know that I, of course, asked Husband if he could design us an 80ft telescope. He said, 'Certainly I can, but I warn you, it'd be much cheaper to buy one from... from the United States', such has the cost of work gone up in England.
And so I got in touch with the... with the Americans, and they agreed that we could buy an extra model of the telescopes they... they were using in their... in their network, and so that is how the first E-systems telescope was built at... at Knockin. And there's another one at it was then near Jodrell, Tabley. I also got permission to use the telescope which Hey had built on the old runway, which we had used during the war at Defford Airport and, in fact, that telescope is an 80ft dish, is still in use in this MERLIN network, and shortly after I retired, Graham Smith, who succeeded me, in the 1980s, he arranged for another telescope of this network to be built on a site near Cambridge, or in fact on the... the original radio astronomy site in Cambridge, so that MERLIN system is... is now a very powerful network and is extremely important and, of course, I... I must agree that the results obtained, even with the preliminary MERLIN Network, before my retirement and subsequently, has been extremely important. And now, what is commonly known as E-MERLIN, is being prepared using optical-fibre connectors instead of landlines to connect the telescopes and this will be very powerful instrument for the future.

There are a few things I ought to say about the whole of this, in view of what is happening now at Jodrell Bank. The government had become deeply involved financially in the... via the... what was the DSIR... by that time we were another body, Science Research Council – I'll mention it in a moment – and deeply involved financially, and it was... and the vice chancellor pointed out to me that did I realise that if this telescope was built, then it would probably mean the end of Jodrell as it existed. And I objected and he said, 'It's no good your objection', he said, 'If you want, if you want to be certain that Jodrell will continue, you can have the telescope, but I warn you, that what you propose is a national facility and with modern techniques, such a national facility can be controlled from, not only the place where it is, or from Jodrell, but from Manchester or London, or anywhere in the country, and I'm afraid, that is the agreement'. So the young people at Jodrell who are worrying today about a move that is taking place of the academic staff to the centre of Manchester, may like to know that this nearly happened 20 years ago and was saved from happening by the abandonment of which would have been a very famous telescope.

Now, I want to return to the position about the debt on the telescope, and I'm talking about the period 1958-1959, in this horrendous period when we had this debt of £260,000, and this was the sum, which was finally agreed between the university and the DSIR, that we had to find £260,000 somehow to pay off the debt of the telescope. And it was also agreed that the DSIR would contribute half of this provided the university would guarantee to raise, somehow or other, the... the other half of £130,000 and I remind you that we're now talking about, on today's values, we're talking about a million or so.
In 1958 and '59, as soon as this problem with the public accounts committee was resolved, the university felt free to proceed to launch a public appeal to raise this £136,000. Sir Raymond Street, the treasurer, he made a very, very famous speech to the court of the university, and then issued this speech as a public appeal. The response was poor. The reason the response was poor is that the industrialists who might have helped, said, 'Look, here, this is not the university's responsibility, the government should pay off', and we were always in the newspapers' headlines. Questions were asked of the prime minister in the house. He was going to the Soviet Union. How dare he go to the Soviet Union when... when this instrument was... was in debt and so on.
Lord Hailsham was then the Minister for Science and he came to see me one day and he was an angry man. He said, 'Oh, so... so you're the fellow who's making my life a misery'. He said, 'Every morning my desk is piled with letters from people I don't know, saying we ought to pay off your debt', so I said, 'My lord, that agitation is not coming from me'. I said, 'We recognise that the government has done its share. It has borne half the cost of the debt. We are trying to raise the remainder'. He cooled down a bit after that and enjoyed being taken on to the telescope.
Nevertheless, we had several meetings and I found these a very tiresome diversion. Furthermore, everybody was contributing. I was getting letters from schoolboys and schoolgirls sending me their pocket money. It was really extrodinarily of touching that we had these children trying to pay off this enormous debt and sacrificing their... their chocolate money and their sweet money, and friends and kind unknown individuals, sending in cheques £50-£100. Well, we... we did in the end manage to raise about £80,000 and then everything became stuck. You know, nothing further happened. I want to tell you what... how... the glorious end to that episode.

After the Sputnik in 1957, we continued to observe the Sputnik... second Sputnik carry the dog, Laika, and I... we... we were able to write a few papers on the nature of the reflections from the carrier rockets and particularly during their descent, during the atmosphere. I think these papers are in the Royal Society or in Nature, and then in... in 1958, when I was really in a state of great depression. In spite of all this pleasure and excitement with the telescope, we still had all this trouble with the debt and in the middle of the trouble with the public accounts committee, two things happened in the spring of 1958.
I had a letter from General CN Jacob, who was the director general of the BBC, and this had contained an invitation to deliver the BBC Reith lectures in the autumn of that year. Now, I... I do not know who made the suggestion or knew that I was capable of delivering these Reith lectures, but of course it was a great thing for me. It indicated a restoration of faith in... in me and the telescope and that was one of the great things that happened that year. I might say a bit about the Reith lectures later on. The second thing that happened almost at the... in the same week was that I received a... a message from the intelligence bureau, with whom I was, for other reasons, going to in London, saying that I... I was about to receive an important visitor from America. And, in fact, they said, 'You are to go to your local station, Goostrey, tomorrow morning and out of the local train, at a certain time they gave... there will be, in mufti, a Colonel L from the United States Air force'. They said, 'He is a very important person and he must talk to you'.
So on that appointed day, a lovely summer's day, a lovely spring day, I drove to Goostrey Station and out of the train, the local train stepped Colonel L and we talked about the nice day and various other sorts of things, and on the way to... I drove him to Jodrell. We got to my office. He looked at all the windows and all the doors, made sure they were firmly closed and I said, 'May I ask what is the reason for your flight across the Atlantic?' And he said, 'Yes, we are about to... we have just completed our Atlas Missile and we're about to use it to send a... a rocket to the Moon', so I said, 'Oh, well, that's extremely interesting. I... I didn't know you had such a powerful rocket', and he said, 'We... we are just about to test it, and we are quite convinced that we can send a rocket to the Moon and thereby get a step ahead of... of the Soviets'. So I said, 'Well, that's splendid news. I'm delighted. What is the reason for your visit?' And he said, to my amazement, 'Well, we will dispatch a rocket, but we have no means of tracking it, and we... we... I've come to ask you if we could... if you... if we use your telescope to track the rocket?' So I said, 'Well, of course, I'm... would be delighted to do so, but quite important issues are involved here. I perhaps ought to consult with vice chancellor of the university'. And he said, 'I'm sorry, I can't wait. I must... I'm returning to America immediately and I must know if you will agree to track our rocket'. So I thought, 'Yes'. I said, 'All right, we will. We will do this in... in the framework of the international geophysical year'.
So Colonel L returned to America and he had said that he would send over certain equipment and a team, but that this must be done in the greatest secrecy, so I think I informed only my very close colleague, John Davis, JG Davis, of what was happening, and it remained a secret until in July... They were going to launch the rocket in August in 1948... 1958, and all was well, nothing was said or heard about until in July the... the Americans landed. They were using the airport of Burton Wood. I think it was still in their possession, and they had sent over in an enormous plane, a... a huge amount of equipment and a vehicle, which was then towed or driven to Jodrell, big labels on it, Project... USAF Project Able, Jodrell Bank.
And before I... scarcely before the... these people had arrived, the newspapers were ringing up, saying whatever's happening? Do... do we take the... the Americans are about to launch a rocket to the Moon? You know, this was their idea of secrecy. It was completely secret and yet the... they... they then display Project Able USAF, USAF, Jodrell Bank. Anyhow, that's by the way, but we... we were then assembled adjacent to the control room, control building at Jodrell bank. A hut containing the American equipment, which was to help track this Apollo rocket and which, later on, was to play an even more important part. We got on exceedingly well with this team of Americans. They were very, very nice people and the... the years that followed were extremely pleasant ones and very active.

I was in the Soviet Union in August 1958 on the date when the Americans were going to launch this probe to the Moon. They did so and I managed to get on the telephone from... via a linguist who could speak 15 languages. He managed to get the telephone network through to Jodrell Bank where I learned that the rocket had been launched but had failed a few seconds after lift-off. This was repeated a second time and in October they launched their second attempt, they called them Pioneers then, the Pioneer II, and this was more successful. It travelled... it was located by the telescope and we tracked it for, I think, 18,000 or 19,000 miles in... into space when it became perfectly clear it was nowhere like going to the Moon. And, in fact, it then fell back to Earth, but nevertheless, had collected some important data from the ionosphere and the amount of interplanetary space for which it had... so I think there was one other attempt which had a similar effect. So the Americans had failed with their new missile, to... new launching rocket to send a payload to the Moon.

In January 1959 – and remember the Americans were still with us – the Russians, Soviets announced that they had launched a rocket to the Moon. We tried to locate that, but never succeeded. And I... I never know why. It was probably... and I do not know what happened to the rocket because there was never any mention of it having reached the Moon. However, it was a different matter in September of 1958, 1950... 1959, we've reached now. One day in September – I was then the skipper of the local cricket team in Chelford, we... we didn't have a cricket team in this village – and I was about to depart for the cricket team and... we were playing at Chelford nearby, and suddenly all the telephones started ringing. I then had a direct link with the control room at Jodrell and both that telephone from the control room and the press, the telephone, an old telephone which the press were always using, rang to announce that the Russians had launched a rocket to the Moon, so I said, 'Well, I'm very sorry, I... I'm going to play cricket. I'm... I can do nothing about it until this evening'. So I proceeded to enjoy a cricket match and the wife was... she was allocated to see to the cricket teas on that day and when she arrived at the ground, she cornered me and said, 'Look, here, you don't realise what's been happening since you left home. The press and everybody's been on the telephone, it's been ringing continuously. You'd better do something about it'. So I said, 'All right, I will call in at Jodrell on the, on the way home.
So, about... I suppose about... it may have been about 6 o'clock that evening, I called in at Jodrell and everything was proceeding normally except that the Americans were there, completely agitated. They'd been harassed from Washington to... about this probe that was going to the Moon and why couldn't they do something about it. And they said they were very sorry, but the person in control was playing cricket. Well, you can imagine what that was like to people in Washington who had no idea what the game of cricket was.
Anyhow, I... after, after that barrage from the Americans, I went into the office and in those days, there wasn't fax, it was something called telex. To my amazement, on the huge length of paper from Moscow came pouring out of this machine and it gave the azimuth and elevation calculated from Jodrell Bank for their rocket. Just that, no other words on them, so I phoned JG Davis and said, 'Look, could you come out to Jodrell? We'd better try,' and I told him what had happened, 'But we better see if we can get signals from this Russian rocket which is going to the Moon'. So we climbed into the swinging laboratory. By good fortune, there was an equipment on the telescope, which I think was being used by Palmer for something or other, I can't remember exactly what. It was probably some of his measurements of the angle of diameters. It was on a frequency of... of 408, I think, so we took a receiver into the swinging laboratory underneath the bowl of the telescope and plugged this into the aerial and the... asked the controller to direct the telescope to the position indicated by the Russians and we immediately, without the slightest difficulty, made contact and continued to track this rocket until it set below the horizon on that Saturday evening.
Well, the next day, Sunday, was quite incredible and by that time, Jodrell Bank was packed with media, the BBC and the... we couldn't keep them out of the control building. The Russian rocket was due to rise above our horizon in the early afternoon and we located it immediately and continued to track it until the evening and JG Davis then had a most brilliant idea. He said, 'Look here, why don't we... why don't we measure the doppler shift because if this rocket is really going to... to meet the Moon, we... we should know'. We should be able to know where it goes and we would get a... a tremendous change in... frequency. So we hooked up another receiver and had all this going through a loudspeaker to the assembly in the control building, and then the drama began.
Just before 10 o'clock on... on that Sunday evening the... suddenly the doppler shift began to change so... so dramatically and about a few minutes past 10 o'clock on that night, suddenly stopped. The Russians had indeed hit the Moon with... with the rocket and we were able to calculate within reasonable area, where... where, in fact, the rocket had impacted. Well, of course, there were people, messages from America, that oh no, they put in an alarm system. They couldn't possibly; they have no ability to do this sort of guidance. Well, it was... it was as well that we had measured the doppler shift because they could not argue about this and that... the results were being published and they had this... had this epic result.
Now, there's one thing I want to say that... about that before I continue this story. Very, very many years later, I think 30 years later, when I'd already retired, I... I met a Russian who had been responsible for... one of the Russian scientists who had been responsible for that probe. And to my amazement, he said, 'Well, of course, we had to rely on you to track it. We had no means of tracking it'. Isn't that incredible? They... no direct request, just a long list of azimuths and elevations for the Jodrell telescope appearing on this telex machine.

The Americans then announced that they were to send a new series of Pioneer. They were going to send a probe into deep space and originally, a probe to reach Venus. Now, the... that was of extreme interest. The launch was to take place in May of 1960 and everything went perfectly. The important point was that we had reached... we... we had the task, a few moments after the launch from Cape Canaveral, of sending out the signal through the telescope, to fire the bolts holding the space load to the rocket. And all this worked perfectly. From the American trailer; the button was pressed at precisely the right moment and we... we were told after launch and the payload was released form the carrier rocket. The... we then tracked that rocket for many, many tens of thousands of miles into space.
Now, of course the... the press went mad over this and the front page of every newspaper in the world continued this... contained this story pretty well the next day. I had nobody to deal with the press in those days and my telephone was ringing continuously and on... on one of these rings, I wearily picked up the telephone again. 'Is that Professor Lovell?' 'Yes'. 'My name is Klingerlee. I'm Lord Nuffield's private secretary. His Lordship wishes to speak to you'. Lord Nuffield came on to the telephone. 'Is that Lovell?' 'Yes, my lord'. 'How much money is owing on that telescope of yours?' And I said, 'Oh my... oh my lord, I think... I think we still owe fifty or sixty thousand pounds'. 'Is that all? I'll send you a cheque'. So I tried to thank him. He said, 'That's all right, my boy. You haven't done too badly'. End of conversation; end of debt. Fairytale ending.
Now, so that released us from all debt in that fairytale ending. Unknown to me, my wife, who had of course suffered as I had throughout all those years, she wrote to Lord Nuffield to thank him, and she had a reply from Lord Nuffield. When I told Rainford, the bursar, of this episode, he said, 'That's absolutely astonishing. Lord Nuffield has never been known to write a private letter to anyone'. That correspondence is in... in the bookshelf there. Anyhow, that is the story of the end of our debt.

I think it was 1966 the Russians sent another rocket to the Moon and this time we tracked it and it was quite late one evening. I was with JG Davis in the place where we were receiving the signals and suddenly the signal stopped. It was silence and I looked at JG and I said, 'Oh my goodness, the thing's failed'. As the words were being spoken, a new signal appeared, and JG said, 'Good heavens', he said, 'It's transmitting a photograph'. It was... it was one of these photograph machines which scanned the picture, so we phoned one of the daily newspapers, either the Daily Mail or the Daily Express, had they... could they possibly lend us one of their picture machines? And... and I'm... I'm very happy to say they did immediately and we connected this, and there was a picture of the surface of the Moon appearing.
Now, real drama, that was the next day, and by that time, I... I could scarcely move in the... in the control building, so I... I rushed out of... out of the... the dark room with this damp picture of the surface of the Moon transmitted by... by this lunic and it was all over the world's press almost immediately. Well, there was no... no mention whatsoever from the Soviet Union and I then got into great trouble from many colleagues in America for having what they called scooped this brilliant success of the Soviets. Now, the Soviets... Blagonravov, General Blagonravov was in charge and I met him quite soon afterwards and I expected to be reprimanded. Not... not a word. He said, 'That... oh, I see you were good enough to... to collect our photograph for you'. He said, 'But you know, unfortunately it was rather annoying from our point of view, the photograph you published was... was rather wrong. You see, it showed that the... the peaks, the rocks on the Moon were not the rocks that we photographed'. You see, what had happened is that the Russians had... were using a different picture recorder with a different thread form the English one and the photographs we published of the surface of the Moon showed the... the rocks had very sharp peaks, whereas they were in fact rounded, so that was the only reprimand other than thanks I ever got from the Soviets for... for that work.

We... we also collaborated with NASA because the United... the United States Air force work on sending objects into space had been taken over by the newly formed NASA, National Aeronautical and Space Administration. It was extremely unpleasant being in the middle of this sandwich between the Soviets and the Americans. You must remember that at that time the Cold War was... was a very bitter one, and unknown to me, I did know that the Americans had launched an... an Echo 2 balloon, which they... which one could communicate by reflecting radio signals because at that time the problem of long distance communication still existed, as I mentioned earlier, because geostationery satellites did not exist.
Unknown to me, I think the meeting happened in Rome because then a delegation from Soviet Union and a delegation from America and they had agreed that they would communicate via the Echo 2 balloon from Washington to Moscow, but since there was no mutual visibility at any time between those two cities, they would use the Jodrell Bank telescope to receive their message from the Echo 2 balloon and then retransmit it to... to Moscow. I was informed of this arrangement by someone from London and I said, 'Well, I know absolutely nothing about this. I haven't been asked, but I'm quite happy to carry on if I can be told more about it', so we agreed to collaborate in this venture.
The day arrived when we were going to... I... I think we're now talking about... 1964, they arrived when we were, that evening, going to receive a message from transmitted... originating from Washington, transmitted in America to the Echo 2 balloon received by us at Jodrell Bank, and re-transmitted via the Moon to Moscow. About two or three hours in the afternoon before this event was due to take place, suddenly there appeared at Jodrell Bank an American army colonel and he said, 'You are on no account to proceed with that arrangement this evening'. And I said, 'Why not?' And he said, 'I'm ordered to instruct you not to proceed with that arrangement', and I said, 'Colonel', I said, 'We are an independent university establishment. We do not take our orders either from America, or directly from London, or from Moscow and we are intending to proceed with that experiment'. He said, 'In that case, I must ask you to receive a telephone call from London',
And quite a few minutes later, I had a telephone call from London, which I... from such an authority that I could not possibly disregard, and I had to conceede that we would not carry out that experiment. Well, I was very angry and so was John Davis, but a touch of genius, Davis said, 'Don't worry; we will transmit via the Moon to Moscow'. The Americans don't own the Moon, so that night we did not transmit any message from America. We transmitted our own messages to our colleagues in Moscow and that... that was highly successful. I need hardly say that this left the Americans with no alternative but to calm down and proceed with what was originally intended. I... it was not a pleasant period. It was a very exciting one and at least we were free from debt and we... we began to earn quite a few dollars from the Americans.
Now, I... that... that is really the end of the story. I would repeat that shortly after that, and particularly after the... the Russian success in photographing the Moon, and I remember the newspaper people telling me that oh, look, as soon as the... as soon as an American or Russian lands on the Moon, you'll be left in peace. Well, that did, in fact, happen after the American landing on the Moon, but until that time, which is many, many years later, we were deeply involved with the success of Soviet attempts. And I had, for other reasons, made visits to the Soviet Union and had been assured that they would send a man to the Moon when they could be absolutely certain of returning him safely to Earth.

Oddly enough I was also very friendly with the Americans, particularly with the American chap called Mueller, who was then directing the manned space programme, and I said... you know, I told him that the Soviets would not attempt to land until they were certain they could return the man safely to Earth, and so George Mueller said to me, 'Oh well, we're... we're going to send a man to the Moon in...' – whatever it was, 1969 – 'and we're quite certain we should get him back'. And I said, 'Why are you so certain?' He said, 'because we can, we have duplicated everything in the flight'. I said, 'Everything?' He said, 'Well, he said one thing we haven't been able to duplicate, and that is the lift-off from the lunar surface'.
Well, as you know, everything went perfectly and Neil Armstrong was the first man to put a foot on the Moon. We were tracking that through the telescope, with five thousand people in the visitors' centre at Jodrell, and the interesting thing is that we had both the live recording from the Moon and the retransmission from NASA, and the retransmission from NASA was delayed over the actuality from the Moon by a minute or so, and we could only assume that this was in case there had been some tragedy on the Moon.
Now, the same time as that happened, the... the Soviets had launched another rocket and we were tracking this rocket as well as the American lunar one, and shortly before Neil Armstrong and Aldrin were due to lift off to return to the mother ship round the Moon and on their journey back to Earth, the Soviet rocket reached the Moon, signal stopped and that was that. Nothing further happened, and we were a bit mystified because we thought at least it would continue to transmit as the lunic, photographic lunic had done and so we, we did nothing further about it, except that I... about an hour later, I received a telephone call from Moscow. 'We are... we believe you have been tracking our space probe to the Moon. We urgently need a record of your recordings'. So I said, 'Oh, well, that's quite all right, I will send it to you, I will let you have... I will send it through the usual diplomatic bag tomorrow'. 'No, our emissary's already in the air on the way to your airport, would you mind taking your last records to the airport and handing it over to him?'
Commander Tolson was then my chief engineer, and I said, 'Look here, Tolson', I told him what had happened. I said, 'Do you mind taking this tape' – we made a copy of it – ' do you mind taking this tape to... to the airport and there is a... a man from the Soviet Union is going to land there at 6 o'clock this evening. He won't come into the airport. Do you mind standing at the barrier and handing it over to him?' And that was that. That was done.
And, of course, what had happened? As we knew later on, less than a year later, the Soviets repeated this mission and this time, the system worked. It was an automatic recovery of lunar rock. The... the rocket landed. It scooped up the lunar rock and returned it safely to Earth. Now, you see, just think for one moment, if they had succeeded when... and Neil Armstrong had not succeeded and they're getting away from the Moon, what a political drama that would have made at that critical time in the Cold War. I think then things calmed down very much as far as Jodrell was concerned, and we had very little more to do with the... either the American or the... or the Soviet space programmes.

I mentioned in... earlier in this record of happenings, that shortly after the telescope began construction, I received that message from the Astromomer Royal Sir Spencer Jones, asking me to join the Air Navigational Committee and I have already related in this record that I did so and subsequently served as a chairman of that committee and then on the Air Warfare Committee, and then on the Aeronautical Research Council. This was a return to an activity, which I had thought I had left behind, but which I nevertheless found extreme interest... of extreme interest.
I was asked to go with a colleague from the Air Warfare Committee to visit the establishment, which I had left TRE in Malvern to see what they were... they were doing and to my amazement they had made absolutely no progress. They had... he... they had succeeded in modifying my last mark of H2S and making it suitable for the V-bombers, which were then in action. But the Fishpond for the rear gunner, which I mentioned, was still in action, and indeed, that system was continued to be used right onto the Falklands war. And, in fact, the modified system which I had left behind me in 1945 was used to bomb the runways and Falkland during that war so many years later, and then, of course, the new devices took over – of guided weapons and... and lasers.

Now, that is not quite the end of my story. As a result of this activity, and of our work with the... on the Soviet intercontinental missiles, which had been used as a launching rocket for their Sputniks, we had acquired a good deal of information, which was of great value to the important people in England who had to deal with future attacks from the Soviet Union. And I had received, one day, an invitation which I... from Sir Morris Dean, who was then the permanent under secretary to the Air Ministry, and he asked me to meet him in London and have lunch with him. I did so and it must have been in the 1950s and, I think, about 1950, in the middle of 1950, in the middle of the story I have already been relating. And he said, 'I have a small group of scientists of whom you'll know, who are acting as scientific advisors to the air staff, and we'd be very pleased if you would join that group'. So I took a bit of advice and I did agree to join this small group of half a dozen of us who were acting as scientific advisors to the chief of air staff.
Those meetings were extremely worrying, but of extreme interest, and most of them were taken by the deputy chief of air staff, who's a very nice person. He was a son of a person I had known very well earlier on and I quite enjoyed attending those meetings although they were so worrying. One learned many things, which it would have been better not to have known, such as the Soviets had 49 armoured divisions lined up against the West. Well, how would we... how could the West possibly stop them? And only one means, by using tactical nuclear power. In that case, there would be rapid escalation to strategic nuclear power and it was an uncomfortable aspect of my life to live through, but nevertheless of great interest. It became even more... even more interesting when one day, the deputy chief of air staff – this must have been 1958, or '59 – he said, 'Lovell, do you mind staying behind after we close the meeting? I have a problem', so I said, 'Certainly', and he said, 'We want your help', and look, I'm going to relate this story now because it's public property. Not many people know about it, but if only they go to the public record office, they can find the story I'm now going to tell you.

The DCS said to me, 'Lovell, we need your help'. I said,'Why? He said, 'Because the situation with the Soviet Union is extremely serious. They have a group of intercontinental missiles posed in the Estonia or Latvia, I can't remember which, posed to launch against London and one group to launch against Berlin, and we have no means of detecting them. And I said, 'What about Fylingdale?' He said, 'Alas, Fylingdales is held up by a strike'. Now I had got to know quite a lot about Fylingdales through meeting on one of the other science committees and I had complained about their construction and I said, 'I made them alter it', otherwise they would have given a lot of false warnings, so these changes had been made and Fylingdales would have worked. So the DCS said, 'I'm afraid that there's a strike and Fylingdales cannot be ready for several years'. I said, 'Well, why don't you get over the Americans to finish it off if our people are striking? He said, 'We're not allowed to for political reasons'. He said, 'We want you to allow us to equip your telescope with the necessary transmitter so that you can locate the missiles when they are launched. I said, 'Well, sir, we can certainly do that if you provide us with the necessary equipment, and we can tell you where they're launched but we need, will need to do two things: we would need to know the exact position and when, and if we give you the launching time, you can do nothing about them'. He says, 'No problem, we can give you the precise position of these launching pads and you're not right that we can do nothing about them. We, you would be giving us ten to fifteen minutes warning and in that time we could save a million lives in London'.So, I don't know what we would have done, I said of course we will help. I went to see the vice chancellor and I told him in broad outlines what the situation was and I had instructions from him that if this unfortunate event ever happened, I was to overrule all the restrictions such as gales or snow, which at that time ruled the, whether the telescope should be used.
So in about 1960, the Marconi system had made a very powerful transmitter. I think it worked on a frequency of 408 megahertz, which we mounted on the diametrical girder of the telescope and connected this to, with the possibility of connecting it to the aerial system through a suitable cable. Now, what is not known by anyone except John Davis, who was with me through all of this drama, both with the Sputniks and the moon rockets, we had a series of senior RAF personnel working with us at Jodrell. They were in mufti and the whole thing was so secret and it could not be done nowadays because everybody would know anything, what every person at Jodrell was doing, but these senior RAF people were working with us, using the telescope on whatever observations the telescope was engaged in on those days, on tracking the moon and so on.
Well, this went on for quite a long time until the, the desperate situation developed with the Cuban crisis in October 1962 and may I remind you that the American recognisance U2 flights had discovered that the Soviets were making a launching pad in Cuba, and the reason being of course, that the missiles in those days were not long distance. They were only inter-continental with a range of a few hundred miles, not thousands of miles, and so the intention was to threaten America in this Cold War by this group of inter-continental missiles in Cuba, which would... had a sufficient range to reach Florida and other parts of America. Well, those weekends, first weekends in October 1962 were amongst the most tensest which I've ever survived. On one of the critical Saturdays I had returned home to Jodrell Bank in October, one Saturday in October, in early October, and it was the controller on the telephone, which immediately I found ringing when I entered here, and he said, 'Look, Sir Lovell, would you mind returning to Jodrell?' and I said... he said, 'There's a despatch rider here. He has a documen't. And I said, 'Well, just sign it and take it'. He said, 'No, he insists that he will only hand it to you'. You know we lived in that sort of atmosphere through that terrible weekend. Well, the rest of that story is history and Kennedy suceeded in handled the whole business and the ships carrying the missiles, taking them to Cuba were turned back and eventually a solution was worked. I always think during that week or so, the world was... civilised world as we know it, was quite close to extinction. The degree of overkill available to the Soviets and to the Americans at that time was enormous and it would certainly have been what was called MAD, Mutually Aided Destruction. From our part of view, from our point of view, we had no reason to use the telescope although we were ready to do so, because the button which would release the attack on London and Berlin was never pressed.

I'm often asked what I think was the most important work, research work, done with the 250ft steerable telescope, and I... it's very difficult for me to answer that because I... so much work has been done I don't like to offend all the people who've done their own splendid work with the telescope. Of course, it's easy to say, well, of course the recording of Sputnik, which is true because that saved us. I mean, I doubt if that hadn't happened, that Jodrell would exist.
I... I still believe that the use of the telescope for the first few years after 1957 by Henry Palmer and his group on the measurement of the angular diameters of the radio sources turned out to be most important. The position was this. I think by that time Ryle had carried out many of his intergalactic measurements in Cambridge and it was perfectly clear that after this tremendous argument that went on between the people who believed that all the apparently point sources, or sources of small diameter, which were being rapidly discovered and revealed by the interferometers, they... they were... the great argument emerged as to whether they were all confined to the local galaxy or were... or were extra-galactic. And... and there was a most violent argument in a meeting of the  Royal Astronomical Society some time in the 1950s between Gold, Tommy Gold, and Hoyle on the one hand, and... and Ryle and his people on the other, who argued. Gold particularly was a vehement that these point sources, we often call them, or localised sources were mainly from an extra galactic nebulae. But incidentally, both worked independently, and... and Ryle had published other papers attempting to prove that they were unknown star like objects with... in the local galaxy. Well, we did not get directly involved in that argument because it... by the time the... Henry Palmer started his work on... on the measurement of angular diameters, it was being fairly well established that most of these localised or point sources were indeed extra galactic.

Now, things then calmed down and – I think it was in 1963 – I had a kind letter from the Secretary of State, thanking me for... or thanking me for helping and that was that. Then I had another message from Sir Morris Dean, saying, 'Look, here, Lovell, if you'd like to be at Manchester Airport tomorrow morning at 10 o'clock, I'll meet you there with a small aircraft and I'll take you to Fylingdales', so I met Morris Dean. We flew to an RAF station on the east coast where a commander in chief of fighter command was waiting. He put us in a helicopter, which was jet controlled, and he gave me some earphones and said, 'Look, here, as long as you're absolutely deafened by this noise, it's all right. If it stops, the helicopter will turn over and you're to fall out'. Well, fortunately the noise did not stop.
We landed at Fylingdales. I was shown all the equipment, which was then working. It was on, working on about 408 or 410 megahertz, and had a... a scanner in the great hangar which was then one of the ballistic missile defence establishments for then around the world. The C in C was extremely nice, showed me everything, gave us lunch and I said, 'Now, look here, it would be very nice if you'd bring some of your staff back to see Jodrell', and a few weeks later the return visit took place. And with that amicable... amicable exchange, my arrangements or my collaboration with anything to do with military matters ceased, although we still had contact with Cheltenham for other reasons, which enabled us to earn some money from the Americans. And that was that, and a typically English ending I thought to what could have been a quite horrific story. I then lived in relative peace and still do so, and retired from Jodrell in 1981, but I am privileged still to use an office there and I'm delighted still to be able to go there whenever I want to and try to understand what the young people are now doing. I think I perhaps ought to end my story there. And so, thank you for recording and for anybody who listens to this in the future.
