billy.williams

Billy Williams, London-born cinematographer Billy Williams gained his first two Oscar nominations for the acclaimed “Women in Love” and “On Golden Pond”.  His third nomination, which was successful, was for the epic “Gandhi”. He was President of the British Society of Cinematographers, and was awarded the Camera Image Festival’s Lifetime Achievement Award in 2000.

I was born on the third of June 1929 in Walthamstow, it's just north of London. My mother was the fifth of eight children. Her father was a... a tailor and she was well educated, a very loving and caring person and she provided a very secure emotional background during my childhood; it was a very happy childhood. My father was the youngest of 13 children and his father was a blacksmith and groom, a cab driver and also a bare-knuckle fighter. And... my father, when he was 15 in 1910, went to work in a film studio in Walthamstow, owned by some brothers: Gobbett; I think it was Walter and either James or Thomas Gobbett, and he started as a... an apprentice to these two brothers who were cinematographers, and the studio in those days had glass walls and they used a... a day light, which was softened by silk curtains and supplemented by arc lights of various kinds. And so he served an apprenticeship with these brothers where you — as a young cameraman — you... you had to learn how to do everything, which was perforating the film stock, loading the camera, exposing a film on the set, shooting the scene, developing the picture on site and then running the projector in the evenings perhaps at the local cinema, so that one learnt a great deal of different jobs in this apprenticeship. Then in the First World War he went into the navy as a... initially as an electrical wireman and he was on a ship called The Repulse; he was never in battle but in 1919 he filmed the surrender of the German fleet at Scapa Flow, which was a great historic occasion, and I remember watching a programme on television, it was one of those monitor programmes some years ago. It was called Scapa Flow, it was the history of the naval base, and there were all these enormous German ships coming in — in formation — to surrender to the British and I got a tremendous thrill to think that my father had shot that material, because there weren't very many cine... cinematographers about in those days. And, of course, the German surrendered at Scapa Flow and then, whilst at anchor, they all scuttled, but, of course, that wasn't filmed because nobody knew it was going to happen.

After he left the navy he became an independent freelance cameraman and in those days if you were freelance you... you always had your own equipment, your own cameras, and cameras were his life blood really; the camera was looked after like a baby and everything was kept in immaculate condition. And ...at that time he had an office in Gerrard Street, which is now Chinatown and, of course, the heart of the film is... film world — as it still is —is... was Wardour Street and Soho Square, and that area, and... you know, he was always looking for work, as were his colleagues and, if he wasn't working, he would sometimes just get his camera out and put it in the box and put a shoulder, pick up his tripod and just walk up Wardour Street as if he was going on a job, and his pals would say, ’Oh Billy's working again’ and, of course, if you were working you had a better chance of getting a job. So he was always very optimistic about life and always hopeful, you know, that something good was going to turn up and, of course, it very often did but there were also long periods of unemployment and he did every kind of film-making from newsreels, I mean he'd do the Cup Final, the Grand National, boxing events. I remember him telling me about one championship fight that he was engaged to film and it involved a fighter called Kid Lewis, whose son later became a cinematographer and a film producer, and Kid Lewis had got this title fight in London. Now the man that was producing the film, was known... his name was Jones and he was known as Knocker Jones because he very often failed to pay up, so he got this reputation of... of being called Knocker Jones. Well several cameramen, I think about eight cameramen with their equipment, were supposed to turn up for this championship fight and on the night my father was the only one that showed up because all the others decided it wasn't worth doing because you wouldn't get paid anyway. So my father turned up, the only camera on the fight. So the fight starts and my father starts shooting and he's got several magazines and he reloads between rounds, and then eventually he runs out of film and the fight is still... still going on, so he has to go into the changing bag to reload. But whilst he's reloading Kid Lewis wins by a knockout and so my father hasn't got the... you know, the climax to the fight, which was a disaster you see, and so they staged a knockout; they faked it all and then it came out in the cinemas and this... this mock-up was so apparent that the audience all complained that it was a fake and wanted their money back.

So this is a letter that Walter Forde wrote to my father, 18th February 1921:
Dear Billy, this is just a business letter, which I want you to read entirely as a business letter. On thinking over the proposition as it stands I've come to the conclusion that from my point of view it is rather altered by your suggestion to charge me for the negative. I must confess that when I first discussed the matter with you, I understand... understood you were putting in the neg together with your services as your part of the assets and that I was putting in the script and my services as my part of the assets, and all actual expenses to be shared. If, as you suggest, you charge for the negative that means you're only putting in your services as cameraman, whilst I'm putting in my services, which from the point of view of selling the picture, are far more valuable than your services as a cameraman and also providing the script, which, as you know, is no easy matter. This you will see is neither equal or fair. Even as I understood the proposition to stand in the first place, it was a trifle in your favour as I am providing the two most difficult things and the two most important from the point of view of selling the picture. No Billy, I certainly cannot agree to your charging for the neg whilst you are on a 50% basis. I might just as well charge for my script, which is just as more, or even more important, and believe me my gags are just as valuable to me as your neg... as your neg is to you. No, we must have an alteration in the percentage, whichever you prefer. Don't you think that I want... I don't think that I want to do you, or I want to get the best of the bargain. I just want you to reconsider it from my point of view as well as your own, rather as I understood it to be; that is to say, you to provide your services and the negative and me to provide my services and the script. It is, of course, being agreed that we both do whatever we can in outside matters to further and help the production. Let me have your opinion on the matter by return of post or, if not, I will be over on Sunday and we can have a good chow over it. As I said to start with, this is entirely a business letter and I hope it makes no business whatever to our private friendship.
It's quite interesting how some films were set up in those days with... with just two people getting together and... and pooling their resources, and... and getting the... getting the show off the ground.

My father had a... a variety of cameras over the years and I think in the... in the early '20s he was either using a Williamson or a Moy. Later on, in my memory, he had a 400ft Debrie Parvo, which he could hand crank and I remember he used to do... he used to do the titles for his films as... as well as the production and he'd... he’d got a mechanism on the Debrie camera where he was hand cranking and he'd press another lever and it would fade out, then he'd wind... wind back, change the title, press the fade button and start rolling again, and you'd have a dissolve in the camera, which of course was... was much cheaper and also much better than doing it in the laboratory. So he had this wonderful old Debrie camera – well it wasn't old then – made of wood and he... I remember he used to buy lenses and scale them himself, and maintain the whole thing and... that was a very important part of... of his life because if he didn't have a camera then, you didn't work. There were no rental houses and so each... each cameraman had his own gear.

In 1928, before I was born, my... my father went on a big production to Africa and it was sponsored by General Motors, and it was the Gen... the Chevrolet expedition from Cape Town to Cairo and two... two trucks and a saloon car drove the 3000 miles from Cape Town to Cairo when there were hardly any roads, and they sometimes made roads, they forded rivers, they bumped the railway line and they travelled to Cairo, and there were only four or five people on this expedition. There was the leader — who was a radio operator — a press reporter and my father and an entomologist; I think there were five of them, and they got to Cairo and then there... from Cairo they drove all through Europe to finish up in Gothenburg in Sweden; of course it took months, and I suppose it was an early form of advertising but it was promotion on a big scale and I've... I’ve tried in recent years to find out what happened to that film but... I've even tried the American Library of Congress but I haven't been able to find any print, but it would be wonderful archive material. So he had this... he developed this great love for Africa and in fact he went back again in 1935 with a director called MA Weatherill to film Safari, which was a film about the big game in east Africa — Kenya and Tanganyika.

When I was a few months old, just... it'd be just after my father came back from this Chevrolet expedition, I think he must have had a bit of money because they moved and we went to live in Morden in Surrey, about a mile from the tube station at the end of the Northern line, and we lived in a... in a semi-detached, a small semi-detached house; two down and three bedrooms upstairs and a small garden, and there were a number of houses in the road but just after we moved there, about four or five years afterwards, they started to build the St Helier Estate, a council estate, and they brought a lot of people from east London I think to relieve the housing problem there. So they built this huge estate and I think three schools, and they all had different numbers; number one, number two and number three school, and I went to number three school, which was, oh, less than half a mile up the road, so I could walk to school and back and we used to come home for lunch and walk back again. It was just up the road and I started off in... in the junior school there when I was about five I think, until I was, I think, 10 or 11 when I moved to the senior school, and in those days we had an examination at 11 called the 11-plus. So we all... everyone took the 11-plus and I, unfortunately, didn't pass the 11-plus. So that meant that when I was 14 I'd reached the school-leaving age.

Then the question came of what was I going to do? Now my mother, who was much more security minded and of course, had lived all her married life with this insecurity of... of my father being in and out of work, having good times and bad times, and also he was a bit of a gambler; he loved horse racing, so that he was always kind of taking chances both in looking for work but also taking chances with backing horses, so she'd... she’d lived through a lot of... of this financial insecurity, and she had a brother-in-law, whom I liked very much, who... who had a business in the City of London on the Stock Exchange, and this uncle was willing to offer me a job to start as an office boy, but on the other hand, I'd got a lot of experience of the film world through my father, I mean the... the kitchen table was always covered with bits and pieces of cameras that were being repaired and lenses that were being scaled, so I'd... I’d been associated with... with cameras and film-making for as long as I could remember, and my father said, 'Well why don't you start off with me as... as an assistant’, you see. So I... I had this choice to make and my mother was usually right, she was much more stable emotionally and... and her judgement was usually much more sound than my father's, but I really didn't fancy going into the city and sitting at a... at a desk all day. So I went with my father and I was only 14, and it was quite tough because he was a very hard taskmaster; everything had to be done just right and, of course, the camera had to be looked after like a baby; it was so precious and everything had to be done in a certain way and at 14 I found it really... really quite hard.

We started travelling and because the war was still on, we'd lived through part of the Blitz and for a period I'd gone down to... we'd been evacuated to the West Country but then came back. So we stayed in this house throughout most of the... most of the war and, you know, if... sometimes one would go into a shelter at night and other times you'd just, you know, stay and hope for the best. And so we started making films for the... the Admiralty — the Royal Naval Air Service — and I went to a number of air stations and, they... they were training films, and then we did a number of industrial films. I remember going to the... the factory where they make Raleigh bicycles and I couldn't believe how noisy it was, how noisy the working conditions were for these people, but it was another interesting side of life, and... we also did three and four-reelers that were programme fillers for the cinemas and I can remember several of them; one was called Boys Of The Old Brigade, which was about the Chelsea pensioners; another one was set in Cornwall, Land Of The Saints, a travel film; another one was called Animal Wonderland, where we went to Chessing... London Zoo and... and Whipsnade and filmed the animals, and then a bit later on, just when the full... war was getting near to its end, we went to the hop fields and made a... a children's film called Here We Come Gathering, and it... it was children working... working, collecting the hops in the summer of 1944 I think it was, so the war was getting towards an end.

My father was always sort of trying to make an extra few bob when he wasn't working and we were always shooting in black and white in those days, and he would never throw away the short ends because, you know, 15ft or 20ft would make up several cassettes for still photographers, and so he'd keep all his short ends and then go into the changing bag and he'd wind on these 5ft lengths of cassettes and feed them into the... into the cassette, and then take them up to a shop in High Holborn called Brunnings, which was... was a shop that sold still cameras and movie camera accessories, and lenses and so on, and, of course, he made quite a bit of money out of this because the film was so scarce, the only disadvantage was it didn't have the edge numbers that a... a proper cassette would have, but that was a little sideline that sort of kept things going when he wasn't working.

In 1946 there came a really... a real high point in my... in my experience with him because he got a job with the Colonial Film Unit in 1946, which sent film units to either East Africa or West Africa, and we'd make educational or training films for the... the local people and they would be sent back for processing and editing in England and then reduced to 16mm and sent back, and they'd go around in mobile cinema vans, and there... shown to the local people for education purposes. So we set sail from Tilbury in 1946 — November 1946 — and I spent eight months in Kenya and then Uganda, and we landed in... we went by ship through the Suez Canal, which was a marvellous experience, and landed in Mombassa where we picked up three army staff corps cars with four wheel drives, and I was only 17 and I learnt to drive on these vehicles on the roads in Africa, which were almost free of traffic; it was the most marvellous experience just driving through this beautiful countryside with wild animals everywhere, and then of course, we went through a rainy season where you'd drive through seas of mud and... and you'd have to be fighting to control the vehicle, and it was just enormous fun. And after initially living in a hotel in Nairobi we went out into the bush and lived under canvas, and of course, it was like, it was just... just a great boy's adventure for me. We had... the loc... local native people would prepare our food and do our laundry and we had canvas beds and canvas baths, and it was just... just wonderful. Then when we went in Uganda we lived in mud huts and there was no water supply, and we used to have to take water from a local swamp and filter it and then boil it, and that was our drinking water.

Now just before the end of the war my father bought a camera from an American serviceman who must have brought it back as loot from Germany and it was an Arriflex. Now the Arriflex camera had never been seen in England and I think my father was the first one to own one, and it was the model 2A and it had a three lens turret and a shutter that I think was about 130°, and of course, this... this mirror shutter device, which was revolutionary, no other camera had this principle, and it had the motor in the handle and it was a beautiful camera to hand-hold; it was.. it was so well-balanced and initially it had 200... just 200ft magazines and, of course, you had to have batteries and you could either have a belt battery or, if you wanted a more solid battery, then you'd have to carry it with a shoulder strap. And so he bought this beautiful camera with a set... he had, I think, a 28mm Schneider, a 35 Zeiss, 50 and 85mm Zeiss and 125 Astro. Well in addition to this he had a clockwork camera called a DeVry, which used to take 100ft spools and you... you could load them in daylight, you... I mean you wouldn't do it in sunlight but you... you had 100ft on a black spool, which you would load into the camera, it would feed onto another spool the other side, and then you could unload it and... and somebody, but you could only run a 100ft on that. And another camera that he had at various times was an Eyemo, which was... which was the combat camera that the Americans and the British troops used. So they were using this clockwork Eyemo and the German cameramen were using this Arriflex, which, of course, needed batteries but it was a much better camera altogether. So this was a great asset, this Arriflex, and we took it to Kenya and it behaved perfectly. We were there for eight months and then when we came back, we flew back and we did... we leap-frogged all the way from Nairobi at various stopping points up the Nile, like Khartoum and oh... and then we got to Cairo and we stayed overnight in Cairo, and it was all arranged for us to... to fly back from Cairo in a Sunderland flying boat, which was a beautiful plane with... with four propeller driven engines and I remember we... we checked in at Cairo with... with all our luggage and all this camera equipment, you see, and when we got there the... the pilot said: ’Oh we can't take all this camera equipment; we... we've got a full payload with the passengers and luggage we can't take the camera equipment’, and my father said, ’Well’ he said, ’If we don't take the camera equipment’, he said, ‘I don't go, because that camera doesn't go anywhere without me’, and he insisted that the cameras went with us and so they were loaded. We got into the plane and we took off on the Nile; a wonderful, wide river, and I thought we would never take off because the plane just seemed to go on and on and on, and we weren't getting off the water, and I thought: we're overloaded; it's all this camera equipment, we're never going to take off. Of course eventually we did, but in those days planes took off very, very, very slowly and only gradually left the water or the ground. Anyway, it was a marvellous flight and we stopped off in Malta to refuel and then we landed in Poole Harbour.

Then I was 18 and so I was due for call-up, national service; everyone had to do two years national service and I applied to the RAF to be a photographer, and I was quite lucky; I got into the section to train to be a photographer and spent... I think it was 16 weeks training at a place called Wellsbourne Mountford, and then I moved onto a place in Oxford called Nuneham Park, which is... was a subsidiary to Benson. Benson was an aerodrome with a photographic establishment and Nuneham Park was a few miles away, where we did all the printing for the aerial survey work. So we had these wide bands of film that would... would come in and we'd have to print them and then make up the maps for the aerial survey... on to surveys, so it... it was kind of keeping in touch with, in a way with things that I'd had before and also taking still photographs, and it was a very happy time, particularly because I made some very good friends; Sandy Rawlingson who now lives in Australia and Tony Moore who went to live in Canada and... and John Jochimsen whom I'd met at the Colonial Film Unit just before I went to Africa and he was also in the RAF as a photographer.

So when I came out of the RAF I... I felt that it was time perhaps for me to become independent of my father and look for a job on my own, and so with my friend John Jochimson, that I'd been in the RAF with, we both went looking for a job and applied to a place in Petite France in London, a film company called British Transport Films. Now the trai... the railways had recently been nationalised and the British Transport Commission had been set up, and the British Transport Commission formed a film company under the leadership of Edgar Anstey, who was an early documentary filmmaker, and British Transport Films made films about the railways, the docks, the inland waterways, road transport, and so I applied there for a job you see and... but nothing happened; they didn't have a job. So I went away and a couple of weeks later I got a phone call inviting me to go up to Hull where they were making a film about the... about Hull docks and the turnaround of a cargo ship.
So I initially went up for a couple of weeks and that became longer and eventually I... I became a regular member of the staff as an assistant cameraman, and with an office in Petite France initially and then they moved to Saville Row, and this went on for about five years. And so we were shooting, you know, training films in black and white, 35mm black and white, training films on the railways, and there was a film we did in Southampton called Berth 24, which was about the great ocean liners, and I remember going on to board the... the old Queen Mary and seeing all this wonderful art deco interior; beautiful ship, and then we went on the Queen Elizabeth and sailed as far as Cherbourg to get scenes on board ship. And then we went on a tugboat called the Calshot and this tugboat was a very prominent feature of this film because... and then the captain was a leading character, and we went on board the Calshot and did shots of the Queen Elizabeth as she was leaving, you see, under... under steam and we had two or three cameras shooting, in fact I was operating one of the cameras and we were shooting various angles of... of the Queen Elizabeth leaving England. It was a lovely day and we kept on shooting and shooting and eventually we got a radio message from the captain of the Queen Elizabeth to say: ’If you've finished your filming may we please proceed to America?’ And so that was a marvellous experience going on board these lovely ocean liners.

And we also did films on the railways and there was one particular film called The Elizabethan Express, which was a steam train which went from King's Cross to Edinburgh, non-stop. I think it was six and a half hours and this was in about the... mid-'50s, 1954 or something like that, and we had a lot of shots to do on this train but the... the scenes that I remember the most were actually being on the footplate of this locomotive travelling between 90 and 100 miles an hour, and I was the assistant cameraman and the cameraman was Jim Ritchie and he was hand-holding this Newman Sinclair, which was a clockwork camera, And square. Yes, a very square aluminium box, which you had to keep winding up every time it started to slow down a little bit; you'd wind it up a... by clockwork, and I remember the excitement of being on the footplate because we... this thing was thundering along and you'd got this cold air coming in on one side and the... the driver by the regulator controlling the speed and watching the road ahead, and the fireman opening the boiler and this great furnace with tremendous heat coming out and this... constantly shovelling coal, tons of coal, and so you got the cold air on one side and this hot air on the other side and this tremendous feeling of speed, and then, of course, when you had to pick up water, the water would fly everywhere and, as I say, it was non-stop so they had a relief crew and alongside the... the tender where the coal was, there was a very, very narrow passageway so that one crew could leave the engine and the other crew could come from the passenger compartment to take over the train; and it... it was just... just wonderfully exciting and... we also did films that were perhaps a bit more mundane, on the... on the track. You know, about how to maintain the railway track and... extraordinary, the... the commitment that these people had. They... they worked in gangs and each gang had a section of railway line that they looked after and that was their responsibility, and they took a real pride in looking after it and making sure that everything was level and the packing was there and, you know, this... we made this instructional film really about... about doing that so one got an insight into how the railways were maintained.

I some... I remember something about Grierson which stuck with me all through my career really in that he described documentary as the dramatisation of reality and, of course, I spent all my early years in documentary, and then later on when I was to get into feature films, this... this sort of early training and appreciation of cinema was really to affect the work I did later on, this dramatisation of reality. But just to stay with British Transport Films for a bit longer, we... we also did films on the canals, on the narrow boats, in the early '50s and it was extraordinary how primitive things were, because very often these barges were horse drawn still and they had to negotiate tunnels and the only way to get through a tunnel sometimes was to... to lie on your back and push your feet against the roof of the tunnel, to push the boat through, and the... the conditions of these people living on these narrow boats was... was really very primitive; immensely hard work and I did a couple of films involving work on the canals.

I really wanted to get into feature films; I was beginning to appreciate cinema much more and there was a lovely cinema I used to go to in Oxford Street called the Academy Cinema, which... which always had foreign films on and sort of more art films, and I was beginning to appreciate the aesthetics side of cinema much more because I think, as an assistant with my father and with British Transport Films, it was very much a technical job, you know, know... knowing the camera, being able to take the camera apart and put it together again, knowing the lenses, handling the film stock, loading the film stock, knowing the filters and generally it was a very technical job, and it was when I was in my early 20s I think that I really began to get a more appreciation for the aesthetics of cinema, particularly European cinema, and I wanted to move into features but there was no way of doing it because, if you... if you'd grown up and were trained in documentaries, it was a very different field from feature films.
Feature films were like the Premier League is now and... and if you wanted to work in features you had to start in the camera room and the camera department of a major studio as a... a tea boy, if you like, and then eventually you'd get onto doing the clapper and loading and work up to focus and operating, and eventually you might become what was called in the British system, a lighting cameraman, but very often people remained as operators or as focus pullers and made a... a whole career of... of being in that one particular grade. So there were very definite divisions in the feature film world, whereas in documentary you were either an assistant who did everything that needed to be done with the camera or you were the cameraman who operated and lit and set up, and so on. So... you're working with a very much smaller group and that's the way that I'd grown up, and it was obviously a very far cry from working in a major studio. So I... I had no experience of working in a major studio; I'd worked in some smaller studios with my father on... on sort of minor projects; he did a number of small feature films and... but always working with very limited equipment, and so, you know, I didn't have this experience of having worked with a very well known cinematographer. But things changed when commercials arrived. Commercial television started, I think, in about 1955 or '56.

One of the directors I'd worked with at British Transport, Michael Clarke, had been given a job to direct a film for a company called Film Centre and the film was going to be sponsored by the Iraq Petroleum Company and it was going to be shot around Europe. Now it occurred to me that it might be a good idea to have my own camera because I'd... I’d grown up with my father having his own equipment and I found that I'd got enough money saved up, particularly from my spell in Africa, and I spent my entire savings on buying an Arriflex camera with a set of Cooke lenses specifically to do this job in Europe for the Iraq Petroleum Company.
So I invested everything in... in this camera equipment; it was a huge... huge risk, and went off to Europe with an assistant cameraman, Alan Hewison, and Michael Clarke and his assistant Ralph Sheldon, and we travelled around Europe and it... it was really a very enjoyable experience. It was... it was all exteriors and so it wasn't too demanding in terms of lighting, but I was very keen on hand-held work and, of course the Arriflex was... was ideal for that and one of the cameramen that I'd worked with when I was at British Transport was Reg Hughes, who was a kind of specialist with hand-held work and I remember him saying, ‘Now, when you're hand-holding’, he said, ‘the important thing is, if you can, to hold your breath and also, if you're doing a walking shot, is to bend your knees’. So you walk along like Groucho Marx and that cushions the movement and makes it altogether more steady you see. So I'd become quite... quite good at this hand-held work and, of course, with the hand-held camera you can... you can be so much more responsive to things that are happening; it's... it’s immediate, isn't it, and you can quickly change the height as if you were on a dolly; you can raise and lower, and so there's an awful lot of things you can do hand-held, you know, once you've got the hang of it.
So that was my beginnings as a cameraman and then the same company... were given a job to go to Iraq, which was where the Iraq Petroleum Company was based, to make a film about the cultural history of Mesopotamia and so, having completed this film in... in Europe, I then, almost immediately, went off to Iraq, to Baghdad, and... to do this film about the cultural history of the Middle East. The film was called Rivers Of Time and the rivers being the Tigris and the Euphrates — the two great rivers — and we travelled around all over the country to famous historical sites, biblical sites such as Babylon and Yrr and Nineveh; places that we'd read about in the Old Testament, and it was quite extraordinary, so we're going to Babylon, and seeing all these excavations which went down, you know, perhaps 50' into the ground where they'd excavated and... and there were all these different layers of civilisation. And in many... many of these places they had these wonderful frieze with... with the earliest form of writing, because the... I think it was the Sumerians, were the people that first write... first created an alphabet and this writing was in... Cuneiform. Cuneiform yes, and there were these huge tablets with all this writing on in marvellous condition and... and these were all over the country at... at various sites, and wonderful carvings of... of the kind of... the leaders and of animals.
And, we also went to the Baghdad Museum and the Mosel Museum where they've got all these wonderful treasures, and when this... this dreadful war broke out and, you know, the... the museums were... were sacked and... The recent one? So many of these priceless things were destroyed. I was so really dismayed at what was happening because that was the beginning of our civilisation; these were the first townships, it was the earliest... it was the beginning of writing, the invention of the wheel and this is where civilisation as we know it started, in Mesopotamia. So we travelled all over Iraq and then into Syria where we filmed some more well known excavations and so on and... I was there for about four months and it... it was unbelievably hot, because we were there in the summer and people in those days didn't... didn’t work outside in the middle of the day unless you were crazy because it was so hot. They had air-conditioning and the only people that were on the streets were... in the heat of the day were the sort of poorer people who had to go about their business but, I remember going to Basra, which was the hottest place I'd ever been in at that point; it was about 115 in the shade with, you know, tremendous humidity.

I remember Baghdad as being in... in the early 50s, mid-50s rather, as being almost like a medieval city and it was... it was people carrying loads on their back, enormous loads, extremely heavy – a very, very strong people the Iraqi people – and it's very colourful and you'd see carpets laid out in the streets... new carpets, which they wanted to look more aged so they'd put them in the roadway and all the cars would drive over them and break them down. And they'd sell them as antiques, would they? They'd look more like antique carpets, yes. But I made some good friends there because the Iraq Petroleum Company had... had set up a film unit in Baghdad and the assistants, the assistant cameramen and the assistant directors were Iraqis, so we made some very good friends there and we used to play cricket –; cricket in Baghdad – terribly English, and so that was a marvellous experience and I was there for about four months.

Before… just before I became a cameraman I met Anne at a dance in Richmond and it was love at first sight, and we were to… we were courting in those days and I was going off quite a lot — away  — and I remember I was in Iraq on… for her 21st birthday. And then we married in 1957 and we have four daughters and four granddaughters, and three years ago we… we got a grandson. So, you know, I've been happily… very happily married during that period and that stability, my family life, I think has played a… a very important part in my career. As you know in our business it's… there have been very… there have been a lot of, you know, matrimonial break-ups, it's been… I think working in the film industry is… is a very testing… You're a long way from home. It's a very testing occupation because you… you're travelling a lot, it's very insecure; you don't know whether you're going to be working next month or not, and then if you are working you might be the other side of the world. So I think for our wives it's… it’s very difficult and I've… I’ve been really lucky that I met Anne.

So I came back from Baghdad and... and continued working in... in documentaries and short films for several years with... with a variety of companies, mostly using my own camera, which had quickly paid for itself, and I'd also, by then, bought a very early zoom lens; it was a SOM Berthiot, it was French... With a lever underneath? With a lever underneath and I think it went from 38mm to... It was 3:1 I think. About 95 or 100, so it was a very early zoom lens and it was good quality. So I had that and the Cooke lenses; I think my Cooke lenses went up to 75 and the widest I had was an 18. So it was quite a good set of lenses and the Cooke... I loved the Cooke lenses; I used those lenses for years and years after that; those Cooke Speed Panchros because they had a lovely... they had a lovely contrast range. I thought they were very good on faces; they weren't too harsh. The Zeiss lenses were — I always felt — a little bit sharper and a little bit too hard and... you know, I just like the look of the Cooke's. The zoom lens wasn't so easy to use hand-held I recall? Oh no. Because it was a... a lever action... that's right... that’s right. As opposed to... no, I never really tried to use that... that zoom hand-held. They brought out a later zoom, which was a 3:1, which went from 20 to 60, but that was much later on and that... that, you could use that hand-held because it wasn't too heavy.

My heroes, I suppose at that time were Gregg Toland, you know, obviously Citizen Kane and Grapes Of Wrath, and Jimmy Wong Howe, the American cameraman — the Japanese American — his work was always very interesting and I liked the work of a Russian cameraman, Eduard Tisse, who I think did Ivan The Terrible, and Aleksander Nevsky; those films were... Very dramatic. Very dramatic and wonderfully striking imagery, and Guy Green of course, whose, you know, his black and white was just magnificent, Oliver Twist and Great Expectations. And then in colour, I... Jack Cardiff, of course, was, I think, the leading British cinematographer of the time, and I remember The Red Shoes and Black Narcissus, and then a film he did later on called The Vikings, which had some wonderful stuff with these long boats and I remember dusk scenes with lights in the boats and I thought that was all very impressive. He seemed to be doing a lot of very innovative work, Jack. And I remember a French film called The River, which was Renoir, wasn't it? Renoir. I think it was made in India, wasn't it? Made in India, yes, and of course, Kurosawa, Seven Samurai was in black and white; that was a magnificent film with all those battle scenes in the rain. And I think of more my... more contemporary heroes, once I'd become established, was Sven Nykvist, a Swedish cameraman, because I... he always seemed to be able to create a very naturalistic look. It was dramatic but at the same time naturalistic and I liked the way he... he lit faces. I... I also liked the films he did with Bergman. He used very few lights I believe? Very, very few lights, yes. I met him a few times and I always remember him saying: 'It is better to keep... keep things simple; it's better to be simple.' There's a lot to be said for that.

So I had this... this desire to... to move into features but not able to be... make the jump. And then, it must have been about 19... well the mid... mid '50s, commercial television arrived and I got a phone call from a chap called Jim Garrett, who'd been a production manager at British Transport Films and I'd... I’d known him for... for several years, and he’d just started this company called Television Advertising and they had a studio in the basement at Film House, Wardour Street, and he said, 'Oh we need someone for... to operate for a day; would you like to come in?' and I said, 'Well, you know, I'm... I’m not really an operator but...' he said, 'Oh, you know, come in for a day or two'. So I... I went in and this day extended, you know, more days and more days and... and I was operating and... and learning to use the geared head, because previously all my work had been on a friction head, learning to use the geared head, and enjoying it. But... and I was working under a, you know, very capable cameraman called Jeff Garron, but they were a very busy company and they were also... they... they didn't always just have one unit going, they sometimes had two or three and they'd bring other cameramen in, you know, on a daily basis. So I kept saying to everybody, really I want to be... to be lighting, and in the end I persuaded them to let me move from operating to lighting, and now looking back I... I remember my early work as being very kind of tentative and unsure, not particularly good, but it was a learning process and it... it was a wonderful place to learn because a commercial... you'd shoot a 30 second commercial in half a day or you might spend a whole day on ... on 30 seconds, if it was a more difficult subject. Some of them were with sound, some of them were silent. They involved product; they were always pack shots, which had to be lit quite differently, or there was a specialist way of lighting products so that it looked its best and most appealing, and we worked in this small studio with very low head room; it only had headroom of about 10ft or 11ft, so the lights were always packed right up to the ceiling, and generally speaking people... other cameramen, and myself included, were working with... with hard lights, just direct light. And I remember one day we were shooting a jelly... a jelly mould, and it was a food commercial obviously, and a still photographer had come in to kind of give us a bit of advice, and he said: 'Haven't you tried shooting this jelly and the product with softer light?' We didn't have any soft lights in those days. So we got some drawing... from the drawing office, we got some tracing paper and this provided a very nice diffusion. So we made this tracing paper up in frames and lot... shot the light through the tracing paper, and of course that gave a much softer light, softer shadows, it spread the high... it got rid of these very hard high lights, and with something like a jelly, it looked so much better lighting it with soft light. And then I thought: oh there's, you know, there’s a lot to be said for this... this soft light and I really became very interested in developing it.

When you think back over the history of cinema, you go back to my father's period where they drew the curtains to soften the sunlight, it was soft light, and when you look back on all the silent films, like all the Chaplin's and the Buster Keaton's, all those early silent pictures in black and white, the light was very diffused, and it was very appealing that you didn't have all these hard shadows chasing around. But of course it was in... in contrast to the film noir period, which we'd gone through in the '40s and '50s, where... where hard shadows were very much a feature and perhaps a design of a shot, who gets this strong shadows, long shadows on the wall. But also you had the problem with hard lights of getting multi-shadows. I think, you know, one... one strong shadow is generally acceptable, but where you've got several shadows, because you're trying to fill in with hard lights and you get all these little shadows on the back wall, it's very distracting and I thought: well I've got to find a way around this and so I started working much more with this diffused light. And of course, we were still working in black and white, and then colour came, colour television and we had colour monopack, I think the first monopack stock techno... eastern colour monopack came out in 1949. Prior to that, if you were shooting in colour, you had to shoot in three-script or in 60mm kodachrome. So when this... when the mono-pack came of course it was much slower, do you remember the speed of mono-pack, the first? About 12 western exterior... 12, yes. So, but by the time, by the mid '50s the colour film stock was up to 50; it was 50 ASA and the Plus-X was... Kodak Plus-X was, I think, 64 to tungsten and there was Double-X that was about 200. So that was a reasonably fast film, the... the Double-X, and there was a Tri-X as well. So colour came in and of course, that was a whole new field, going from black and white to colour, and although I didn't realise it at the time, it's something that has developed over the years that I think partly because I started in black and white, that I continued to light colour as if it was black and white, although they always said you've got to have more fill light with colour because it didn't have the same latitude and you had to fill in the shadows more. But right throughout my career I've been very conscious of... of tonal values and of separating different planes tonally and not just by colour, so that I would always try and put a light colour on a dark colour on a light colour, and... and to do this by composition, initially where you put the camera and separate the... the characters from the background by... by using tone as well as colour. And I mean, f you... if you look at some of the great masters in the museums and they're in colour, you get these wonderful rich colours, areas of light and shade and then you buy a postcard perhaps that's in black and white, the same picture in black and white, and you've still got the separation in... in tonal values as well as the colour separation. And so this was something that... that has interested me for many, many years now, of this appreciation of... of separation tonally, and so I've continued to light colour as... as if it was black and white, and have always loved black and white and would... would loved to have done much more work than I have in black and white.

I was still with Television Advertising and we were working in this little basement studio, but occasionally a big job would come along and we'd need a big stage and we'd go to Shepperton perhaps, which was a real treat, you know, to get onto a big stage.  But it was usually with a white cyclorama- because an awful lot of commercials at that time were kind of set in limbo. So you had the white cyclorama, which was coved down to the floor and coved into the corner, and sometimes, you know, it would be, you know, 100 feet one side and 50 feet the other, so it would be a big area of white, which had to be lit out so that it was pure white and then the foreground would stand out cleanly from the background. And so that was, you know, a further development of my experience of actually going into a major studio. But, of course, it was one thing to be lighting just a white backing with a foreground and another thing to be lighting a major set, which I didn't really have experience of because most of the commercial things we were doing were very small sets. But what happened really- the really important thing for me during this period was the opportunity to work with other filmmakers, because there were other cameramen coming in and out all the time. Bob Painter became a staff cameraman at Television Advertising as I did. I eventually became on the staff. I was paid a weekly wage, which was pretty unusual in our end of street to have a job where you had a regular job. So I was on a weekly wage and so was Bob Painter, and other cameramen used to come in on a daily rate. There were a number of staff directors but there were also directors that came in for particular jobs, including Ken Russell and John Schlesinger, Ted Kotcheff, and I did commercials with them and little realising that in a few years' time I would be doing features with them. And so commercials were a stepping-stone for me, in coming from documentary, because first of all I was learning how to work in a studio, work with dialogue, work with actors more rather than, you know, unprofessional actors, learning how to do portraiture. I think portraiture is such an important part of what we do, the way the actors look and this was a thing of growing interest to me, is portrait lighting and, you know, I learned a great deal from studying some of the portraiture of people like Karsh, and you get a National Portrait Galley in Trafalgar Square and see the work of, you know, Cartier-Bresson and those early photographers. And so I was developing a feel for photographing people and storytelling. With commercials, of course, it was always a very short story, 15, 30 seconds; 60 seconds was a long commercial, but a lot of things came out of that period in commercials because they were very experimental in many ways. It was bringing people together from different fields.The directors were coming from television, from the theatre, from feature films and so were the designers and the cinematographers.  So it was bringing a whole group of people together in a new medium and it was developing its own technology, its own techniques. And because a story had to be told in 15 or 30 seconds, you had to find another way of doing things. I mean, in the cinema a scene runs for as long as it needs to run, but in a commercial, of course, you only had exactly 15 or 30 seconds, or 60 seconds, and that was it. So it was a kind of shorthand technique where, through the use of camera and simplifying things, you had to put across the message in a very short space of time, so that two and three second shots were more the norm than longer scenes. I mean, sometimes if you had a dialogue commercial you'd have longer shots, but very often things were getting faster and faster cut in order to put across the point in this short period of time. So that kind of new film grammar, that new way of looking at things was very stimulating and it was changing all the time, and, of course, equipment was changing; lots of new lenses were coming out, long-focus lenses, wider angle lenses. The film stock still hadn't changed very much. It was still 50 ASA and so you needed quite a lot of light inside and that was- you know, we always worked with tungsten. We always worked with tungsten in the studio. If I went into Shepperton for a job- say I needed an arc light, it was a great thrill to work with a Brute. Then you would use a Brute with a white flame carbon because I believe it burned better and you put the orange filter on the Brute to bring it down to the colour temperature so you could mix it with the tungsten light.

						1965 I shot my first feature film. It was called 'San Ferry Ann' and it was in black and white, directed by Jeremy Summers, and it was the story of a group of British holidaymakers, catching the ferryboat at Dover, crossing the channel and arriving in Calais, and it was a comedy with all the obvious things that the English used to encounter when they went to a foreign country in those days, and we had a marvellous cast of many of the people that have been in Carry On films, like Barbara Windsor and Joan Sims, Wilfred Bramble, Ron Moody, Graham Stark and-so we travelled from Dover to Calais and what was unusual about it, is that it was a silent film; there was no dialogue. It had a music score, a very amusing track by Ron Goodwin, but no- just effects, but no dialogue. So it was quite a challenge; you had to tell the story as if it were a silent film, and the company that made it was called Dormar. Now the year before they'd made a similar film, which was called 'A Home Of Your Own', which was shot on the same principle of no sound and had been the most successful short film ever made; it had been on the film circuit several times it was so good. And so this was trying to repeat that success and it turned out well and it got a cinema release as one of the Bolting Brothers' pictures, and so I'd got a film out there on the circuit and, you know, it was great fun to do it. I had- I used my own camera but I had a very small lighting package because there weren't many interiors and there wasn't much money on the film. But I got the job through David Anderson, who was the production manager, and David Anderson I had worked with on commercials and so there I was, I got my first feature picture and I was absolutely thrilled. Well the same company then went on to make another film, but this time in colour, just a few months afterwards called 'Just Like A Woman', and we shot in a studio in Isleworth- well I say it was a studio, it had just been converted from being a cinema. So it was new studio and it was quite long, quite high but rather narrow, and the story was of a matrimonial relationship which had broken down- it was Wendy Craig and Francis Matthews, and- so they were separating and the thing that the woman most wanted was to have the most wonderful bathroom. And so she had- they separated and she had a bathroom built in the middle of a field, and we had a lovely supporting cast of comedy actors and it's the only time in my life where I've had an influence over who directed the picture, because the producer was Bob Kellett, and Bob Kellett had produced this little black and white film, 'San Ferry Ann', and he hadn't- he'd got a director in mind though he couldn't make up his mind who was going to direct his next film, and he said to me- well who do you suggest? And I suggested a chap called Bob Fuest, whom I'd also worked with on commercials, who'd been a designer and become a director, but he also did a bit of writing. And so Bob Fuest directed 'Just Like A Woman' and it was a nice little film, and it went to the Edinburgh Film Festival, which was, you know, a great thrill. So that was my second feature film and I remember we had a lovely continuity lady called Lily Poiser and I said to Lily one day, I said, how do you- how do I get on to the big pictures, because I'm just really anxious to get, you know, into the big time. And she said- little by little. So I said, all right; well I've got to wait for a bit.
					
						The next film was another comedy with Dudley Moore. That was called 'Thirty Is A Dangerous Age, Cynthia', directed by Joe McGraf, who was comedy director who'd worked with Peter Sellers and, he's a very funny guy, and we shot on location in Wimbledon and in the studio in St John's Wood, and it was about a guy who's approaching 30 and, you know, he wanted to have made some mark in his career by the time he reached 30 and he was a musician and he wrote a musical which appeared as if it was going to be an absolute disaster, but in fact turned out to become, you know, a success, so he succeeded by the time he was 30. We also went to Dublin. I had my first experience of working with the Irish, which was a delight. I really- the Irish crews were such fun and they're such wonderful storytellers that I've always enjoyed working in Ireland. Looking back on this film, which has been on television a number of times, I kind of wish I hadn't done it because looking at that- some of that early work, I really feel- oh dear; oh my goodness; I got this so wrong- in terms of lighting- I really- looking back on most of my early lighting, not all of it but a lot of my early lighting, I think oh dear; why did I do it like that?
					
						The next film was with Tony Richardson who was a well-established director. He'd come from the theatre of course but- so with Tony Richardson and starring Vanessa Redgrave, so it was quite a step forward and it was a film of about 40 minutes long called 'Red And Blue', and it was going to be part of a trilogy, and the other two episodes being directed by Karel Reisz and Peter Brooke. Well these films were made but for some reason it never came out as one whole film. So the film that I did, which was called 'Red And Blue', is about Vanessa, who's a nightclub singer, and she has various lovers in her life, going from Michael York to Douglas Fairbanks Junior and each lover relates to a song. So it was a 40 minute musical which, you know, I love doing and, again, we used this studio at Isleworth and I remember, because the title of the film was 'Red And Blue' and she was singing a song of- 'Red and Bue', I used a lot of red and blue light, and that seemed to work quite well. But I had an experience which really taught me a lesson regarding one's relationship with the director. I mean, I got on very well with Tony; he was an absolutely delightful personality. I remember when we- each morning, for breakfast, you'd would have champagne- instead of just egg and bacon; you'd have a glass of champagne before you started the day. Well that was a great start and everything was- it was enjoyable. Although he was separating from Vanessa at that time, they seemed- just seemed to be on really good terms and she was game for anything that Tony wanted, and we had a scene to do at Victoria station and we only had the station for a very limited time, because, as you can imagine, we got the train and the platform to ourselves and we got a very short couple of hours or so to do this scene. And we arrived at Victoria you see and Tony said- well, he said- I think that we should look this way down the train- okay, and I looked and I said- I don't know Tony, I said, I think it's better looking this way, the opposite way, and he- I stuck to my point you see. I argued a bit with Tony about shooting this way or this way, and in the end he said- all right darling, he said, we'll start here; that's where you want to look, isn't it; we'll start here and Vanessa can come along the platform and she can pass the camera and we'll look this way, which is the way that I'd like to look and then Vanessa can get into the carriage, and she can walk into the carriage and we can track in, you see, and we see her get in through the window; we see her put her case up on the rack and then she looks out of the window and she starts her song. And then we cut inside as she's singing this song and the train moves off and it goes to Paris. Well, of course, by arguing with the director about which way I should look, I'd given myself a real- I'd really- I'd got to light the platform both ways instead of one way, which was much more difficult as you know, and I thought- ah well, I should know when not to- when to stop disagreeing with the director or pay the penalty. But he did it in such a nice way and he made- he really made a joke of it. But it taught me a lesson, although I must say that throughout my career I've always had lots of discussions about where the camera should be, because I think, you know, what the camera's doing, that's, that's where it all starts.
					
						Then I got a phone call from Harry Salzman's office. Now Harry Salzman, as you know, had done the Bond pictures. He'd done two Harry Palmer pictures, 'The Ipcress File' and 'Funeral In Berlin' with Michael Caine and he was setting up 'Billion Dollar Brain', and Ken Russell was going to direct it. Well Otto Heller had been engaged to photograph the picture. Half of it was going to be at Pinewood and half of it was going to be in Finland in the winter, in the snow, and they'd already gone out to Finland on a recce and Otto had had a look around and he'd seen all the locations and made his equipment list, and when they came back the production manager, a lady called Eva Momney, said to Harry Salzman, look, you know, we're going to be working in a very cold environment out there and Otto's not so young; I think he should have a medical before we go. And Otto wouldn't have the medical; he refused to have a medical examination, so that meant, of course, they didn't have- couldn't have insurance on him, which meant he was off the picture. And so Harry Salzman then offered Ken a very famous British cinematographer to shoot the picture and Ken turned him down; he said he didn't want him. Harry Salzman said- well who do you want to photograph this picture and Ken asked for me. Well I had shot about six commercials for Ken over a period of two or three years I suppose; maybe six or eight commercials and we got on fine. And so this came, you know, as a great surprise to be offered this big picture, so I went up to meet Salzman and Ken, and talk about things. They wanted to see some of my work, so I was able to get the cutting copy of 'Red And Blue', the film I'd just finished with Tony Richardson, and I showed it to them and I got the job.

					
						'Billion Dollar Brain' was my first major picture and I didn't have an operator that I was really confident that I wanted to do this film with and- so I went to Bert Easy, who was head of the camera department at Pinewood and asked his advice and he said- well I think we- I've got someone that would be just right for you, and he introduced me to David Harcourt and he's a lovely man and we've been friends ever since then. Working with David I found that he was very easy, he was always contributing; it was a collaborative process and he wasn't ambitious, he didn't want to become a lighting cameraman; he was very content to stay where he was, an operator, and- but he'd worked with many of the leading cinematographers of the time, so he had a vast amount of experience; he'd worked with a lot of the top directors, and I relied on him a great deal, particularly in these early periods when I was coming in with really very little knowledge of shooting a major drama, and the rest of the crew were all top-flight and I had a wonderful gaffer too, who was on the Pinewood staff, called Johnny Swan, and the cast- we had an impressive cast; Michael Caine, Karl Malden, François Dorléac, who was the younger sister of Catherine Deneuve, and a character actor called Ed Begley, who has this idea of invading Russia, you know, because he's very anti-communist and he's a very wealthy Texan oil millionaire, and so he builds up an army intent on invading Russia across the frozen Baltic; rather like 'Alexsander Nevsky', the horsemen going across the ice.
					
						We went off to Finland first to shoot the locations in the snow and I took lights with me, of course, and I took the package that had been decided by Otto Heller, because I had no time to do a recce. Now when you're shooting- I found that shooting in snow, you've got to be careful not to under-expose, because you've got all this white light around and if you're under-exposed, everything else that's in the frame goes muddy. So I kept the exposure level up, well up, but there were times when I needed fill light on the faces because Michael Caine was very- he was wearing very dark clothing and he'd got like a hood and I needed more light on the face. I was using Brutes, which, of course, matched in with the daylight. I think we used to use an Y1 filter to match daylight, but I found that in snow the colour of the light was so cold that instead of putting this Y1, I was often sometimes putting a quarter blue or a half blue, so that my additional light matched the colour of the snow. And I've always worked with a colour temperature meter; I've always felt that a colour temperature meter is the most important thing to have when you're shooting colour, because you can't always judge by eye precisely what the colour temperature is, especially when you're working with fluorescents. So I would always check the available light and then match my additional light and make it the same colour. So quite often, particularly if getting towards dusk in the snow, the colour temperature goes up to about 10,000, so really, if you're filling in, you've got to fill in with the same colour or it looks like you've switched a light on. The other thing that I was keen to do was to diffuse this light so it didn't look like there was an artificial sunlight, because it was mostly overcast, and so I lit through these tracing paper frames that I'd become quite attached to and- we made them up in various sizes so that, in fact, instead of having a hard source of light that you do with a Brute arc light, you had actually a soft source; it was powerful but it was soft, because it might be six feet across, and that gave a shadow-less fill light; you didn't know it was there, and I think when one's used- particularly when you're using lights on location, where there shouldn't be a false- another light source, it's very important to disguise it and, of course, one can do it in this way by softening it out, and that worked, that worked fine. We had lots of scenes to do in the snow and would you believe it, they had the warmest winter for 200 years, and so in the cities the snow started to disappear. We had to send truckloads out to fill up with snow, bringing it back and spread it around the streets just to maintain the continuity. We had lots of scenes on the ice, because the Baltic Sea comes into Helsinki, the port of Helsinki, and in order to keep the fishing- the channel open, an icebreaker goes through to break up the seaway, and then it has to do that frequently because it freezes over so quickly. Well, Ken is not someone who has a lot of regard for the safety of the crew or the actors and he had Michael Caine jumping around from one ice-flow to another on this frozen sea, which had been broken up, with nobody- no protection, nobody there to rescue him if he fell in. I mean, it was an enormous risk and I was amazed that Michael agreed to do it, because it was very dangerous and Michael's not the kind of- he's not an actor that likes doing stunts, but we did it and it's in the picture, and fortunately we didn't have any mishaps. But then I had quite a few big interiors, like an ice-rink and hotels and I was kind of feeling my way with lighting because, as I say, I had not a great deal of experience but most of my experience had been on location, and certainly in those early years I think I was better lighting on location than I was in the studio, because somehow when I got into the studio I was inclined to use a bit too much light and put up too many different light sources. Whereas when you're on location you're very often restricted to where you can put a lamp, especially in those days, the equipment was so heavy you had to think twice about trying to hang something from somewhere. So a lot of light was from the floor or through the windows and so on.
					
I remember we had one important sequence to do on the ice and we were worried because it... it had been thawing. There was a local chap called the ice doctor and it was his job to test the ice and he had like a giant gimlet, which he used to screw into the ice, down to about 3ft, and he'd pull it out like a cork from a bottle and he'd come out with this 3ft of ice and he could look at it and tell you how strong it was, whether it was safe. Fortunately it was safe, because we had to land a helicopter on the ice. Oskar Homolka had to get out of the ice and there's a scene with Michael Caine before the helicopter takes off again. So we had the helicopter and a generator, and I remember, as we drove onto the ice, there were these cracks... there were these cracks in the ice and the location manager put pieces of wood across for the genny and the trucks to drive over, and these... these were several inches wide, these cracks, but we were assured that it was okay, and of course it was; fortunately we didn't have any mishaps. But we had a wonderful old Hollywood character called André De Toth. I say he was a character because he was such an interesting man; he had one eye, a black patch over one eye, and he was an old Hollywood director and in fact, directed the first film in 3D called House Of Wax. It's rather unusual to ask a one-eyed man to do a film in 3D. But anyway, that was one of his earlier films and he was married to Veronica Lake. He was vastly experienced and he was executive producer on the film and the second unit director. So he used to go off with Ginger Gemmel and get a lot of the run-by stuff and a lot of the stunts in the snow, and they came back with some wonderful material. So we finished shooting in the snow and went back to Pinewood.

All these huge sets had been built and I remember going on to E Stage where there was this enormous set encompassing the whole of the stage, and the first shot that Ken wants is a handheld shot of Ed Begley, who's this crazy Texan millionaire, walking in a circle around the camera. So it's a 360 with a 55mm handheld Arriflex shooting in Panavision; it was anamorphic. And so that was... that was what I had to do... the first shot back in the studio you see. Well, I had to call upon my electricians to help me out a bit, but anyway we did it, and I... I was soon to learn, working with Ken Russell, that he was likely to ask the sort of thing that hadn't been done before and it was no such... there was no such thing that it couldn't be done; you had to find a way of doing it. So it was a great challenge, you know, he set me a lot of... of difficult tasks and I had to find out a way to do it. And, as I say, a great deal of it was shot handheld. Whenever we could he'd choose handheld, so, of course, that made it a bit difficult because, you know, keeping the lights out of picture and everything... very difficult for the operator. But it was his style and it worked; it made the picture more exciting, it freed it up.
You know, I think a lot of British pictures around that time, or a bit earlier in that time, had become a bit stiff, a bit set. The lighting was rather predictable sometimes. There was a certain pattern of frame size and a pattern of lighting, which became a bit repetitious, and with Ken you never knew what was going to be thrown at you next, because he had a great feeling for movement and moving the camera, and so, you know, things were opening up all sort of challenges, and... and that was great; it really kept me on my toes. And although we used to have our disagreements, because Ken has a very short fuse and he would blow his top... anything that perhaps wasn't working properly or somebody had made a mistake and, you know, he was very short-tempered and... and I found that if I stood my ground with Ken and faced up to him and... and kind of argued the point — a bit like I had with Tony Richardson but not perhaps taking it too far — then I could, you know, settle things down a bit and calm him down a bit, because he used to upset quite a few people on set by this temperament, this explosive temperament. But what I liked working... about working with Ken was that, you know, he... he was full of ideas and if you... if you say, ’All right; I've... I’ve got this wrong; I'd like to try and do something else’, he'd let you do it, if you admitted you'd... you’d perhaps got something not quite right; he'd accept that. And the other thing was he had a great sense of humour, so, you know, you could have a laugh from time to time because, as you know, on any film there are always things that go wrong and... and unless you can afford to see the funny side of it, I think there's always a danger that it becomes so serious and everybody gets uptight.
And there is always a... a tension on set because everybody's creative, everybody's trying to do their own little piece for the film.... we... we're inclined to become a bit isolated into departments like... I mean, you know, the soundman is obviously only interested in the sound and the set decorator's dressed the set and wants everything to be in the right place, and so on. The script supervisor's watching the dialogue and the continuity of course... but I think the cinematographer, in addition to composing and... and lighting the scene, has got an overall thing, an overall vision of what's in front of the lens. I feel that one has a responsibility for everything the camera's seeing and I know, you know, we have to work in collaboration with... with lots of others, but I always try to be near the camera so that I can be close to what's going on. I light through the lens to a certain extent but then I prefer the operator to have the rehearsal time so that... that he can, you know, get the feel of what the actors are doing and the pace of things, and communicate with... with the grip so that things are flowing nicely.

So I'd begun to get into using softer light. So in the studio I asked for big ceiling pieces to put...be put in above the spot rail. I still use the spot rail but I had a ceiling piece above the rail into which I could bounce a couple of 10Ks, which gave me like a soft fill, top... top light, which kind of filled in some of the dark areas, because you had to fill in a little bit more in those days, the stock we had then, you had to give it a little bit more filler, and you know, it was nice to get something into the shadows. And I was still using... for the... in the studio I was still using mainly a hard soft light and trying to fill in with softer light for fill in, so the key light might be hard and the soft light filler... the fill light soft. And we used pieces of flat, painted white, to bounce light off to fill in with, but because it was a bit cumbersome and over the years, of course, getting fill light in has become so much easier with... with the development of polystyrene, which gives a lovely white surface and it's so lightweight and easy to fix, it’s... over the years it became much easier to get a soft fill light in without going to a great deal of rigging, because rigging time is... is lost time. When I think back to how long it took to light a set in those days. It was partly... you're mainly waiting for things to be put in position, because the equipment was so heavy and the cable was so heavy that you were very often just saying, well I'd like... I want a lamp there and then you wait five or 10 minutes until it gets there. Nowadays equipment is so much lighter that you can get things into place a lot easier. And of course... Of course the advantage of pre-rigging is terribly important too, to have a set pre-rigged so that things are all in position.

The space lights were developed by… well I think it was Ozzie Morris who first asked for that kind of soft lighting on Oliver, and a chap called… a wonderful electrician called Bill Chitty designed them and it was like a giant dustbin with five or six quartz bulbs shooting downwards and you had like a… a silk in a shape of a dustbin with silk underneath, so no hard light escaped. So you had rows and rows of these hanging space lights, which could give you a good exposure and also a very soft light, shadow-less light. But I didn't very often use those… you wouldn't normally use those in a smaller set because they'd be too overwhelming. They were best used when you had like a street scene to do or if you were trying to create a garden and you've got sort of soft daylight; they were wonderful for re-creating soft daylight, shadow-less. But they came a little bit after… after I'd done Billion Dollar Brain, but they were a wonderful development and I used them later on, on many occasions.

There were various people playing around with... with soft light. There was David Watkin, whom I first worked with at British Transport Films. He was one of the assistant cameramen there and he was lighting through sheets, and I remember going on the set with... one day when he was shooting and he was lighting... putting Brutes through sheets and the heat on the stage was absolutely unbearable. He was using so much light because the sheets were not letting much light through. I mean he was getting the effect he wanted on the set, was which this soft shadow-less lighting, but in order to get it, he was burning all this electricity and this terribly hot stage... and so I knew about that technique and although I could see the advantage in certain situations, I didn't want to put a soft light over everything. I... I felt it was important to... to control areas in terms of light and shade, and the trouble with using an overall soft light at that time was that you didn't have a means of stopping it, controlling it; it just went everywhere, and so you could... you get a natural fall off if you just lit from one side, say, with a big soft light, then it would naturally fall off from one side of the set to the other. But if you lit from the top with overall soft light, then you get an overall flatness, rather like going into a department store. Well, that's okay for certain things, if you're trying to create a department store look. But where you're trying to create more light and shade, and more drama, more depth of... you know, tonal depth, then, at that time, it was... it was quite tricky with soft light, just bouncing it.
Later on, jumping forward a few years, I got into egg crates, which is a frame decided... divided into segments, and a couple of years later I did... a few years later I did a picture in which I got this same Bill Chitty who designed the space light, design... to design a lamp for me and he called it the Billy Light, and it was 16 500W bulbs in one unit, so it was about 2.5ft square, so I had six... I had 8kWs of light with an egg crate for each bulb, so that I could direct this towards the area that I wanted lit and I would have a... a soft light. But then it would fall off outside the area that I'd directed it to because of the egg crate, and... and that was a way of getting a soft light, which didn't go everywhere, and in more recent years, now that we've got into kino flos... kino flos first of all came out in a straightforward fashion, then they put an egg... egg crate on so that you could control the kino flo so it didn't go everywhere. So we then... we... we got into an area where you've got a controlled soft light, you could retain your light and shade and retain the dark areas. But that took a few years to develop fully and it's still going on. Difficult to flag to get rid of a microphone shadow? Well we used to use so many flags too, especially with the microphone. The microphone was on a huge three-wheeled stand, in which the boom operator used to stand and he would rack the microphone in and out and it was a big piece of equipment, and of course, if you're working with hard light it throws a shadow. So wherever the microphone went on the set, you had to flag off the shadow of the microphone. So working with hard light always involved a lot more flagging for that reason. Once we started to get into the softer light, the microphone's shadow didn't show, because the shadow... the shadow was so soft you didn't see it, so you didn't have to worry about that. So that was a... a job saved. Things... those things take time and time is everything on the set; time is precious.

Well the main camera on the shoot was a… a BNC Mitchell in which you… you racked over, the camera moved across on a sliding plate, you moved it across to look through the lens and line up the shot, and then when it came to roll the camera you had to remember to rack it back otherwise you wouldn't expose anything. So the… the camera would move… move across sideways so that the gate was lined up with the lens and in perfect registration with everything you'd seen before. So this camera was new to me and it was quite difficult for the operator because, as opposed to working with an Arriflex where you're actually looking through the lens, you're looking through a view finder, which is a few inches to the side of the lens, and so you have what's called a parallax error to correct, and when the camera moved in to a close-up, the view finder had to move its position… the lens would be going straight in and the… the view finder would have to track inwards so that it had got more or less the same frame as the lens, but not exactly the same frame, because on the view finder you might be off the set, whereas on the lens you… you were on set, so that whoever was operating had to check the back position to see what his limits were, both in the view finder compared to the lens and then if you tracked into a close-up, he had to check that he wasn't off set on the view finder although the camera was okay. You could be… you could be off set on the viewfinder but you couldn't be off set on the camera. So there was this parallax disparity, which took a lot of experience to get to… to understand, and, of course, it was controlled by the focus puller. This parallax moved in conjunction with the focus changing on the lens; the focus puller had a knob, a large knob which… with marks around a piece of white disc… he marked up all his distances and as… as the camera moved in, of course he would change focus and the parallax would change.
Well this is something that… that I had no experience of working with, whereas David had — David Harcourt — had been working with that system for years and years, so I had no worries in that area, I could let David take care of it. But, of course, it was a much bigger camera than I was used to working with and of course, it created its own shadow in certain situations, so you sometimes had to flag off the camera so it didn't make a shadow, or put some softer light in, which was shadow-less. The other thing I was always anxious to do was to get… get some light close to the lens, so you could get a little bit of light into the eyes, and so very often I would… would have a travelling light affixed to the camera — we used to call them Obie lights — and over the years they were… they were improved. Panavision eventually brought… brought one out, which you could control on a… on a kind of dimmer, which didn't affect the colour temperature. It had like a revolving drum so that if you started wide you could have maximum brightness and then as you tracked in, you could wind a cable and it would close down the brightness, so that when you got in close there wasn't too much fill light. So this was... this was a very useful device and it used to fix just above the lens on the BNC. But it was big and it was rather... rather cumbersome. And the... and of course David always worked with a geared head — a Moy head — and we had what was known as a Moviola dolly, which had only recently arrived in this country, I think they were made in America, and that allowed you not only to... to track in but to change direction, so you could track in and then by turning the wheels, go sideways a little bit and, you know, the dolly grip had to make this adjustment; you could have two wheel drive or four wheel drive, and this... this was a great improvement on the tracking methods of a few years before when we had a massive piece of equipment called a velocilator, which used to go on rails, so you could only go in and out on a velocilator attached to... rolling on these rails like a rather... steam engine, and it was extremely heavy and... and took time to move from one position to another, whereas with a Moviola, as long as you had a flat floor, and they used to just put plywood down on the floor to iron out any bumps on the stage, and then make your marks with bits of camera tape, that's where the camera had to go.

Most of the directors that I've worked with have rehearsed the scene at length before you shoot it, so that out of that rehearsal would come the decision as to where the camera was going to be placed. Some directors work with storyboards; in more recent years a lot of directors work with storyboards, and I used to work with storyboards on commercials because with commercials everything had to be so precise. But I always found them a bit of handicap because sometimes it was quite difficult to get exactly what was on the storyboard, and... and that's what they wanted with commercials. And when I got onto features and where storyboards, in my experience, were not being used very much, the opportunity of good rehearsals gave one a chance to see how the scene was going to play, what the actors wanted to do, and then deciding where to put the camera, you know, in conjunction, obviously, with the director and the operator, kind of working as a three... as a trio, a threesome, in determining the position of the camera in relation to where the actors wanted to be and how a scene was going to be covered and how... when one was going to need to reverse and when you did close ups and so on.
So I think with the advent of this Moviola dolly there was developing much more freedom in using a set and giving the actors more freedom, opening things up more and it was a more fluid way of... of storytelling, and it's like I was... in hand-held... with the hand-held Arriflex but, of course, that was in a very simple style and it was without sound, and it wasn't on a stage; it was out on location. So things were becoming more cinematic. I mean, I discovered some years ago that the word kine is a Greek word for movement and, of course, in the early days it was called the kinema before it was called the cinema. The k became a c, so it became the cinema and we... we are cinematographers. So cinematographer is a... a photographer of movement. You know, the actors move, the camera moves, sometimes the lights move, but I think the more that cinema has evolved, the more movement has developed. With the Moviola you could also jib up and down silently. Yes of course, with the Moviola you could change the height; another little job for the grip to do or sometimes the second assistant cameraman would... would do the jib. If... if the grip was... was fully occupied steering the... the dolly, then the... the clapper loader — second assistant — would adjust the height of the dolly. Course the storyboards were drawn to any perspective they cared to use. They could use a false perspective in the foreground, and another perspective in the background. Yes. You couldn't possibly... Yes, I think storyboards have a purpose for certain types of things. I think though essentially if you're going to do process work, because you've got to know what's going on in the fore... if you're making plates. I think if you're doing stunts and if you're doing battle scenes, then storyboards are a very... a very good guide to knowing where things are going to be.

I think storyboards have a definite place. I mean some storyboard artists are absolutely brilliant in the way they… be able to sort of come forward with ideas and interesting compositions, and an understanding of where things might be. I think a good storyboard artist can make a… an important contribution and there are some directors that feel very secure with storyboards, and I think that's… that's so important especially on a complex picture, that the more clarity the director has about what's to be done and what's to be seen in the frame, has a lot of relevance because the more confident we are as individuals in what we have to do, the more confidence is kind of spread amongst the crew, and if… if you have this feeling that the director knows what he wants, then the director will tell me and the camera operator what he'd like to have. We then have to transmit that to other members of the crew who are going to fulfil various roles, like grips and electricians and props, and so on. So it goes down the line, this feeling of knowing what's going to be done, and it… it is a question of confidence and it goes right through the filmmaking process. It starts from… it starts from the top and if the director gives a feeling of confidence, you know, about how he wants to do something and he's got a good crew with him, then… then I... I feel we... we're there to visualise his ideas, to put them into practice and to make it work, to make all the mechanics work. But also to bring something perhaps a little extra now and again, that the director may not have considered, or the storyboard artist hadn't thought about.
So you... as you... as you shoot a sequence I think one's constantly thinking about whether you've really got to the essence of the scene, whether you've captured what that scene is about. You've seen the rehearsals and you... you've decided how you're going to do it, and then you... you've perhaps done a certain number of shots, and then you might have a thought that there's something a little bit of extra... something extra here or an extra cut or a cut-away or something that... that would give it a little bit more significance, and... and I think it's... it’s the role of, certainly myself and the operator and the script supervisor, to... to point this out to a director. A director always has a choice of whether to take advice like that or whether to say, ’Well no I think, you know, we're okay’. So these... these are important decisions and... and the job... all of our jobs is about making choices and making decisions and I think that if you can give a feeling of... amongst your crew and the people that are waiting to know what you want, then... and you can make your... make your wishes known clearly, confidently, then they go about their job in a confident manner and they get it right. Whereas if you give some muddled instructions then sometimes you finish up with something you... you hadn't really expected to get. It's about communication.

We're in the communication business and... and I think that the... the cinematographer is... I feel I'm a storyteller in pictures. I'm a storyteller in moving pictures and someone else wrote the words, and someone else spoke the words and someone else told the actors what to do, but I'm thinking about where the camera should be to best tell that story in moving images of light and shade, which will express the feeling of the scene, the emotion of the scene, portray the actors in the right kind of light, because obviously, if you're... if you’re playing a love scene, you don't want people to be unattractively lit with harsh light and alternate... conversely if you're... if you’re shooting a thriller, you don't it to look like a cosmetics commercial to make... give extremes so that... there are so many ways of doing things.
Very often, when you start a movie, you have... the publicist will come up to the... to the cinematographer and say, ’Well what style are you going to shoot this film in?’ And I'm... I’m usually completely baffled by this question because I would say, ’Well I don't know; I've got a story to sell... to tell but it's made up of many different scenes and many different emotions and I'm going to photograph each scene and each sequence in a way that I feel best expresses what that scene is about; so I can't tell you that I... this whole film is going to have a certain style; if you want to see what style I'm going to shoot it in you have to wait until I've finished it.’ Because I... I... there's a certain spontaneity in... in the way that I work, in that I'm very often affected by the way a scene is played, and when you see the... the way a scene is rehearsed and begin to understand what it's about, and you begin to see and appreciate a lot more that's in the written word. Once the actors get to grips with it, they bring their contribution and their dimension and their emotion to it, you know, assisted by the director and so on, and all sorts of things come out of rehearsal, which are not necessarily in the script. And I think it's... it’s part of my job to get that, to capture that with the lens so that the lens is in the right place and that it's... it’s lit in... in the right fashion. You know, it's been said before that there are three types of... of photography and cinematography; you know, there's good photography and there's bad photography and there's the right photography. So not all... photography doesn't always need to look good. Sometimes you want it to look rough-and-ready and very spontaneous, and you don't always want the characters to look as if they've just come out of make-up. You want them perhaps to look hard and vicious, and brutal, and you would photograph people playing that kind of role differently perhaps to, you know, somebody that you want to be more sympathetic to.

I got on with Michael Caine very well on Billion Dollar Brain. I mean I love his sense of humour, he's a great storyteller and I think it was largely through him that I was offered my next picture The Magus, written by John Fowles, and it was going to be directed by Guy Green, one of my heroes, my great black and white heroes, and a wonderful cast: Michael Caine, Anthony Quinn, Candice Bergen, Anna Karina. And it should have been set on a Greek island where Michael Caine comes to start work at a school and he encounters this mystical character, the Magus, played by Quinn, and has two relationships with these beautiful girls, Candy Bergen and Anna Karina.
But instead of shooting it on a Greek island it had to be transferred to Majorca because there was a revolution in Greece and the Colonels took over, and so they decided it was much too risky to go there. So Don Ashton built a beautiful set on Majorca and I remember the first time we worked with Quinn... we'd been shooting for about two weeks with Michael Caine and the crew were kind of settled in, and we were waiting for Quinn to arrive with a certain amount of trepidation, because he was such a big star and such a charismatic character. And he arrived and we rehearsed his scene, which was a very long scene, and it was getting towards the end of the day and... so I went up to Guy Green and... and said, ’You know, it might be better, Guy, if... if we started this scene tomorrow; because if we start tonight we're not going to finish and tomorrow the sun's going to be over there instead of there and nothing's going to look the same’. So he agreed that we shoot the next morning. Well, my eldest daughter Claire, who was then about nine, had done a very nice drawing of a man fishing and she wanted me to give to Anthony Quinn as a... as a gift. So after we'd rehearsed this long scene I went up to Anthony Quinn and I said, ’My daughter Claire has done this drawing for you as a present; she wants to wish you good luck for the film’. He was so touched, he was... he was in tears. He said, ’You know, I have been so nervous, I've been so nervous with this scene’ and he said, ’This is the nicest thing that ever happened to me on the first day, having this little drawing’. And he sent Claire a cable to thank her, and that was the first time I realised how much pressure actors were under. Even people with...with his amount of experience, how tense it could be and how concerned they should be, and, of course he... you know, I think that Guy... Guy Green had already sensed that Quinn was... was not settled at all and he was quite happy for me to say let's shoot it the next day; and we did and it was fine.

A thing that surprised me about Guy Green in that it was... I think he... it was such an important point. It was the very first set-up that we did, the first shot of the film and it was day for night scene, looking out to sea with a group of people in the foreground, it was an action scene, and it was... it was quite a difficult shot to get the exposure right, with the moonlight on the water and everything, and I'd got a day for night filter on as well. And we got this scene set up and we ran the... well, first of all we... we shot the slate — mute slate — and then we went to roll the camera and the camera wouldn't roll, so there was a grip... you know, everybody running around, checking ca... checking cables. Everything was all right, so turn over... we shoot the scene, complicated scene, take one and Guy said, ’Print that's it’ and I thought: goodness, take one no protection... and this wasn't an easy scene, and I did persuade him to do another one, but I thought afterwards that maybe I shouldn't have done that because I think when a... when a director starts off the picture and he prints the first take, it puts everybody on their toes, because they know that they've really got to be with it with this director because, you know, he's not going to go on doing endless takes... and, you know, hoping everybody else will get it right. You've got to get your bit right on the first take and if it's not right, you've got to say so. And that was quite a good lesson.
I like working with Guy; he's a lovely, lovely man, very, very friendly, very understanding and he... he listened a lot to what I had to suggest. What he didn't do was ever... ever tell me how to light it and looking back at the movie I... I sometimes wish that Guy had told me how to light it, because I don't think I did a particularly good job; I overlit it. I hadn't worked in such brilliant sunlight before. You know, I'd worked in England, I'd done this film in... in Finland in the snow, but this was... this was high summer in Spain with a lot of top light — very strong sunlight — and although I was working to try and keep the... the back light as much as possible, where I couldn't do that I was... I was sometimes putting in a bit too much fill light, especially for Michael Caine. So I... you know, I think I overlit some of his shots. But with Candy Bergen, who has very small eyes and they're pale, and when it's bright her eyes completely disappear because she can't stand the... the bright light. And so I said to Guy, ’You know, we're not going to get any good close-ups of Candy in... in this bright light’. I said, ’How would you feel about shooting, you know, all the... wider shots and leaving the big close-ups until the end of the day when I can light them to match' big close-ups, which he agreed to, and... and it worked, because my... my background was quite confined, but I was able just to work with far less light than sunlight and to put it in a nice position for her, because she was really very beautiful, and... and you could see her eyes. Whereas in... in the bright light you couldn't, her eyes disappeared, and he agreed to that and that worked out. Whereas Anthony Quinn, who's got almost black eyes, you could always see his eyes, whatever the light. He was unaffected by it, and it's something I... I've been aware of over the years of... of how actors respond to bright light in that, you know, if... if an actor is really having difficulty, you've got to do something to help them and, of course we've got things like scrims — diffuser scrims — and things that will take the sunlight out altogether, and a... a variety of grip equipment now that... where you can sometimes reduce the light to make it a bit more acceptable to the actors.

I learnt a lot from David Harcourt about working with actors, because his father was an actor. When you think about it, it's what the actors are doing that… that really matters and if we, as… as filmmakers can make them secure and confident and give them the right amount of freedom to do what they want, then they're going to do a better job. If… I think this… this relationship with actors, although we may not speak to them anything like as much as… as the director does, to have this kind of understanding that… that they can do what they want to do and the camera will follow them, rather than the other way around, rather than the camera dictating what they're going to do, I've always believed in… in the actors doing anything that they want to do and… and the camera will find a way of doing it. So that they're expressing the way something should be done; that's where it should start from I think, what they… what they want to do with a particular scene, because they… they're very often insecure.
There was this case with Anthony Quinn where he was so nervous on the first day and I think a lot of actors are nerve… are nervous, particularly when they're starting out and they come onto a set where everything's well established, everybody knows everybody else and they come in for a day's work… perhaps they don't even know a soul, and it's… it’s very important to reassure them and give them confidence, you know, that… that we're there to look after them and make them feel comfortable and secure, and… and so on. So when it comes to marks, you know, when one rehearses a scene with a stand… you rehearse with the actors and then the common practice is to mark where the actors have been and to mark where you'd like the camera to go, and then to bring in stand-ins to do the lining up and the laying of tracks and the lighting, and so on, and… and to do the donkey work with… with the stand-ins. But I never liked to tie actors down too closely because, you know, they might want to do something a little bit different and if you've… if you’ve created a lighting pattern, which is so precise that they've got no flexibility, then I think they're going to be a bit confined. I mean there are certain occasions where you… you might need a streak of light across an eye, but actors are very good at finding that. If you just tell them what you want, if it's important for that moment.
I… I remember working… when we worked with Quinn and David said: ’Ooh he's a mover’. He said, ‘I have to give him a bit more freedom, because he was always moving about’, you know. You… you never quite knew where he was going to go, and it was in complete contrast with Michael Caine, who's got a very set… once he… he's got a very set position when he acts. He doesn't move around very much. You… you know with Michael where he's going to be and, of course, we all vary and… and actors vary as much as any of us in the way we behave and so, I think, particularly the camera operator has got to be kind of sympathetic to the way an actor is going to behave and… and not to kind of cut the camera because somebody's head's got cut off for a moment. David would never do that and I don't think an operator should. You can… you can talk about it after the take and say, well it just hit the side of frame; or he popped out of frame a moment there but the rest of it was okay. Of course I'm talking about the time… before we had video assist, when the only person that really saw the shot was the operator. So he was the only one that knew whether… whether it had all worked out properly from a framing point of view and had to report to the director of how it was. Now, of course, with video assist, any number of people, in fact, sometimes too many people can watch the monitor.

So we shot the whole of The Magus on this beautiful island of Majorca; lovely locations, good... good artists and a good crew, but the problem was that nobody understood the script and quite recently I was with Guy Green and we... we were talking about The Magus and he told me for the first time, he said: ‘I did not understand the story’. It’s a really enigmatic story, and even if you read the book a few times I think it's still equally difficult to know what it's really about. And... and this comes through in the movie I think. You know, we had a wonderful performance from Quinn all the time he was on screen, you know, mesmerising, a great screen actor, but... but we didn't know what it all added up to in the end except that none of us really knew where we were all going. Difficult to give a performance if you don't know what it's about, isn't it? Yes, yes. Except that he was supposed to be mystical and he had this aura about him, which... which was good, but it was a film in which nothing was really what it seemed to be. And... although we had everything going for us, we had a good budget and we shot it again in Panavision, and we had marvellous locations and a great designer and a cast, it didn't succeed and it wasn't a commercial success.

After The Magus I did Two Gentlemen Sharing, directed by Ted Kotcheff, and I'd worked with Ted on commercials but nothing else, just a few commercials and he'd come from television, directed a lot of television drama and he was a very explosive character, not unlike Ken Russell... perhaps even more so, and it was a story of... of a black man and a white man sharing an... an apartment in London, and it was really about racial issues but it was a comedy and we shot it mostly in London and... with Robin Phillips and somebody called Fredericks [sic] was the black actor. But Ted had a great sense of humour and he chose to wear a bowler hat whilst we were shooting this film, and whenever he got exasperated he would take off the bowler hat and throw it on the ground to get it out of his system was to take off his bowler hat, throw it down and sometimes he'd... he’d jump on it, and as the picture progressed this bowler hat got more and more battered, and the culmination of all this... his most explosive moment was when we were given permission to put a camera on the mansion house... there's like a walkway, an iron... a cast iron walkway around... around the mansion house, and we had the camera right up high there, looking down on the square in the city, and this... the actor had to come along and disappear down into the Underground, and we all set up for this... there's lots of activity going on and we roll the camera, and the actor comes across the square, goes down into the Underground and before you could even get a cut in, he came back out again, and Ted went absolutely berserk and the four-letter words were screamed out across the city and people stopped work and looked out of their windows to see what was going on. And there was Ted Kotcheff absolutely going bananas and screaming out these expletives and taking off his bowler hat and throwing it down. Oh dear, it was so funny but in his calmer moments he was a good director and... and certainly a good... good chap to work with but unfortunately it's one of those films that... I haven't seen it since we finished shooting it and... and I'd love to see it because it's a social comment on Britain in the late ‘60s as... as black people are starting to be integrated and... and getting jobs and that's what the script was about. It was written by a black writer called Evan Jones and it would be really nice to see it today but it seems to have disappeared, so I have to hope one day it comes out on DVD.

Now in the summer of 1968 Ken Russell asked me to photograph Women In Love, from the novel... the classic novel by DH Lawrence, and an American, Larry Kramer, had adapted the... the screenplay and was a producer also, and when I read the script and I read the book I realised that it had the most incredible variety of different photographic moods and opportunities to... to do different things, which I'd dabbled with a little bit in commercials. I'd shot some commercials with... with Richard Lester a couple of years before in which we used a variety of coloured filters for some commercials for Grant whisky, and I'd got the flavour of... of trying to use different colours to express a certain mood and times of day, and there was an extended sequence in Women In Love in which this presented a marvellous chance to... to really use colour in a way that it hadn't been used very much before, to capture the time of day and the mood.
And this sequence starts with a day exterior sequence in a wood with the two sisters, played by Glenda Jackson and Jennie Linden. They're having a picnic and Glenda gets up when a herd of highland cattle appear and they look quite frightening, these cattle with their long curly horns, and she proceeds to dance amongst them and it becomes like a ballet with her waving her arms about and bending her body, just like a dancer, and she mingles amongst the cattle and the cattle are all tossing their heads around and these great long horns are making wonderful arcs. And we chose to shoot it with a handheld camera and... and David Harcourt was in amongst these cattle; it... it looked quite dangerous. In fact there weren't any mishaps, but it looked quite dangerous with these cattle, and he and Glenda were right in amongst the cattle and Ken shot so much material of this and I... I thought: when are we going to finish shooting these cattle.
But he... he had it in his mind how he was going to edit it and also how he would use the music, because Ken was... you know, he was... great... great knowledge of music and I think he had a certain rhythm in his mind when we were shooting. And the final result was that it's like a ballet and it finishes up with these cattle becoming so terrified that they all run away and at that point, Oliver Reed and Alan Bates appear and Oliver Reed is infuriated because they're his cattle and there then develops a... a scene between Ollie and Glenda about these cattle, but it leads up to a kind of confrontation in which she finishes up slapping his face, and a little later he confesses to being in love with her. And they're in this forest with a brilliant lake behind them and there's a tight two-shot where they're both looking at each other in profile and... they're almost in silhouette, and there... there's a certain point where he moves a lock of hair from her face and I thought: that is so dark that I don't think it'll register, but I wasn't quite sure. So I tried to light the scene to give a bit more light on the faces so that this gesture — which was quite important — was apparent, and... and I put up a lamp and it looked dreadful. And so I thought: this isn't going to work, I’ll... I'll take a chance and... and go with... with the available light, and I suppose they must have been about four stops under-exposed on the skin tone and so... but it was only just there. But in fact it worked and... and the mood of it... it helped the mood of the scene so much that... that they were very dark figures against this beautiful shimmering lake behind them.

It begins to get dark and we intercut these scenes in the forest with scenes on a lake where a young couple who are recently married and the... the bride is the sister of Oliver Reed, go swimming in the nude in the lake and as it begins to get dark they get into difficulties and... resulting in the bridegroom calling for help because his... his wife has disappeared beneath the water. It's gradually getting dark. Now the only way I could do it was to shoot it at magic hour, because I wanted this feeling of... of the darkness. In the background of the scene was a fairground with lots of hanging lanterns and there were also boats on the lake with people rowing with... all... all had Chinese lanterns on them, hanging behind the boat, and inside each Chinese lantern was a 100W bulb and in the boat was a set of car batteries of... of 30V, and the boats were operated by extras — local people — so when everything was ready they had to put the clips on their batteries to illuminate these Chinese lanterns you see. Because as the wa...... as it was getting dark the water was getting almost black and the light from the Chinese lanterns, it kind of punctuated the darkness and gave you the feeling of movement on the water.
Now when you shoot at magic hour... they call it the magic hour, but in fact you've got about five minutes, and it's the time when it... just before it gets dark when the colour temperature goes up, sometimes to 8000 or 10,000K, so it's a very blue light and... so the water had a kind of blue-blackness to it and it was punctuated by the warmth... the yellows and oranges of the Chinese lanterns, and instead of using an 85 on the camera, which would have taken some of the blue out, I used a half-85, which was an 81EF, so that I had a kind of blue-black quality in the background and the only way... the only light I could use was a certain amount of fill light, because we had two cameras on the bank looking out across the lake towards a house and the fairground in the background. So I had two cameras running, quite close together, and because it was such an extended sequence it took three nights to do it and it involved Oliver... Oliver Reed diving into the water and searching for his missing sister, and then other boats coming to try and assist in the rescue, and there's an extended scene where Alan Bates and Glenda Jackson and Jennie Linden are in... in a boat and Ollie is diving... continuing to dive down into the water to look for his missing sister and there's a sort of general panic with lots of whip-pans on the camera and lots of coverage from the two cameras and... because it was such a complex scene including a cutaway looking back away from the water to Oliver Reed's father arriving with a group of people who have, you know, realised that there's a serious situation, and so that this is intercut with... with cutaways looking away from the water, and for those cutaways I used a...a light reflecting on the lake to give a little reflected light, like shimmering water effect on... Alan Webb played Oliver Reed's father.
And so... what was great was that... that Ken Russell was willing to give me the time to do this and shoot... so we... we could shoot it at the same time on three successive evenings. Of course, it needed a certain amount of preparation, but actually the take only ran for the maximum of five... about five minutes, because although we had... the Mitchell camera was the main camera, which you could have 1000ft, the second camera was a blimped Arriflex, which only had a 400ft mag. So that was what... about four and a half minutes or so, five minutes. So that was the length of the take and by that time it was getting dark. The light was gradually fading during the course of the take, which we had to adjust later in post-production, and I think I was shooting at either 2.3 or 2.5, and it worked; it did. It's... it's a great sequence and with all the coverage that we had it was a very moving and move... very wonderful scene.

We had some day for night shooting when Alan Bates and Jennie Linden are talking about death, because this young girl has just drowned, and they're talking about death and love. And we had this scene in the forest, which I shot day for night and I took the 85 off and put on a filter that we used for black and white, which was a 3N5. The number three was a kind of yellowy-green filter, so by taking out the 85 and just putting in some yellow I kind of got a bluey-green look, which I thought was quite nice for day for night, and I under exposed it about a stop and a third or a stop and a half to get the darkness. And we set up a shot on a long lens, a 400mm lens, so that I could hold the two of them about chest height and we marked out a circle so that the two of them could walk in a circle and the camera panned with them for about half this circle, so that they maintained the same distance from us. I put dark leaves in the foreground and because we were on such a long-focus lens everything except the actors was out of focus, so it had this very strange moody quality and we passed... they passed behind dark tree trunks, and there were a lot of dark areas in the shot, a very dark shot scene. The only light I used was a Brute right over the top of the lens with a soft diffuser on it, just to get a bit of light into their eyes, because when you're shooting day for night, or when you're shooting any very low-key scene and your faces are dark, you... you do need that little bit of light in the eyes to really capture the expression and the feeling and the mood that the actors are expressing. So I had this lamp, which had to pan with the camera, and it just gave enough light to read everything and... so we'd gone from this magic hour into what appeared to be full night, but in fact was day for night.

Then we had dawn sequence and at dawn Oliver Reed comes down to the lake, which has been drained, and lying on the bed of the lake in the mud are this... is this young couple, the bride and groom, and they're sort of entwined together. Well, intercut with this is a scene with Alan Bates and Jennie Linden making love for the first time and it was a very frantic affair with them desperately trying to get their clothes off, and it was shot handheld to give it that kind of frenzy and passion, and David Harcourt did — again — did the most marvellous job handheld, moving around to various parts as clothes were torn off. And the couple make love... well, they then... you then go to the... the still shot of the drowned couple and there's a...a very brief dissolve to the couple who have just made love in exactly the same position, and the couple who have just made love entwine and it... it's a most marvellous transition. The only way we could do it in those days was by shooting the... the scene where the couple had drowned first and getting the shot of them static, entwined together. Shooting that scene, having it processed, taking the print and making a punch frame. You could punch out a frame and put it in the gate of the Mitchell camera, and then by looking through that frame you could line up the couple who had just finished making love, who were also in the same position and the way that their arms were entwined and the angle of their heads, and we got a pretty close match just by using this very... well, at the time it was the only way you could do a match frame, and it worked pretty well, but of course, nowadays with a monitor you could shoot the scene in advance and then line up the shot you wanted to match to it by adjusting it to the monitor. But at the time it took us... it took us a little while to do this, but it was worth it and it was a lovely... lovely transition.

The wrestling scene, which as written in the book, takes place by the flickering light of a fire. Well our main location for this shooting of the scenes on the lake and the... the wrestling scene was a big house in Derbyshire called Elvaston Castle and it had a magnificent room with a huge fireplace and a vaulted ceiling with like gothic arches, and it was painted gold with gold fleurs-de-lis on a dark blue background, so it was a very dramatic room, and we were able to build a huge fire to do this wrestling scene. Now usually when you do a fire in... in a film it's done in the studio with... with gas flames and it never looks the real thing, and we could have done it with the real fireplace with gas flames but again, it wouldn't have been believable as... as a roaring fire, and so we used logs and really got this thing going and it was a tremendous heat coming out. But of course it does prevent... present rather... a problem for the sound mixer, because they always say: ’Oh I can hear the fire crackling’. But Ken Russell, being a very visual director, wanted to get the picture right and, you know, I had no trouble in persuading him that we should go with the real fire and, you know, if there was any problem with the sound, any crackles, you can always do a bit of post-sync, or you can do another take on site without the offending noise, and very often one does that, you know, if you've got some interference with the sound, or an aeroplane goes over. If you immediately shoot an... another take mute without the camera, the actors very often match the sound.
So I've always believed — well especially being a cinematographer — that if you can get the visuals right you can always play with the sound afterwards. So we had this wonderful fire. Now I wanted to give the feeling that the scene was lit by the light from this fire, although there were a few candles burning in the room as well. And so I got lamps mainly... it was mainly a 5K, very close to the angle of the... of the flames on... on a very low stand, I put a heavy orange filter on, which brought the colour temperature down to about 2000K — which is the colour of firelight — and then to get the flickering effect I cut some branches with leaves. Now, the usual technique in the studio in those days is if you want a flickering effect you’ve got a... you got a piece of wood and tied on some strips of rag and waved it around in front of the lamp. Well, I'd tried this in the past and I thought this... this looks phoney because it hadn't got enough variation in the pattern of light, because when you... when you look at a big fire there's a... there’s a lot of movement of light as the flames go up and down, and I found that by taking a branch with the leaves of various sizes and holding it in... in front of the lamp and moving it about, and shaking your hand and flickering it, you get this very believable effect of firelight and... because what you needed was someone with an unsteady hand and in those days, if you remember, the Mole-Richardson electricians used to drink a prodigious amount of Guinness every night, and so in the morning you... there was no trouble finding somebody that was looking a little bit shaky.
So the electricians, you know, they got quite a kick out of this, of actually having to stand there with a... with a shaky hand and move this branch around, and for the whole length of the take, and every... every light that I had burning, had this effect on it. So when you see the scene, which is shot handheld, it's got all this movement going and the actors are... by then, stripped off, naked — fully naked — as it was in the book... of course, this had never been done in cinema before and so they're stripped off naked, they're covered in sweat and the... the handheld camera, of course, is very fluid and is able to... to go with whatever movement, whatever happens. And we had two cameras; one on something like a 25 or a 28 and the other on a 50 I think. So we were able to get a matching action with these two cameras quite close together.

When we came to do the scene of course there was quite a lot of anxiety and I think more amongst the crew, but Ken didn't seem to be at all bothered about it. And the two of them stripped off you see, and Ollie made quite a big deal out of the fact that... that Alan Bates was... was better equipped... ‘He's... he’s got a bigger donger’, he said. It was the worst thing in the world that you should be faced with someone who was better endowed, and I think it was all of a ploy to sort of relax the tension. And he kept dodging off into the corner to see if he could kind of improve matters a bit, and then coming back and... I mean it was all a bit of a laugh and I think that Ollie had had a couple of Vodkas or so before he started. Alan was absolutely sober and taking it very seriously, and... and Ollie was just fooling around for a bit. Well when we got into the... the real thing it was... there were no holds barred and they'd had a certain amount of instruction from a stunt arranger. We had a... a heavy kind of Persian rug on the floor, a huge rug, and underneath that was an underlay of rubber about 2in thick, and that was the only protection they had. There were no stunt doubles; everything was done by the actors, and they were throwing themselves around all over the place, taking some really heavy falls, and all the time with this...- this fire raging with this flickering light. Well they only agreed to do it fully nude for one day. So on the second day we still had more to do, so we had to confine ourselves to kind of waist upwards.
And then when the wrestling is over they... they sit together with the fire behind them and talk about their relationship.Now Alan Bates, who plays the character Rupert Birkin, wants a closer friendship than Ollie is willing to share with him, and you perhaps get the feeling that he's bisexual, because he's in love with this women whom he will marry, but he also wants a very close relationship with a man, and this is a... a recurring theme throughout the film. And he talks about the ancient knights who became blood brothers by cutting their arms and mixing their blood together, and that... that maybe they should do something... perhaps not involving the blood but that they should have a very special close relationship. And Oliver Reed is not so sure about this, and he gets up and leaves Alan on... on his own, seated on the floor, and he goes to a light switch and switches on a light, which brings up... takes it from a low-key scene with flickering firelight to a... a sort of night interior with a colder light, and it just breaks the intimacy of the scene, and it's a wonderful end to that very close, physical contact that we've experienced with the wrestling into a kind of more remote quality emotionally.

We went off to Switzerland and... for a couple of weeks and shot in the snow. Whilst we were in Switzerland the editor put the scene together and when we came back Ken looked at it and he said: ’We've got to do some more wrestling’. Well we were no longer at the location in Derbyshire; we were in London at a small studio at Merton Park, where we had a few close scenes to do, a few scenes on small sets, and we had to match the wrestling because Ken wanted to shoot a sequence at high speed — 72 frames a second — of the... of a.. the kind of climax to this wrestling where, instead of throwing themselves around all over the floor, they came into very close physical contact and they were kind of embracing each other at the same time as they were trying to... one was trying to force the other to yield and fall to the floor. And we shot it at... at 72... all I had were some matching flats and a couple of candelabra and the original rug that we had on location. So we matched it just really by... by staying close and matching the lighting style. But, of course, I had to use a lot more light because instead of shooting at 24 I was at three times the speed; I needed another... stop and a half. And when it's cut together you... you don't see... you don't realise there's been a cut and... and it finishes with them falling down in close-up onto this rug and it's at 72, and then cutting to a wider shot, which was at the original 24, as they fall apart, and the cut works; absolutely great. So it's one  of... it was a scene that caused a great deal of controversy. In fact, the film should have been released by the Rank Organisation but because of this scene and... and various other scenes of love making, which were quite sort of frank and revealing for the time, Rank refused to release the picture, and so in England it went out on the... the other circuit, the ABC circuit.

The film was mainly shot in England and there were extensive scenes in countryside because, you know, Lawrence wrote very much about the... the elements of air and earth and fire and water, and the novel really captures all of these... these qualities, and... and Ken Russell, I think, was the perfect director to recreate that in a movie. So there were... there were many scenes in... in the forest and some of those we did day for night with the house in the background and again, I used this... this 3N5 filter, shot it as the daylight was getting low and put tungsten lights in the house behind, so that you had the yellowy quality of tungsten and the blue green of the day for night quality. And there were other scenes that we did in the forest where he... he's just had an argument with... with... Alan Bates has had... had an argument with... with his then lover, played by Eleanor Bron, and she's hit him with a paperweight and he runs away and there's blood streaming down his head, and he runs away from the house into the forest and it's a forest of birch trees and so we had these beautiful birch trees, which were ideal for day for night... because when you do day for night, because everything's much darker, you need contrast. If you don't have contrast within the scene, you know, you finish up with just a... an area of dark grey, so you need tones of... of light and dark, and... and usually when one does day for night, you do it in sunlight so that the sunlight looks like moonlight and you get the contrast.
Well, as it happened, when we shot this, it was an overcast day. So we shot in this forest and... with overcast light and... again, I used this... the 3N5 filter and because there was so much contrast between dark trees and the silver birch, and Alan Bates had all this blood streaming down his face and he was wearing a white shirt, it was a very convincing day for night look. There was another scene where he lies in a... in a field of long grass and I wanted the feeling of... of early morning dew, and so we sprayed the whole of the area with... with water  so that it was like dew drops on this very tall grass, about 3 feet high, and then I back lit it with a Brute to bring out the... the globules of water so that they sparkled, and he lies down in this grass and he kind of cleanses himself with the glass... with the... with the wet grass and wipes off all the blood from his face and his body, and it's a kind of cleansing moment, and he's using this... this grass and water to kind of clear his mind of this woman that he wants to get away from. And it's this kind of getting close to nature, which is so apparent in the film.

Oliver Reed is the son of the owner of a coal mine, and we went up to Newcastle and we went down the pit, because originally there was supposed to be a sequence at the pit face with Oliver Reed cutting coal. Now we went down a pit, which was a tremendous... a great experience and we had these miners with us who were looking after us, because we went down in the shaft and then we had to walk a long way to get to the coal face, and when we got to the coal face we had to crawl on our hands and knees because there were these pit props everywhere, and there was only about 2 or 3ft in height for you to crawl up to the pit face where they'd got... it was partly mechanised with a cutter and it was partly cutting by hand. And when we got there you... you realised they're really tough conditions that these coalminers worked under. I mean it was... there was dust everywhere, it was dark and it was so... it was quite warm and there was all this physical effort that they were putting into their work. Well we went into the chances of... the possibilities of shooting at the coal face and... of course, we were soon to discover that it was going to be so difficult, because you had special... you had to use special lights that couldn't create a spark, and the space was so confined that we decided to abandon the idea of... of shooting at the coal face. Instead we found something much better.
At this old colliery we found a conveyor belt system where the coal was coming, you know, from the pit head; it had been unloaded by... in trucks and it was being sorted, and we had these wide belts going through picture with all these different lumps of... sized lumps of coal on them, and it was like a Dickensian scene. It was so dark; we just had these lights illuminating areas of... of the coal and I let other areas go off quite dark, put a bit of backlight on to make the coal shine. And Oliver Reed comes into this scene and... and there's an old man there who's having difficulty lifting a lump of coal and he kind of pushes him aside and throws the lump of coal off, and eventually the poor guy gets dismissed because Oliver Reed is a... a hard character who’s- you know, he's concerned about profit and that when people reach the end of their days, you know, they should be dismissed, whereas his father is of a much more charitable disposition and wants to take care of his workers and... So you have this transition of... of the benevolent coal miner, the owner of the coal mine, and the coal mine being taken over by this younger, aggressive man played by Oliver Reed. So we had several scenes in these old pit heads.
There was another marvellous scene where the workers are going home and we shot it late in the day, as it was getting dark. They're going home in streams of... of men, all in dark clothes and their faces covered in... in coal dust, and a locomotive goes through the shot and the smoke comes out of the locomotive. And driving in-between all these dark shadowy areas is a white Rolls Royce – a cream white Rolls... Rolls Royce to be precise – with a red leather interior, and there's the coal... the owner of the mine played by Alan Webb and Oliver Reed driving through these ranks of men who all take off their caps to them and pay their respects, and... it... it's a wonderful illustration of the divide between the hardship of... of these working people and the wealth of the pit owner in his Rolls Royce and comfort. And, you know, it says so much about those days at the beginning of the 20th century. It's set about the time of the First World War.

We had other scenes, again in Newcastle where we had these wonderful old streets and old pubs, where Glenda Jackson is wandering around in this working class area with... where there was a pub with prostitutes hanging around and fights going on between the miners and she's really intrigued with all this... well this other world, and we did it... a night exterior and there was one scene where she walks through a tunnel — a tunnel under the railway — and there's a young couple there kissing, and I wet... I wetted the ground down and put a 10K right way back so that the whole of the... the roadway that goes under the railway tunnel was... had got this lovely shine to it with the cobbled stones, and in the foreground was this young couple kissing, very under lit and Glenda walks past and looks at them in a kind of curious way. Later in the film, in exactly the same location, she has a love scene with Oliver Reed and it was this kind of curiosity that she has to kind of explore her sexuality in a variety of different situations, not just in the comfort of a bedroom, but wherever it happened to be. And... and this, of course, is all from DH Lawrence and his sensuality, and Ken was the perfect person to explore this. The film is... I mean it's a very sensual film and a very tactile film, and it gave me all these chances to do such a variety of cinematography with... with different times of day and different filters.

When we went to Switzerland and we had this marvellous location at the foot of the Matterhorn, which of course Ken Russell couldn't resist using as a phallic symbol, and the...this Matterhorn rising up in so many scenes, and of course this complete change of light, going from, you know, all the greens of... of England and the scenes in the water and the wrestling scenes and candlelight scenes, we're now in this area of white and I'd done... previously I had done quite a bit of shooting in the snow in Finland and I realised that the best way to shoot snow scenes, particularly with mountains, was either with a cross light or a three-quarter back light, especially if it's sunny. Now as it happened we got a lot of sunny weather and... so I... I used this... this cross light and three-quarter backlight to give some depth to the mountains, because if... if you photograph mountains with flat light with the sun behind you, they look like a backing; you... you don't get any perspective to it. And so it was very important to shoot it at the right time of day and... and Ken was... was, you know, he was all for getting the best out of the location. And I remember we had a little... we had a little crane arm that you could put on the Elemac dolly and it... you could go up to about a height of about 9ft, so we were able to take this crane arm and the Elemac up to about 10,000ft, just under the... the Matterhorn, and that proved very useful in getting some movement into the shots. It was a crane you couldn't sit on, so if you wanted to go from a... a high position to a low position, the operator had to arrange a series of boxes so as the jib came down he climbed down the boxes. But that... it... it worked well and it gave us that additional flexibility.
Now the climax to this... these scenes in the snow is where... is a final confrontation between Oliver Reed and Glenda Jackson, in which, you know, he tries to strangle her. It's the end of their relationship, which has been tormented for some time. He tries to strangle her and... and just leaves her in the snow and walks away... and he just walks away and keeps walking and walking and walking. And he's got these big snowshoes on, it’s very deep snow and he's obviously intent on committing suicide. And so we have these series of shots, which we shot just as it was... as the light was going and the snow turned from being white to very... very blue in the shadows. It was a wonderful mixture of... of white and pale blue and dark blue, and we used the zoom lens. We had a zoom lens, which at times we overused, but what had happened was that because the Mitchell didn't have a mirrored shutter, you know, you were always looking through the view finder and you couldn't use a zoom lens until Angenieux — the Angenieux Company — bought out a 10:1 with a side finder. So you could put the 10:1 on and look through this long view finder rather than looking through the lens that... as you would in the Arriflex or a mirrored shutter camera, you looked through this long viewfinder and you'd got a 10:1 zoom. The only thing was that you had to get it to 5.6 in order to get reasonable quality; it still didn't match the prime lenses. But this was a new toy and Ken was very enamoured with it and looking at the movie years afterwards, you realise that we... we overused it because it was... it was the new thing and it... it sometimes saved you tracking, and so we did a lot of shots with this 10:1 zoom.
Well the best shot that we did with the zoom was of Oliver Reed, having walked about a mile I suppose, amongst all this frozen landscape, leaving his footprints, and we started off with him, sort of a tight full-length, trudging through the snow, sinking in about a foot with his footmarks, and zooming slowly back to... to reveal this magnificent snowscape with all the footprints where he'd wandered around and staggered. And finally he collapses into the snow and he takes off his hat, and he lies down in the snow and he dies... and it was such a moving moment. Then the... the following scene is of him in the chalet — of where they were staying beneath the Matterhorn — in the chalet, lying there dead... the very blue-grey skin quality, and candles are burning, and Alan Bates is there and Jennie Linden, who's by now married to Alan Bates, and Alan's crying because he's lost his friend. It was really a marvellous scene.

One often talks about whether it's better to shoot on location or in the studio. What are the advantages and disadvantages of shooting either in the studio or with what's available. Well, on Women in Love we had some marvellous locations. We had Kedleston Hall, which was the ancestral home of the Curzon family, and this was supposed to be the home where Alan Bates' first lover — played by Eleanor Bron — lived. She lived in great luxury and we were given the full range of this magnificent house with all its antiques and precious paintings, but we had certain restrictions on where we could go. And I was very limited into where I could put the lights and there were only a couple of occasions where I was actually able to rig a lamp, and one is a... an extended dance, which takes place with Eleanor Bron and Jennie Linden, Glenda Jackson dancing, and Alan Bates and Oliver Reed, and one or two others are watching this dance, which... which takes place in a beautiful marble hall with columns and candelabra, and the only lamp I could rig was a top... a soft top light with diffusion on it, and I suppose it was about 10 by eight, so I'd got like a very soft top fill light. Everything else I had to do from the floor. Now because I had all these marble columns I could hide lights behind them. So I used mainly direct light to get a... a rather... quite a dramatic look to this sequence.
So that was one scene that we did in this house and there was another one in a room where there were beautiful paintings and lovely antique furniture, and this is the room where Alan Bates and Eleanor Bron struggle and she hits him with a paperweight, which causes all the blood to run down his face, and I couldn't hang any lights at all. The only way of getting some light into the background was bounce a 10K off the ceiling and that gave a little bit of soft light into the background, and the rest I lit from... from stands, you know, around the camera. And then of course there was the... the wrestling scene, which we could never have done in the studio, because you... you would never have designed a... a room like that with these wonderful gothic arches and have a real fire. So there... there was another case where the location gave us this tremendous advantage. And incidentally this was... these were the early days of... of filming sort of extended sequences on location, and we had a marvellous location manager called Lee Bolon and she'd made the deal with the Curzon family and we had this magnificent house with all its grounds for £100 a day... a snip.

There's a scene between Alan Bates and Oliver Reed in which Alan is talking about their relationships, their particular relationships with their girlfriends, but also their relationships with... their relationship with one another, and it... it's a scene where Alan is trying to express that although he loves this woman that he's married to, he also loves Oliver Reed, and so he's kind of trying to... trying to say that he is bisexual and there's a reference to having a snub nose, which I think is supposed to mean that, you know, he's a bit AC/DC, as we say nowadays, and we didn't have a... a place to shoot this.
And so we looked around the... the house where we had shot on the lake – Elvaston Castle – where we'd shot the wrestling scene, and we found a room with huge mirrors on three walls and the fourth wall just had a small window on it, and it was only about 12ft2, and we thought: well if we played this scene here we could get the added dimension of reflected images so that, you know, a person could be in the frame in... on either side of screen with one person in the middle, and the person who was talking could be on either side of screen reflecting the most... so he was kind of looking at himself. And it... it kind of all added to the confusion of what the... what his sexuality was, that you were in this room where you weren't quite sure whether he was looking at himself or looking at Oliver Reed. Now the further bonus, which was a complete surprise to us and which we used, I think, to considerable effect, was that... that one mirror had a huge crack in it, which ran from top to bottom in a jagged fashion. And so we were able to play close-ups of Alan with this crack going across his face and, of course, it... it captured... it expressed visually what was within him, that he was kind of divided. And that could never... I don't think a designer could have ever have come up with something like that. It was a... it was luck... it was luck and Ken and the actors were able to use it to capture the essence of that scene.
What that scene was really about was enormously enhanced by the fact that we were in a room with mirrors with one of them cracked and... so that was something that I don't think one would have ever done in the studio, and it's surprises like that which... which favour me towards filming on location, because you just come across things that you think: oh gosh, this... this is where we should shoot this particular scene because it's got the right atmosphere, and... and it... you know we can make it work. Sometimes it's difficult to light and this particular occasion all I could do was... was bounce one light off some white... off the ceiling, so I played it mainly with top light, because everything you put in was reflected, so if you put a lamp in you had to put up blacks to stop the reflection of the lamp, and the camera had to be black so... and they were a very small crew so that... as you know there... there are difficulties in shoot... shooting mirrors, but it worked.

In this scene, which I've described previously where they walk through the forest, and we're on a 400mm lens, panning with them as they walk in a semicircle... the reason why they walk... why we designed it that way was that we could maintain a close shot without tracking. It looks as if you're tracking because they're so close together and they're so far away on the long lens, and by walking in a semicircle their configuration... their relationship to each other remains the same. Alan Bates is on the right looking ahead and Jennie Linden is slightly in front of him looking back, and that relationship is main... retained throughout the length of the shot, and with... with the addition of the Brute just above the lens, it gave that little bit of light in the eyes. But you can very often do that with a long focus lens, it... it can look like a tracking shot. And the other thing, which I didn't make clear was the zoom lens – the Angenieux zoom lens. The... it had an eyepiece, not a finder, on the side. It had an eyepiece coming out of the lens with... with a prism at the end of the eyepiece, which reflected the image through the lens and this was the first time that you could use the zoom lens on a camera that wasn't a mirrored shutter. And we used it to great extent, too much at times, because there are shots where we kind of zoom in and out, where today you wouldn't... wouldn’t do that. But... equipment goes in phases. There have been... and a lot of this comes from commercials. I found that... that on commercials we were very often using equipment extensively before it was used in films. Like zoom lenses were very popular in commercials for a time and then fog filters were popular for a time, and then fog and mist on the set was popular, and it... it was usually a little while after that that it became accepted in... in cinema. So the commercials were a testing ground for a lot of things.

Right through the '60s, '70s and '80s, right up till about 1990, duplicating – making inter... interpositives and internegatives from the original negative – was not a very good process. You... you could see the difference with a print made from the original negative and a print made from the dupe. There was quite a deterioration in quality and it wasn't until about the '90s that Kodak brought out duplicating stocks that... that more or less eliminated the difference in quality. And what would happen with the older type of duplicating stocks is that you would... you'd get a deterioration in quality, in... in definition, and the contrast would go up, so that if you had a scene which was going to dissolve, there would be a jump where the dissolve started and until the dissolve ended, and then you would go back to the original quality. So this... this could be quite distracting, and a way of getting over that was to do what was known as A and B printing, which avoided having an optical, which meant that... that when you... when you printed in the lab you had what was called A and B rolls, and roll A would go through the printer and fade out, and then roll B would be printed and fade in, so that you were actually still using the original negative. And this... this was used quite... quite a lot by Ken Russell, both in Billion Dollar Brain and Women in Love. So we... we stayed with the original negative quality and we didn't have any opticals, which... which mean... meant going to a dupe neg.
So in those days we tried, when we were... came to the final post-production, and the grading of the picture, which of course is very much the... the cinematographer's responsibility, and the editor's always there of course, and the director is usually there but not always, and sometimes the producer. But I think it's the cinematographer that has the primary responsibility for... for grading a... a picture because you know what you've put into the negative, you know what your original intentions were and you know the colour filters you've used and how to sort of match things so that you... you get rid of the changes perhaps in light. When you're shooting on exteriors you always get certain discrepancies when you're shooting over a period of time. These were all ironed out in the grading process. Well, of course, this used to be done, in those days, at the laboratory where the colour grader or a timer, as the Americans call him, would make a print using the cutting copy as a guide and you'd see this first answer print and view it together, and make comments and adjustments, and go away for a couple of days while the grader altered things and altered his printer lights and his densities and so on, and then you'd look at another print. And this, depending on the complexity of the film, could go on for up to about five or six prints. Well of course every time that the negative was going through the printer, it... it was at risk. There was no protection and you've got millions of dollars worth of... of precious film going through the printer where it's... there's always a possibility that there might be a break or a scratch, and a damage and so on, and... and so it was a high risk business. Well of course, that's been eliminated now because most... most post-production is done on... on a digital process where they... they transfer the negative to digital and you... you edit it digitally and colourise it digitally, and do all the grading with a colouriser rather than a film grader, who can make infinitely more adjustments in terms of... of colour, density and even... and contrast, you see; using the old method we couldn't alter the contrast really. But nowadays, if... if you've got a shot that's a little flat, then the colouriser can tweak a little bit more contrast into it, so that it matches the shots that go either side. And this technology is constantly improving.
I... I was at an equipment show last weekend and Joe Dunton has got this equipment... this monitor known as a Lustre... Lustre is the name of the process, and it's able to give you up to 4K quality, whereas previous... machines could only go up to 2K, which means that it's got it very close to the... the quality of film and the texture of film, and the detail in film it’s.... Digitally it's now very close, so that the practice nowadays is... is not to do all this timing in the lab, but 20, 30 years ago that was the way we had to do it. And so when a film came up for release you would try to make as many prints as you dared from the original negative, perhaps six or eight, to... to play in New York, Los Angeles, London, Rome and Paris, where the film was going to be previewed and where you would have, you know, your  critics and so-on, to present the film in its best light and then the release prints were... were all made from the dupe negative, and until recent years were inferior.

With the Technicolor process ­— which I know you, Neil, would know a lot more about than I would because you... you worked to Technicolor — originally it was a three-strip process with three rolls of film running through the camera at the same time, and then later matrixes would be made from those three negatives and the prints would be made using a print process, using dyes rather than a photographic process. Is that right? Now around 1949 Eastman Kodak brought out the first 35mm colour film in a single layer. It was called Technicolor monopack... monopack, Kodak monopack, and so we had colour film on one strip of film rather than three.

So the film speeds gradually in... increased, and when I shot Women in Love the speed was 50 ASA to tungsten. Now if you were shooting in daylight of course you'd put the 85 on and that would bring it down from 50 to 32. Well, just after I started shooting Women in Love, Kodak brought out a new fast film, 100... 100 ASA, one stop faster, but because everybody wanted this new fast film, you could only get 10,000ft at a time. So I used to conserve this fast film for the scenes that needed... you know, where I was short of light; the candlelight and the dusk scenes and the firelight scenes, but I'd soon run out of 10,000ft and have to ask for more and they'd send me another 10,000 then another 10,000. So over a period of a film, about half the film was shot on ASA 50 and... and the other half was shot on various different emulsion numbers of the... of the faster film, but when we came to grade it all it all seemed to go together as if there wasn't any difference at all. Now when we came to print the film for release we discovered that United Artists, who were releasing the film, had a contract with Technicolor to say that all release prints had to be done using the Technicolor dye transfer process, so that instead of making a negative-positive print, which our rushes had been provided with... all the rushes were done using that — the normal printing process — you now had to take the negative and make three separate matrixes and using the... a dye process, a printing process of... of using dyes, to make the release prints in... in this fashion; they were called dye transfer prints. Now Ken and I were quite dismayed at this because when it came to it we discovered that the rushes, which had a lovely crisp, sharp look, when they went through this process of... of three layers of printing, we lost quite a bit of definition – it looked softer. Also when you wanted to make adjustments between scenes it... it wasn't so easy to make fine adjustments because every time you made an adjustment you had... you had to go right back to the beginning of the reel, and it was... it was much more complicated to get things exactly as you wanted it, and so we were not as happy with the... this dye transfer print as I think we would have been if we'd printed in the normal way.
Well many years later I was to be very thankful that we had printed dye transfer because it wasn't until the '70s that it was discovered that the contact prints were fading and it was George Lucas and Steven Spielberg, and one or two others in Hollywood, that... that sort of raised the alarm and... and got together with Kodak to try and produce a print — a positive — that wouldn't fade, but I don't think they've really succeeded.

I think that anything that is made using the normal Eastman colour... the Eastman colour process is going to fade, and what happens is that the blues and greens go and you're left with a pinky-magenta image. And I remember when I started teaching at various film schools and workshops I got a 16mm print of Women In Love, which had obviously been printed in the contact print pro... process — the Eastman process — and it had so faded that it was unrecognisable; it was all pink and it... it was useless to show to anybody as an example of... of how the film should look. Now some years afterwards, when I'd started meeting and talking to students, I wanted to show them Women in Love and so I went back to the distributor and found a dye transfer print and although it was very scratched, the colour was still as it was originally. And later on I found another print, which had belonged to the BBC, which had never been run on a projector, which was in perfect condition, had no scratches, no marks on it, with this original colour quality and I'm now able to show this print because I have it; I'm able to show people what a dye transfer print looked like as it was made 35 years ago, and this wonderful colour is still there.
But... but sadly other films, which were printed around that time not using dye transfer, are no good. And this is.... this is a real problem for our industry because unless the negative has been well looked after or there's a good inter-positive, it's very difficult to get back to the original picture quality and, of course, now that... that DVD is becoming so popular and older movies are being re-released, then it... it's very essential that... that you can go back to... to the way it looked originally. I think it's very important that the cinematographer should retain some degree of control over the... the way films are printed. We, in the old days, had it in our contract that we would be required to attend the grading process and, you know, that they would try and arrange it so that one could be present. Nowadays what's happening is that those older films are being put on to DVD and they're making the transfer without communicating with the cinematographer. And so, sometimes the DVD comes out and it's... it’s not looking the way it should because, you know, the person that knows the most about the way the colour should be hasn't been invited to participate. I think it's very important to... for today's cinematographers, in their contract, to have it very carefully stipulated that they will be invited and have responsibility to participate in this process of... of transferring from a negative to a DVD, because there's a huge audience now for DVD and... and if it's done properly the quality is superb. I've got a DVD of Women in Love that looks... looks magnificent, you know. There were one or two areas where I think it could have been improved for colour, but they didn't consult me before they made it so, although it looks quite good, there are areas where I... I would like it to have been different.

My next film after Women In Love was [The Ballad of] Tam Lin — American title The Devil's Widow — which was a story based on a Robert Burns poem about an evil woman — middle-aged woman — who attracts a coven of young people around her, young men and women, and she manipulates their lives and manipulates their relationships. It involve... involved a lot of drug taking and hallucinatory effects, and the director was Roddy McDowell, the actor who had been a child actor of course, and he was a delightful person, very open and bright and stimulating, and because he'd been an actor, of course, he really understood actors. And this is his debut as a director. He was a wonderful still photographer, really brilliant photography, and so it was nice again to be working with someone who had a good eye for a picture. It was shot — excuse me — about 50% on location in Scotland and the other half in the studio at Pinewood where, again, Don Ashton, who did The Magus, was the designer, and I was introduced to Ava Gardner who was 47 and was certainly showing the effects of her lifestyle and I, of course, remember Ava from so many of those earlier pictures... oh, what was the one she did in Spain? Pandora And The Flying Dutchman, and, of course, she was so beautiful, she was one of the most beautiful woman on the screen, and it was... it was really sad to see how her beauty was fading away and particularly the quality of her skin.
Now I found that when I was shooting her in the studio, by careful lighting and a certain amount of diffusion, she looked pretty good, you know, she really looked good but not anything like, of course, that she did 20 years earlier, but she looked pretty good. When we got onto location it was quite a different problem because, depending on the light, the quality, the visual quality of the face can vary enormously because if... if you've got top light it really ages people and brings out all the kind of... the bags and the pouches and the creases. Top light is a very unattractive light and it was demonstrated, I think, very well by Gordon Willis when he did The Godfather. He deliberately went for top light with very little filler to make the characters look more sinister and threatening. But, of course, that's the last thing you want with a leading lady. So that there are times, again depending whether it's sunny or not... if it's sunny I always try to put the ladies into a back light so that then I can fill in with some soft light and iron out the creases. But if you've got overcast light, not... without sun but, you know, it might be bright, just cloudy bright, then you've got this down light, which is very unflattering, and I was soon to find out with Ava Gardner that the only way I could make her look good was by eliminating the top light, and the only way I could do this was... once we started to get in close, say, about a waist shot, was to put in a blackout over the top of the picture – a 12 by 12 blackout – so that none of the top light hit... hit her face at all. And then to put a soft light over the lamp — a Brute, heavily diffused — over the camera to give her a good light, which made her look beautiful again. Of course you can't do this on long shots, so it was a question of deciding in the cutting when... when we could go from a wider shot to a closer shot and in fact change the lighting. And of course, usually you have a cutaway in between of someone else, so you try to disguise what you've done, the cheat you've made by cutting away and then coming back to a closer shot when she looks better lit, and that worked. But you've got to have the equipment to be able to do that. And she was... she was quite happy when, you know, I used that method.
And there were several other young people in the film, there was Ian McShane and Joanna Lumley; it was their... their first big break in pictures and it... it was an intriguing story but, unfortunately, the company that made it went bust when the film was in the editing stage and it was a film with a lot of very contemporary references — contemporary wardrobe and so on — and so it didn't come out for about two years. By that time it seemed rather old hat and it had lost its immediacy. So, unfortunately, it... it wasn't very successful, but it was an interesting picture in... in some other ways because there was a drug sequence, a hallucinatory sequence, that we had to do. They were supposed to be on LSD and we shot a whole sequence on infrared film in the studio and it kind of transformed all the colours in... into a sort of very impressionistic and a strange, nightmarish quality. We had to do some tests of course to see how fast the film was and I used a lot of distorting glass on the lens. Of course nowadays you can do that kind of thing digitally without any trouble. It's... it’s an easy thing to do, but... but then, it was 1969, everything had to be done on the camera.

In 1970 I was thrilled to be asked to photograph a film with Elizabeth Taylor and the English title was Zee and Co. and the American was XYZ, and it was a matrimonial drama — comedy drama — with Elizabeth Taylor, Michael Caine again and Susanna York, and it was largely shot at Shepperton Studios and I had the opportunity, of course, to do some tests on Elizabeth because, obviously they wanted her to look her most attractive. I think she was about 39 then, and I found her such a delightful person. She was so easy to work with and lovely sense of humour, spontaneous wit and she was kind of one of the crew. There was no nonsense with her at all. And the director was an ex-actor called Brian Hutton and he loved telling jokes, and Elizabeth would arrive at the studio of course probably seven o'clock in the morning and she would spend a long time in make-up, and she wouldn't come on the set until she was absolutely ready and although that... you'd hope that it would be 9:30 or 10, it might even be later. So we used to prepare the scene — the shot — the day before so that we could be finishing the lighting and so on with the stand-in, so that we would be all ready when Elizabeth was ready.
And sometimes if we finished what we had to do, this director, Brian Hutton, would start telling jokes and he was... he was a great storyteller, very, very funny and he'd be telling jokes and Elizabeth would come on the set, followed by the producer and the make-up people, and he'd carry on telling jokes you see, and Elizabeth would join us and these jokes would go on for five or 10 minutes you see, and they're all falling about laughing and the producer's looking at his watch you see. And it was just a way of keeping things relaxed, and then a... you know, this was a regular thing that... that she would be quite late coming on set and I remember one occasion, we... we'd been waiting quite a long time for her, she’d been... she was later than usual and Brian was telling his jokes and Elizabeth arrived and he stopped telling the jokes and he turned to her and he said, ’Wow, da dum’, he said, ’Big movie, big star, big pain in the arse’ and she fell about laughing and she... and we all did. She could take a joke — a big pain in the arse, yes — of course Richard was... was present during the... the early part of the shooting and the first couple of days he used to come to rushes.
Now I was getting into the softer light and with the help of Bill Chitty, the... who was my gaffer on the picture at Shepperton, we'd made these frames out of tracing paper — diffuser — and we'd extended them away from the lamp by about 2 or 3ft so that you got a much broader source of light, and whenever you moved the lamp, of course, the frame went with it. So I... it was the beginning of... of the soft light system of lighting, and I used this method on Elizabeth and a certain amount of diffusion. Of course she had very good make-up and hair and Richard used to come to the rushes of the first couple of days and he turned to me one day and he said: ’You know she's looking like a teeny-bopper’, and I thought at first: is that a compliment or not, and then I thought: well perhaps it is because I... I've made her look younger, which is... which is what they all want.

Many times in my career I've had to work with... with beautiful women who are in their 40's and they want to look 10 or 15 years younger, and... and you have to do it by a combination of good make-up and hair, the right wardrobe, choosing the right lenses, diffusion, but principally the lighting, where you put the light, and since those days... you know, once I started working with... with very well known actors and actresses who, you know, wanted to look right, I would make a point of... of when they were... say the... during the test, the day of tests, going... going into the make-up and taking a little lamp with me and talking to them about how they would like to look and what was their best side, and anything they were worried about, with the make-up person present, just the three of us, and I'd move around with the hand-held lamp and see what happened with the light in different directions. It's amazing just how much you learn about the different configurations of the face, the good points, the bad points, the good side and the bad side that's not so good.
So I'd kind of make... keep mental notes of... of where was the best place for the light to be and so that whenever one started to get in close, I'd make sure that they had the best possible light. Sometimes when you're in wide shot you can't maintain that degree of... of finesse because you have a lot of other considerations as well. So that usually as.... because particularly with someone like Elizabeth [Taylor], when you're getting closer you re-light the shot a little bit, take a bit of time to improve things, and that's... well, it was in those days, accepted as... as being important because she was the money, she was selling the picture. So it was... it was really great fun working with her. The other thing that... that I... really impressed me about Elizabeth was that, although she might come on the set rather late, she knew exactly what she had to do and we would do one... one final rehearsal once she came on set, and then we'd shoot and take one would always be perfect. She was absolutely spot-on with her lines, her marks, whatever props she was handling, whatever the timing was, it was absolutely spot-on and she would carry on being perfect for about three or four takes. Now if she was playing a scene with someone who took some time to warm up, as some actors do; not... not all actors hit it first take, some actors take three or four takes before they really get into it and then it starts to happen. But, of course, if you're in a two shot and... and you've got one actor like Elizabeth who's there from the... from the first moment and someone else who's not, it can be a bit of a problem.
But we didn't have that because we had Michael Caine; he... he's always good. You know, Michael's very, very dependable and consistent. But we also had a smaller part actor called Billy Dean who'd been a... a stand-up comic and he'd never appeared in a movie before, and they cast him as a police inspector and he has quite a few scenes with Elizabeth, and he couldn't always get his lines right and he'd got one line that he had to say... he was... he was sort of enquiring about someone and he... his line was: 'How old was he, would you say?' And he couldn't get it right and he kept saying: 'How old was he... would you say... how old was he, would you say he was?' He just couldn't get this line right you see, and in the end it became a bit of a laugh, but, of course, it didn't help Elizabeth, but one gets around it by cutting. But she was a delight... and I was later to do another picture with her where she was... she was equally good fun.

We had a crew scree... screening of... of Women In Love before it was released and John Schlesinger, with his producer — Joe Janni — came to the screening and at the end John came up to me, as I'd worked with him before on commercials, and said how much he enjoyed the film, he liked my work and would I be interested in photographing his next film, and I said: ’Yes of course I'd be delighted.’ So I was sent the script and then went up to meet John to discuss it. Well, it was very controversial because it was a story about a Jewish doctor and a professional woman who were both in love with the same man — a young man — a much younger man, and so, obviously, the doctor was homosexual and the two older people both knew of the existence of the younger lover. So, you know, it was an exploration of... of homosexuality and bisexuality and so on, and initially I was a bit wary of this. I wasn't quite sure, you know, how things were going to be handled and it was going to be the first screen... screen kiss between two men. And so I... I went to John and, you know, explained my concerns and he was very understanding and, you know, he explained to me how it was going to be done and so on, and... of course, as it turned out, it... it was a very personal film for him because he's homosexual and his father was a doctor. So that Peter Finch, who was playing the homosexual doctor, was... was sort of very close to John's feelings and family background, and so on. So, you know, he persuaded me that... that it was the right thing to do.

So we went into the picture. The first thing he said to me was that he didn't want me to photograph it as I had photographed Women in Love. He wanted it to be under-photographed and by that I think he meant that he wanted the cinematography to be, shall we say, less noticeable. He wanted, I think, a style which did not detract in any way from the actors or the performances. Although, I mean, I didn't deliberately set out to be, shall we say, overly flamboyant with Women in Love; I felt I was interpreting the script, but with this script – Sunday Bloody Sunday – it was a completely different style. It was a much quieter... much less camera movement, really no hand-held work, less need for colour changes with the light, although there was one firelight scene. So we went into the picture, which was again, being released by United Artists, the same distributor as Women in Love, and he chose the same production designer that we had on Women in Love – Luciana Arrighi – and Glenda Jackson of course. It was lovely working with her again.
And we were filming a great deal in a house in Wandsworth, which fortunately had a high ceiling because I had a lot of movement around this room and the only way I could really get some light in was by hanging it up in the roof. And so, because it was a sturdily built house, I managed to get the grips to put screw eyes into the rafters from which I could hang small lamps, and because the ceiling was a reasonable height we could keep it out of picture. It was quite a complicated shoot because, in addition to several adults in a scene, there were four young children and a monkey that wouldn't behave itself, and so there were many times when we had to go again and again, and we were plagued with plane noise. The planes were coming over every two or three minutes and so for the soundman it was a nightmare. We just... you know, we just had to stop and retake a scene many, many times. So we shot a great deal in this house in Wandsworth and we shot various locations in London, including a scene in the rain in Soho and lots of night exteriors, which I very much enjoyed doing, I love the atmosphere you can create with night exteriors, especially if you wet down the streets a little bit. And we also had some studio work at Bray Studios. Now I'd already kind of developed a style with...with softer light but even so I got the feeling that... that John was not entirely happy with what I was doing and, you know, wanted to encourage me to get away a little bit more from a kind of studio look.

Something I was having difficulty with at that point in my career was that although I could, I felt, capture the right mood if I was lighting interiors on location, when I went into the studio it seemed to become much more difficult, and I think it's because in the studio you... you can put a lamp anywhere you want to, which you can't on location, and I was inclined to take advantage of that and put lights from too many different sources, and when I look back on it now I can see where I've gone wrong. And so it was a period when I was perhaps doing a little too much with light, when I should have kept it simpler, and I've learnt since that simplicity is the best way to go and... and not to put in... to go overboard with detailed work, not to become too fussy.

The great thing was that it... he was a wonderful director to work with. He was, I think, the most complete director. He was not only visually very imaginative but he understood the script, particularly this script because it was his personal story in a way, but he was so good with the actors because he'd been an actor. And I was... I have over my career worked with... with many directors who've come from acting and their great strength is understanding the way actors think and behave, and how to develop a character and how to talk to actors, and... and with so many of the best directors I’ve... I've found that they will talk very quietly to the actor about what they want and then if they do another take, they'll go up to them, speak very quietly about what they need... rather than letting everybody know what... what the issue is, and it's this sort of understanding, I think, of the... the temperament of an actor, which is so important for a director. And John, of course, he'd already made several groundbreaking films in terms of their social realism. He also understood editing well and music; he had a great strength in music and he went on to direct a number of operas in... in later years. So he was a very rounded, cultured man and with a lovely sense of humour. He... he... you know, you could have a laugh on the set. I always remember he would be very conscious of what was going on around during the take and we had a boom-swinger, who'd worked with John a few times so he knew him, and we were doing this take and it was a very long take, and the boom-swinger was hand-holding the mike, you see, and this went on for a couple of minutes, you see, and after a while this boom-swinger – Tom his name was – started pulling awful faces and John started to notice this, you see, and couldn't really concentrate on the acting. And in the end when he cut he turned to... turned to Tom and he said, ’What's the matter, what's the matter, is something wrong with the scene?’ Tom says, ’No’, he says, ‘This is so heavy. Ooh it's heavy guv’.

I had my crew, a crew that had been with me... mainly with me since Women in Love that was David Harcourt operating, Ted Deeson focus and Danny Shelmadine loading — second assistant. Well Danny has a marvellous sense of humour and he knows when... just the right moment to... when to crack a joke, and John, in... in his way too had this marvellous sense of fun, and I remember one take we did and it was a take with Peter Finch, the Jewish doctor, and Danny put the board in and it said, 100... slate 120 take nine. Danny put the... the board in and he read out: ’Slate 109 take... to you, eight and a half’. And everybody fell about, everybody fell about. It... it was moments like that that kind of released the tension. You get a lot of tension on the set, as you know, especially when you've got a difficult scene to play, everybody gets very concerned and... and there are moments like that... if you know how far you can go, that kind of eases it.

It was a film, when we finished, that I was so pleased that I'd done because it was... it was about a very important issue, which needed... needed exposing, I think, in the modern cinema and... also it was a very good picture of contemporary London. I looked at it recently and... it was shot in 1971 and it really captured the... the atmosphere of the way of life and people's social habits and so on, and it's... it’s a good movie. When we came to do the release prints we had to go through the same dye transfer process and we had difficulty getting what we wanted. Well, there's a final line in the picture from Peter Finch that... he was talking about his life, you know, and that he'd only got half of this... of the love of this young man because the other half was being shared with a woman, and his final line of the picture... well, you know: ‘Half a loaf is better than nothing’. And when we came to grade the picture we finally had to settle for what the Technicolor could give... give us with the dye transfer process. Joe Janni said: ’Well, it's half a loaf’. So he wasn't really satisfied. But, of course, those prints that were made, using the dye transfer, have survived but unfortunately, there were an awful lot made afterwards. It must have been the change over from dye transfer to the abandonment of it by Technicolor, because I can't find a print now that... apart from one which the BBC had, which seems to have disappeared, I can't find one which is dye transfer print. Because I went to a film festival recently in Palm Springs, where I saw John Schlesinger who had suffered a terrible stroke — this is two years ago — and we had a screening of Women... of Sunday Bloody Sunday and the print was dreadful it was all pink, all the colour had gone; it was so sad. And sadly too John Schlesinger died a few... few weeks ago and I went to a memorial service for him about a couple of weeks ago, which was lovely, it was beautiful. He made a great contribution to British cinema. He made some lovely pictures.

After Sunday Bloody Sunday my next film was Pope Joan, which was a... a medieval drama of a woman who legendarily became Pope and we had a marvellous cast with Liv Ullman, Franco Nero, Maximilian Schell and Olivia de... Olivia de Havilland playing the mother superior in a very regal style; lovely lady and the only surviving cast member of that time from Gone with the Wind. And... we had a lovely cast and beautiful sets by Elliott Scott, but the picture... it wasn't a bad picture but it... it didn't... it didn’t do much commercially.

And the next film was something completely different. I was asked to do a Western called Kid Blue, and the script was very funny. It was a satirical Western, supposedly set in the... in the West but shot in Mexico, and it was a film for Twentieth Century Fox with Dennis Hopper in the lead, and also in the cast were Warren Oates, Peter Boyle, Ben Johnson, Janice Rule; it was a good cast and the director – I think it was his first movie – his name was James Frawley, a very nice guy. But Dennis Hopper had come from a huge success with Easy Rider, which he was, I think, the co-director as well as the actor, and then he'd gone on to direct a picture in South America, which had lasted a long time. So he'd kind of got used to holding the reins and he gave this director a pretty tough time and I felt really sorry for him at times because Hopper was... was just being... he was being a bit naughty. I mean, there were certain times when he would insist that we only did a scene in one shot without any coverage, so it couldn't possibly be altered. So the editor was faced with using the scene in its entirety or dropping it and I... I thought: well I'd never heard an actor wield that kind of power.
But we shot in Mexico in a small town called Chupaderos, which John Wayne sort of discovered a few years before, and it was small town with a... a kind of main street and a couple of streets coming off it, and what used to happen is that every... every movie that came into town would... would just change the frontages of the buildings to the particular look that they wanted, because behind these frontages lived all the local people, and... and most of them were peasants and they earned a living by working as... as labourers and so on whenever a movie came into town. So there were periods when they... you know, things were quite good for them. And I remember when... when I arrived, I didn't have an awful lot of preparation time and they were sort of finishing off building the set and on one corner of the street they were putting on... painting a kind of Baptist church with white cladding and so on, and I thought: oh I'll... I’ll just go in and have a look inside this church. So I... I went through the door of the church and then there was a second door, and I went inside the second door and found myself in the real Catholic church. They'd built... they’d built a Protestant church on top of the Catholic church and it was... it was that sort of thing that they did; you know, they'd build the... the bar and the saloon and the hotel.
And we had a boarding house where we had a lot of dialogue scenes around a table and it was a nightmare because none of the walls would float. And we were working with the Panavision camera; they'd bought out by then a reflex camera called the PVSR — Panavision Silent Reflex — and that had really taken over from the BNC, the Mitchell camera, because the Mitchell hadn't got a mirrored shutter. And so Panavision had this... this new camera, which came out about... oh I think about 1969, 1970, and it was a good camera, and of course you could put a... your anamorphic lenses there... we were shooting anamorphic, which I've always loved. Excuse me. And... but shooting in this boarding room... house with about 12 or 14 people around a table with no walls that would float was really a... a headache.

The story was of Dennis Hopper who… starts off life, he's a train robber, and you start off with a train robbery that goes wrong, it gets bungled, and he decides that he's going to give up this… his bad way of life and go straight, and so he goes into this town, which was called Dime Box, which was the original title of the film — Dime Box… it's a very funny title — and when he gets there he meets all kind of rather stiff Victorian… unyielding Victorian values, and whatever he does, with the best intention, goes wrong. So he's always in trouble and the only people who really befriend him are the preacher — Preacher Bob — played by Peter Boyle, who's building an aerocycle, an early aeroplane and we had this wonderful construction of an early aeroplane, which was partly fired by a wood-burning stove and partly by a bicycle with a propeller at the front, and we had a stunt to do at the end where this thing actually flies, because he's got to get a...  make an escape and he... this thing actually is meant to fly. Well, we had a devil of a job doing this and the designer had built like a runway on the side of a hill so that this thing could launch itself out from the side of the hill and fly away. But the only way we could make the plane fly was with a helicopter with wires, and so the helicopter attached to the... there’s this mod... this plane to it and then took it off, you see, with the propeller going at the front and it looked as if it was flying except we couldn't get rid of the wires. And we did lots of coverage of this but there are inevitably one or two shots where you see the wires. But of course if they release it on DVD they can take the wires out easily, so it's one of the great advantages of modern technology.
But the whole commercial... reason for this town was a factory called the Great American Ceramic Novelty Company and it was a huge building that had been specially constructed for the movie and they make ashtrays. That's how... their entire product is making ashtrays and they're making Christmas ashtrays with pictures of Santa Claus on, and one... one ashtray would have a Confederate flag and the next one would have the Union flag, and so on, and the climax of the film is when Dennis Hopper, who's become very friendly with a group of Indians, who are trying to get their lands back, combines with these Indians and they... they rob the factory, take the payroll and get away. So it's a comedy Western but with a lot of... a lot to say about how America had developed and a kind of... a lot of the useless products, which are manufactured, which give people a living; things that people don't really need. It was a really interesting movie and it was in a lot of critics' top 10 list, top 10 pictures of the year. But very sadly it was made at a time when the hierarchy at Twentieth Century Fox were changing chairs all the time. You know, a... a head of production would come in and last a year or so, and then he'd go out and the films that he'd been responsible for were... were kind of pushed aside and the new guy that came in wanted to promote something different, and... and it was that period so the picture fe... fell between two kind of movements of management, and it didn't get any release but it was a good picture. And I showed it to students a couple of times and... and then the only print that was around in this country seemed to disappear so... but I've got a video of it fortunately. It was a good picture.

I got a cable from Elizabeth Taylor inviting Ann and I to attend her 40th birthday party, which was going to be in Budapest, and it was in Budapest because Richard was there shooting a film called Blue Beard, and so a whole group of people, a terribly diverse group from... people like Emlyn Williams and Frankie Howerd, Princess Grace, Ringo Starr, Michael Caine and Susanna York, and myself and a make-up man and a hairdresser, and we were all invited to this party in Budapest and had a wonderful time. And out of that came the next picture I did, which Elizabeth was going to do in Elstree called Night Watch, which was the same director that did Zee and Co., Brian Hutton, and it was a thriller and we shot the studio work in Elstree with just a few London exteriors. And it involved a lot of lightning effect and with storms, and the way we used to do lightning then was to... for the electrician to take the negative and positive carbons from an arc lamp and form a... a scissor arrangement, so that you started off with the... with the live carbons apart and then as you brought them together on a kind of scissor mechanism, you'd get this splash of light, which was absolutely brilliant, and looked quite like lightning. But, of course, it was... it was quite dangerous because, you... you know, if you looked at it, it... it was really dazzling and also the poor electrician that was standing underneath these scissor arcs, because he used... he was usually up on platform holding it up high and whenever he brought the arc... the arcs together, the carbons together, there'd be a big splash and sparks flying everywhere. So the poor chap used to have a difficult time; he had to wear gloves and goggles, and all that sort of thing. But it was... it was quite an effective way of... of doing lightening and continued for a while until somebody developed a system with a lighting box with a... with a xenon, which gave you... you know, a... a similar effect but was much safer to use. So that's how we produced lightning then. Later on I was to do a picture called The Manhattan Project, in which I'll tell you of... of how it was done further along the line. So it was another picture with Elizabeth Taylor, which was great fun.

I got a call to go to Iraq, where I'd been about 18 years before in my documentary days. They were shooting a picture called The Exorcist and it was in production in America and there was a sequence, which opens the picture, to be done in Iraq, where the leading actor played by Max von Sydow is established as an archaeologist and he's working excavating, and comes across a small figure, which... of a demon, which predicts some... that something awful is going to happen, that he's going to have to come face to face with something evil, and you then later reveal that he's not only an archaeologist but he's a Roman Catholic priest who’s experienced and has some experience in exorcism, hence the title of the... of the film. Now the majority of the film had been shot. They were shooting it in America, but it was almost as if there was a curse on the film because things kept going wrong. The set burnt down and then an actor died, and there... there seemed to be things going wrong all the way, and I was originally asked to go to Iraq in March and so much had gone wrong and they were so far behind schedule that I didn't actually go until August.
So I went off to Iraq. I met the director William Friedkin at the airport, Max von Sydow, and there was a production designer and assistant director. And I brought my English camera crew... two camera crews from England, and we... we flew to Baghdad. And... initially I went on a long recce with the director to try and find the right place to shoot these scenes of an archaeological dig and in fact I went back to many of the places that I'd been to on my documentary, but we didn't find anything that was quite right. Until we came across a city called Hatra, which was on the old trade route from India about 3000 years ago, and they were excavating this site and re-building the temple, a temple to the sun god, and there was part of this... the old temple, existing temple, with blocks of stone with the insignia of the stonemason on them. Each stonemason, on the corner of these huge blocks of stone, put his mark and you could look around these... this cathedral... well it wasn't a cathedral, it was a kind of temple, and see all these different marks. And the Iraqi people were... were re-building this temple by going back to the original quarry and cutting fresh stone and... and replacing what was missing. So we finally settled on this... this place called Hatra.

The equipment then arrived and we were staying in Mosul, at the Railway Station Hotel. I remember coming back from a recce one day with... with Bill Friedkin and there was all the gear laid out in front of the hotel and there were about 200 items because, you know, when you shoot with Panavision you get a case for everything, all... every lens has a separate case. So there were two complete camera outfits and there was a Fisher dolly, and there were various lamps. I had no idea what I was going to have to shoot before I got there, so I took some tungsten lighting. But there was one thing missing and it was a huge packing case, about 7ft high and about 4ft wide. It was the biggest item and it wasn't there. It was the only thing that was missing. Inside this packing case was a fibreglass statue of a demon, and it was the replica of a demon that had been unearthed some centuries before and which the original is now in the Louvre, and this demon is called Pazuzu and he's a sort of demon god. And the art department in Hollywood had made one fibreglass statue of this demon and it was the climax to the whole sequence that we were going to do in Iraq, that our archaeologist priest was going to have to come face to face with this statue, and then you cut to the modern day period with the exorcism and the... the girl, you know, afflicted with the demon.
So this... this statue was absolutely vital and it was missing, and nobody knew where it was. Well, this was 1973 I think, after the revolution in Iraq, and it was no longer possible to make an international phone call. And David Anderson – the same David Anderson that got me my first feature film – was... he was the production manager, and in order to make an international phone call, he first caught the overnight train from Mosul to Baghdad and he got on a plane in Baghdad and he flew to Beirut in the Lebanon to make a call, and they found this statue in Singapore. They'd forgotten to take it off the plane. So some days later it turned up and we shot the sequence, but it seemed to be quite extraordinary with a film that about exorcism that the demon should disappear, that there should be so... so much go wrong with this film. It was almost like there was an evil eye over the production. But of course, when it came out it was the most enormous success; it was a big, big hit.

Now I had quite a lot of interesting things to shoot out there. One was in a... a souq, which is like a... an underground market with shafts of sunlight coming through and lots of activity with traders and so on, and Max von Sydow has to walk through this souq, and it was extremely contrasting and I thought: I don't know how I'm going to light this, because there was no way of getting lights in. And all I had were these shafts of sunlight coming through, which were reading, I should think, about F22 on... there... we were still using 100ASA stock, so I'd got these shafts of sunlight with dust, you know, show... making them show up beautifully and... so I just got little bits of... of white card and I put them on the floor out of picture to reflect a little bit of light up from these beams of light. And then just in one... in the foreground I put a bulb to illuminate some work that somebody was doing, and that was about two to two and a half stops under and I shot it at 3.5, and it came out. I was greatly relieved because it had a marvellous atmosphere. I had another scene to do, an interior, and a... in the desert and I didn't have any Brutes... the biggest lamp I had was a 5K and so I had no daylight lamps. But I had some reflectors and because in that part of the world the sun shines all the time, I set up reflectors and shone them through the windows of this building and inside the room I had softer reflectors with... with white board on, so I reflected the light that was coming from the shiny, silver reflectors outside onto these white boards and lit the interior that way, without any lamps and of course, the colour of the light was correct and it... it looked, you know, quite acceptable.
So it was an experience to go back after all those years with the regime change, and the other thing that was interesting was that the... my assistant cameraman from 18 years before was now the leading cameraman in Iraq and the assistant director was the leading director in Iraq, and they both came to work on the film, just for the experience of working on a... on a Hollywood picture, and that was great. The other thing that... that I did, which I used a few times after that, I noticed that... and it... you'll have experienced this as well, is that when you're working in a hot country the morning is usually quite calm and then as the heat builds up, the wind gets up, so you very often get wind in the afternoon, and with all this excavation work going on the wind lifts the dust and it creates an atmosphere. And so I said, ’I'd... I’d like to have a wind machine’, so they brought in an aeroplane engine — a Ritter they call it — and I had a generator and so all of the scenes of the excavation I used this wind machine, which creates so much more movement with the clothes flapping and the wind blowing, and it gives a lot of energy to a scene that might otherwise be a little bit tranquil. And, that... that was... that was, you know, a useful device really.

I only shot the first 11 minutes of The Exorcist and then the next film I did was The Glass Menagerie with Tennessee Williams, directed by Anthony Harvey, with Katharine Hepburn in the leading role and her son Tom played by Sam Waterston, and we shot it on a composite set at Pinewood, and the financing was from television. It was going to be a movie of the week for ABC in America. I remember having a discussion with... with Tony Harvey, who insisted that the film was actually going to be released as a movie, and so when we shot the picture we framed it for 1:8:5, although it was initially going to be shown on television, but we framed it for 1:8:5 because we all felt the film was going to come out in cinema as well and it was... I mean, it was... it was a good picture, it was beautifully played and meeting Miss Hepburn and working with her was just kind of an amazing experience because she... she had such a presence and such a personality, and strength. She had a way of... of getting what she wanted and she had an extraordinary relationship with... with Anthony Harvey, who'd previously been an editor, and they had, a couple of years before, done a very successful picture called The Lion In Winter, Peter O'Toole, Katharine Hepburn, and it was... their relationship was... was like a... an aunt with a favourite nephew, in that she was kind of protective of him and he was willing to... very anxious to please her all the time, because everything was... was... you know, it was... revolved around Kate's performance and... and of her having her way, and Tony was... was kind of working in that direction all the time. And it worked because I mean she's a central character and it was a very good film. But sadly, apart from a showing at the London Film Festival, it... it never went into the cinema, and I was told afterwards it was because the producers refused to pay the actors the extra fee to release it as a movie. So it's never been shown as a movie.

I went to Dublin to do a film, which... which... the title of which kept changing and it finished up by being called A Likely Story, and it was a low budget film made under some kind of tax shelter arrangement, and the director was William Kronick, whom I'd not heard of before, and it was a story of a counterfeit gang and it was partly comic and partly dramatic, and we had some lovely locations and a lovely cast, and I enjoyed doing it but the picture never went anywhere; I never... it was never released and I found out since then... I had more experiences with other films, that... that these movies that are made under some kind of tax shelter arrangement, they very often don't get seen because they... they go out... they're made without a distribution deal, they're very often made by people who are not serious filmmakers... you know, they're setting up a picture so they can get the tax benefits of the particular country they're working in; in this case it was in Ireland. We were shooting in Ireland but the money was Canadian I think and... oh, it... it's all so devious that... you know one doesn't want to know too much about that side of it. So it didn't get shown except within the trade because a few months after that I was asked to do quite a big American picture called The Wind And The Lion, and it was an MGM picture and the producer, Herb Jaffe, had seen this little film that I'd shot in Dublin and that's, I think, partly how I came to get the picture; that he quite liked the look of this film.

Now this film, The Wind and the Lion, is set in 1904 and is based on a true story. At that time there was a Berber, brigand, a bandit, called Raisuli, who kind of ruled the area of... of Morocco, the mountainous area, and in 1904 he kidnapped an American citizen called Perdicaris and he held Mr Perdicaris to ransom and demanded money from the American authorities. And at the same time President Theodore Roosevelt was campaigning for a second term of office and he used this incident to enhance his political campaign in that, you know, he said: ‘America will protect its citizens all over the world and that this person will be brought back, we will rescue him’, and he... they despatched the fleet... a fleet of destroyers and so on, to Tangier where they stood off in the harbour and... and achieved the release of Mr Perdicaris.
But that's the true story. In the film, which was written and directed by John Milius, Mr Perdicaris becomes Mrs Perdicaris, played by Candice Bergen, with two children; a boy of about 12 and a girl of about nine or 10. So they're kidnapped by Raisuli, who was the real life character, but Raisuli is played by Sean Connery, with his full Scottish accent, no attempt to turn him into a Berber, and it's an action picture but it's also a culture clash between East and Western values in that, you know, these... this Westerner is... is kidnapped by a Muslim and... and held to ransom, who observes prayers and at the same time cuts off people's heads with a sword and... there were wonderful action sequences, horse... horse stunts with marvellous Spanish riders and battle scenes, and... I don't know if you know anything about John Milius but his films are always very macho and they always involve a lot of gunfights and sword fights and a lot of bloodshed, and... but with this film it... although it was an action film, there wasn't... there wasn’t any blood really and the whole thing is seen through the eyes of the 12 year old boy who's kidnapped and he looks up to this Raisuli figure as a kind of hero, although he's kidnapped... he's been kidnapped by him with his mother and sister and held to ransom. He's kind of... ooh, really enjoying all the colourful lifestyle of these Berber people who take them off into the desert and hold them to ransom.
And... the climax of the picture is... is a huge battle scene, of course, shot with great style and I remember we wanted to do... we had lot of travelling shots to do and the... the best vehicle, especially if it was rough ground, was the Citroen Deux Chevaux and you... you could get a vehicle in Spain at that time called a Mahari, which didn't have a... any seats it was just like a little pick-up truck, but it had got this marvellous Citroen suspension, which ironed out all the bumps. And I had Ginger Gem... Gemmel as my second unit cameraman and we lashed the tripod down and... and set off, and go across really rough ground, following horsemen at full tilt and the results are marvellous, absolutely great stuff, and it was a wonderful little vehicle for that sort of thing.

We started the picture off in Madrid as we had a lot of scenes that were supposed to be in Washington with Brian Keith playing President Teddy Roosevelt with John Houston as his Secretary of State John Hayes, so it was a marvellous cast, and we used this hotel in Madrid called the Palace Hotel, which had a huge sort of art nouveau glassed glazed dome with lots of space around it and some lovely big rooms and corridors, and... and we used this as a location shooting at night for Washington, and it worked beautifully; had some marvellous... marvellous scenes there. Well it was right opposite the Prado Museum and we were in preparation and I had a bit of time and I would go over to the Prado and spend quite... you know, some... some several days there looking around and I was really taken with... with the Goyas. I thought Goya was just, you know, the best, and I thought wouldn't it be nice if I could try and get something of the Goya look, if you like, into this movie. So it was a kind of an ideal that I had that if I could capture something of the... the colour and the light and shade of the Goya it would be some sort of inspiration.

John Milius was casting in Spain and although he'd got all the principles of course, there were several smaller parts that he was hoping to cast locally and I went into the office one day and he said, ’You can play Sir Joseph’, and I said, ’What do you mean?’ ‘Yes’, he said ’You'd be just right for Sir Joseph’. Well, Sir Joseph is the British Vice Consul in Tangier in 1904 and I was cast for the role. I said, ’Well I've got no... I, you know, I have got no experience of filmmaking’... ’Don't worry, don't worry, it'll be fine, it'll be fine’, and so right at the beginning of the picture there are several scenes of this band of brigands – Sean Connery's band – rampaging through and destroying various villages and this... these scenes are inter-cut with the European quarter of Tangier, which is very tranquil and peaceful and there's this beautiful garden, a lovely house, and Candice Bergen – Mrs Pedecaris – who's going to be kidnapped, is sitting at table with the British Vice Consul in Tangier talking about the wine and the servants while her two children play in the garden, and I'm cast as the British Vice Consul. So my big day comes, you see, and as it happened Anne, my wife, and my daughter Jo, were there on the day we shot the scene, and we were down in Almaria and it was very hot and I had to wear a white suit, which was about half an inch thick — it was terribly hot — with a waistcoat, an Eton tie, a gold watch and chain and a shoulder holster in which I have a Browning pistol – automatic pistol. And the sequence is that I'm sitting there with... with Candy talking about the wine and so on and the wait... waiter comes up with a bottle of wine, and at that moment this band of brigands bursts through a rose garden trellis and come charging towards us, across a pond with some ducks on it, at which point... this is in rehearsal, at which point I have to get up, draw my pistol, shout: ’Brigands!’, move to a mark, take aim and fire when the first horseman is half way across the duck pond, at which point he would take a... a fall, you see.

So that was the scene which had been scripted. Well prior to shooting it, I... we'd got a little bit of time before we were going to shoot. I said, ’Well John, do you think I could rehearse my lines a bit first’ and he said, ’No, no, no’. He said, ’Don't worry about the lines’. He said, ’Let's go and do some shooting’, because, you know, guns were his passion. So we went off set and I was shown in great detail how to draw a pistol and take aim and fire, you see. He said, ’No, no, no, no’. He said, ’That's no good’, he said. ‘With real bullets’, he said, ’You get a bigger recoil’. So I had to do it again and take aim and then... when... when the blank goes off, to take the recoil. He was very kind of particular about everything being correct as far as the way weapons were handled and everything.
So we practiced this for quite a while... ’Okay, okay, let's... let’s go and do it’. So we go back and get everything ready, you see, so I'm sitting there, made up and everything, all dressed up to the nines, and I... George Cole is my gaffer, you see, and there's a lot of leg-pulling going on about me being in front of the camera, and I've got this line that I must say as I'm getting up: ’Brigands!’ and George made... George made up an idiot board with ’Brigands!’ on it. He's holding this... this above his head so that I won't forget the line, and... and we're all ready and I said, ’Well George how's the light, what's happening with the light’, and he said, ’Don't worry about the light’. He said, ’The light's okay’. He says, ’Just don't forget the line’. So we start rolling the cameras and there are five cameras on this, including a Slave, which as you know, is... is a camera without any crew around it because it's in a dangerous position, and this Slave camera was right where the horseman is going to fall, so it captures the fall. So we've got five cameras ready, you see, so okay... all the cameras start rolling, you see, and I'm... I’m talking to Candy and we're talking about the wine and all that and... the horse.... the horses burst through the trellis, you see, and I turn, draw the pis... get up, draw the pistol, shout ’Brigands!’ go to the mark, take aim and the horseman does the most spectacular fall and the director says: ’Cut’, and it was terrific except I hadn't fired the gun. I got everything else right... there's so much... what I didn't realise when you're in front of camera, there is so much to think about, so many things going on and the timing of everything is so precise... I'd forgotten to do the thing that was the most important thing in the... for the director... it was that I fired the gun properly. So, of course, we had to fake it but it was a great scene, a great action scene. And then... I then, you know, I fire the gun, kill about three or four Berbers and then I go to fire and shoot another one and I run out of bullets, and so I take aim with the pistol and it's ’Click’ and I say: ’Oh damn’... very British: ’Damn’, you see. And then the next cut is a Berber charging at me with his sword raised to cut me down and that's my exit from the picture.
When we came to this... this scene, this stunt scene, the director said, ‘Oh’, he said, ‘I don't know’. He said, ’This is a bit risky; we better put Phil in’. Well Phil was the second unit director-cum-stuntman, you see, so Phil had to get into my suit, which was too small... he was bigger than me, the suit was a bit too small, and so Phil doubled for me, you see. Well, my daughter Jo was in tears. She said: ’Daddy, daddy, that's the best part of the film and you're not doing it’. And would you believe it, there has been a programme, which has been on television several times, about stunts in movies, and they show that clip and they show the clip of the stuntman doing my bit. So that was my debut in front of the camera and it made me realise what a lot... what a lot there is to acting. It's not just a question of getting the lines right. Do you remember one of the lines? Well yes, we were talking about the wine, you see, and that... well, you... you wouldn't drink a red Marg... a Margaux... you... it wouldn't be... you're late... she... Candy says... you... you know, you're... no, I say... she... let me get this right. She says, ’How about a... a Margaux’, and I say, ’Your late husband would never have approved a red Margaux before lunch’, kind of thing... it's the wrong... wrong wine to be drinking at lunchtime; it was too heavy. And... there were various other lines that were... that were cut; they didn't appear, you know.

But it was a good picture to shoot because we had some wonderful locations and I pursued this idea of having a rich contrast because it… it was like a culture clash and that you had the dark figure… he was always in black, Sean Connery, he was always… like he was the dark Eastern presence and Candy Bergen was always in white and off-white, and she was the Westerner and there… it’s this culture clash of what their values were and, of course, in the end she gets rescued and everything's fine, but not before a lot of bloodshed. That's a bit of a contrast isn't it? The white and the black. Yes, yes it was, but it… it worked out, it worked out okay. And I decided on that picture to go back to a hard key light, because I thought it was more appropriate... light designed... especially… there were a lot of scenes supposedly in Washington that we did in Madrid with senators and people like that, dressed in black, and I… I thought that a… a hard chiselled light — sharp light — was much more suitable to that... to the atmosphere. I still used a bit of soft filler so that I didn't get any double shadows, but all my key lights were hard, and it worked out all right. It was... it was, I think, the best way to go for that subject. And, again, it was anamorphic so we had the big wide screen, big negative... it was released in 70mm, wonderful score by Jerry Goldsmith and, you know, it was... it was a good boy's own adventure.
And Candice was young enough to take the hard light? Candy...? Candice. Sorry? Candice Bergen was young enough to take the hard light? Oh yes, well she was only... she was only about 21 when we did The Magus and this was about... this was about seven or eight years later. She was still under 30, and she's a wonderful horsewoman, marvellous rider, much better than Sean. He could ride but she was superb. As, there was so much on horses, on horseback... and I got on... Milius, John Milius, he's quite a... well, he's a very macho guy and, as I say, it's... it’s the weaponry that matters the most and he said to me at the beginning of the picture; he said ‘I don't want any close-ups in this picture’. He said ’We don't want to go too close’. And he kept to that; we nev... there were no really big close-ups. And the... he only looked through the camera once and that was when Brian Keith, who plays Roosevelt, was holding a rifle up and he was... he was about to shoot, and he just wanted to look through to make sure he was holding the gun properly. Otherwise, he'd come onto the set and just describe what he wanted, and he... he was a very good action director. You know, he'd say, ’Oh these are going to come in here; the other guys are going to come here; and this is going to happen here and the guns going to fire’... and... and he just described it to us all, with the first assistant and my camera operator, David, was with me, and then he'd walk away and let us set it up, and didn't look through the camera and we didn't have video assist. And so you had a lot of freedom. You know, you really felt, well, this is it; we do what... what we think best, and of course we got the dailies back and... and he liked what he saw. So it... it was very easy in that respect.

I did a... I did a second picture with Guy Green called The Devil's Advocate from a novel by Morris West, with John Mills in the lead. It was lovely, and we shot half in Bavaria Studios and half in Italy and again, it was a tax shelter situation; the finance was this tax relief business and... it was a good picture but never got any proper distribution, which was a great disappointment. It was lovely working with Guy again and I remember I was using diffused light, shining through frames and so on, and he said to me one day; he said: ‘I think...’ he said, ‘I think this... this system of yours, this new system...’ he said, ‘It...’ he said, ’It works... I think it works well for... for day interiors’, he said, ‘I don't think it's so good for night interiors’. You know... you know o Guy, very politely saying to me that he thought that the harder light was still better for night interiors. But he was such a nice man to work with. And so, sadly, that film didn't get a great showing and... partly due, I think, to the fact that Morris West had the... had final cut. Guy didn't know this at the time and I think the cutting was not to its best. When you have somebody who's not really a filmmaker with the final say, it's not very good news.

The next picture was Voyage of the Damned, another true story. In 1938 an ocean liner called the St Louis left Hamburg with about three or four hundred Jews fleeing the Nazis, bound for America to seek sanctuary. When they got to Florida the coastguard turned them away and they went to Cuba, to Havana, where they were allowed to drop anchor for a while and a few people, including some children, were allowed off, but no more. They were then ordered to leave. They went back to Hamburg and very few people survived the war, the Holocaust. That's a true story. The ship was called the St Louis and the original title of the film was Voyage of the St Louis, it was changed to Voyage of the Damned. It was directed by an American called Stuart Rosenberg. It had the biggest cast list I've ever worked with. The captain of the ship was played by Max von Sydow. His cabin boy was Malcolm McDowell. Among the passenger list was Faye Dunaway, Oskar Werner, Lee Grant, Lynne Frederick, Sam Wanamaker, Wendy Hiller, Maria Schell. In Cuba we had James Mason, Fernando Rey and Orson Welles. Now we'd been shooting for a few weeks and everybody was sort of waiting with some expectation for the arrival of Mr Welles. We were in Barcelona at the time. ‘Cause he had three big scenes to do, and I remember he arrived and there was a restaurant just opp... opposite the hotel where we used to have dinner and I... I sat at one end of the... of the... the restaurant with my camera crew, and at the other end, was Orson Welles with the director and some of the other actors. You could hear every word that Orson Welles said at the other end of the restaurant his voice had such resonance and projection. Everyone called him Mr Welles except the director.
So we come to his first scene, which is an interior, and he turns up on set with an incredible amount of make-up on. I mean like the old Technicolor make-up, very thick and heavy and dark... reddy-brown. So I called the make-up man and I said, ‘What's happened with the make-up?’ He said, ‘Ooh, Mr Welles did his own make-up’. So I went to the director and I said, ’Look, you know, we've got a problem with this make-up, it looks so theatrical’. And the director got a... he said, ‘Ohh’ he says, ’I can’t... I can’t... we've.... we’ve got to shoot’, he said, ’We can't do anything about it, he's ready, we've got to shoot’. And so, we had to shoot. So we did the day's work. Now, they had... the three scenes that he had were quite separated in the script, so I thought: well, I've got to do something about this. So at the end of the day I very politely went up to Mr Welles and I said, well, you know, ‘Excuse me Mr. Welles, but do you think tomorrow you could wear a little less makeup?’ and he gave a great big belly laugh and he said, ’Listen son, if I... if I don't wear all this makeup’ he said, ‘I look terrible, pale and washed out, I look dreadful’. I thought, that's it, you know, I've been put in my place. The next day we come to... to the second scene, he comes on set and the makeup is perfect. He'd done it himself and it was perfect. So, nothing said, we shoot and we're shooting on exteriors and we get to about five o'clock and we're in a courtyard in Barcelona and the... the light was dropping and I was actually wide open. And at that point, he looked at me and he said, ’Are you okay for light?’ And I said... I said, ’Yes, we can... we can just get this scene’. He said, ’Ok, ok, as long as your happy’. I thought that was... that was nice, that he understood my problem and he was giving me a little bit of backing up, you know, and there were no hard feelings kind of thing. And then the third day, his makeup was perfect again.

Now, we had another artist on the... on the movie called Lee Grant and she had previously said to me, ‘You know, I've got to have lots of fill light, you've got to give me lots of fill light because these lines are beginning to come rather pronounced’. Well I'd got Faye Dunaway to look after, who... who, you know, was the leading lady in the picture and was getting constant attention with makeup and... and I was, you know, lighting the picture in a certain way but, you know, taking as good care of the ladies as I could, but obviously Lee... Lee Grant felt that she ought to do a bit on her own and so... after we'd started — and she was in quite a number of scenes — she started coming on with white lines painted in here. And I again, I called the makeup and I said, ’What... what's happened with Lee's makeup? They said, ‘Oh, she's done that herself’. It’s funny isn't it? Anyway, the cast list... I say I'd never seen anything like it. Now, as you probably know, when you have the, you know, influential actors and actors above a certain category on a picture, in their contract they get a trailer or a caravan or a Winnebago —whatever you like to call it — for themselves to go and relax in and change and so on. And I remember when we were in Barcelona, we were using Barcelona to double for Havana and there was this long line of trailers, all for the actors. And I counted them, there were 34. There were 34 star actors in that film, each one with a trailer. It cost a fortune. All the same length? Hmm?  All the same length? Yes, yeah all identical.
But we had some wonder... there were some wonderful scenes, a very moving picture. It’s a tragic film, a very sad film, and I think it's weakness is it doesn't have enough humour and it's very even paced, and I've seen it on television; I think it works better on television than it did in the cinema, but it was a marvellous story, and we had wonderful sets. At Elstree we had a production designer called Wilfred Shingleton, and he built the whole of the bridge area on stage. Now, in Barcelona we'd already shot scenes on the ship, both at day, at night under steam, but now we'd got these lengthy dialogue scenes on the bridge and on the wings of the bridge, which had to be done in the studio. And when we got out onto the wing of the bridge, which is exposed, I said to the director, ‘Well, you know, we've got to have some wind on this because the ship's under sail and we're cutting with material where we've seen wind blowing and all that’. He said, ’Oh no, no’, he said, ’We can't have wind; I've got to get direct sound’. So I said, ’Well look I... let me try the smallest wind machine’ which was a Mole Richardson, small job. And I said ‘Let... let me try that’ and I put that on and he'd got the headphones there and he said, ’No, no. No, I can hear it. No’. So we shot all these scenes without wind. And when you see it, it's obvious that the ship's not moving! And, you know, it was such a disappointment, I thought, you know, you can easily take out a bit of wind noise, there's no problem in the mix, I'm sure, to do that. But no. No wind.

Eagles Wing was another Western to be shot in Mexico again. The director... Anthony Harvey, with Martin Sheen, Sam Waterston, Harvey Keitel and Stéphane Audran. And... it’s another story of a culture clash between the white man and Red Indian. Martin Sheen played the white man and Sam Waterston played a Kiowa Indian who speaks no English throughout the film, only his native tongue. And Harvey Keitel is in the picture for a brief period as a kind of senior partner with Martin Sheen, who are trading furs with the Indians for alcohol. And they have an assignation with a certain Indian tribe to, you know, trade some furs, and this particular group of Indians get involved in a battle with some other Indians, and the chief amongst one of these two tribes has the most magnificent white horse. The Indian played by Sam Waterston sees this horse and thinks what a marvellous animal it is. And, in the course of the battle, the owner of this horse gets killed. Now, the ritual was, that if... if a man got killed you also destroyed his horse. Well, Martin Sheen who we’ve already established as wanting to trade with this same group of Indians that get involved in the battle, comes across a strange ceremony, a ritual ceremony where they're going to kill the horse. Rather than see the... the horse killed, he makes an attempt to rescue it, which he does. But in rescuing the horse, a local shaman who is performing this strange ritual, gets killed. So the white man has got this wonderful horse but an Indian has been killed in the process. And so, he is then pursued by a group of Indians seeking revenge. He's also being pursued by the Sam Waterston character who also wants to own this horse, so it... the picture is a running duel between these two characters for the possession of this horse. And during the course of the movie they both own it. The same group of Indians that... that Waterston belongs to ambush a stagecoach. And there are wealthy Spaniards on board this stagecoach, which is carrying a lot of money. And he takes all of their money and jewellery and also an Irish girl who’s part of the group on the stagecoach, he kidnaps her. So the Sam Waterston character makes off with the white woman and all of these... all of this treasure that he's looted, so he has this burden to carry.
As the film progresses, the ownership of the white horse changes from one to the other and the Red Indian who has now got the white horse, in order to make his escape, decides to keep... to abandon all this treasure he is carrying because it is slowing him down. So he starts to dispose of all the treasure, and eventually disposes of the girl. And, the group that are pursuing him to recover the girl then start picking up the treasure that he has left behind and, again, in Mexico, like it was in Iraq, the wind was getting up in the afternoons, and so I brought in the wind machine again and agitated the dust and gave a lot of these sequences a lot more energy. I also had a Chapman crane which proved to be the most marvellous tool in putting the camera exactly where you want it in the shortest possible time, whether it was 25ft up in the air or 3ft down on the ground. And because it was six-wheeled drive it could go anywhere, and so I could get all these high angled shots that I wanted of rapid lifts up and drop down and swinging the boom, lots of things to make the... the picture more exciting. And, you know, I really... I'd... I’d already used the Chapman on Voyage of the Damned and... yes, Voyage of the Damned and Wind and the Lion, and so, it was the most valuable tool. Wonderful landscapes in Mexico and wonderful skies, particularly as it starts to get dark so... it was a really exciting picture visually. The other thing which attracted me was, apart from the beginning of the film when Harvey Keitel is partnering Martin Sheen, there's no more dialogue and no subtitles. The Spanish speak Spanish; the Indians speak Kiowa and Martin Sheen talks to the horse, talks to himself. So we had to tell the picture visually, and that was a... that was a lovely challenge. And it was a... an exciting picture, it was hailed as the first British Western, because it was a British producer, the crew were British except for our Mexican assistant, and the money was British, it... it was financed by Rank. And it was... it was a very enjoyable picture.

I'd been a member of the... the BSC [The British Society of Cinematographers] since 1967 and in 1975 I was... I became president for two years which, you know, was a great honour but also quite a responsibility and... You know, the BSC was fashioned very much on the lines of the American Society of Cinematographers and we've kind of, based ourselves very much on their beliefs of, you know, enhancing the artistry and integrity of... of cinematography and trying to retain its role in filmmaking and I think it's important that, you know, future cinematographers do continue to make their presence known in moviemaking, and for us not to get overwhelmed by any new technology which involves electronics, because the, you know, the work has to originate... it has to originate I think through the vision of the director and cinematographer. I think we've got to be very careful that we... we retain a degree of control during these postproduction processes which are becoming so... so... well, so advanced and, you know, so... offering so many choices now to alter the image completely. I think that... that, you know, the BSC plays a very important role in... in doing that. Also I've made many friendships. We have a kind of camaraderie amongst ourselves, we... we don't mind sharing secrets. I remember when I first started, cameramen used to have secrets, they didn't... they didn’t used to like to talk about how they got a certain effect. All the while I've been working I've always found my colleagues to be very open in talking about how things were done and sharing their knowledge and kind of furthering the whole creation of moving images. What's the point in keeping something to yourself? If progress is going to be made it should be available to everybody.

I did a picture called Going in Style and... was with a very young director straight out of film school, the American Film Institute in New York. And he was only 27 and his name was Martin Brest. And... he'd insisted that I shoot the picture although we'd never met. And of course there is a problem when a European goes to America, you have to get a work permit and you can only get a work permit if the union will agree to you working. And in New York, for quite a long period of time they'd accepted many European cinematographers, people like Giuseppe Rotunno and Ozzie Morris and so on. There had been lots of Europeans coming in. But at this particular point they decided to make a stand and to not want any more Europeans coming in — this was the executive of the union - so when Warner Brothers applied for me to go to America, they... they turned us down and said: ‘No, we're not going to let Billy Williams come in, you've got to find somebody locally’. So Warner Brothers made a second application and it was turned down again. Now this young director, Martin Brest, was persistent in that I must photograph the picture, and he said, ‘I'm going to go along and make a... a third request that he should be allowed in’. The studio said, ’Okay’ they said, ‘but if you're turned down, if the union won't agree, we'll pull the picture out of New York, and we'll shoot the location in Chicago and we’ll shoot the studio work in Hollywood’.
So Martin Brest went to the union, and they turned him down. Well of course, the studio then moved. They said, ‘we're taking the picture out of New York’. Well! Talk about a furore! Because it wasn't just the camera local that was affected, it was all the unions that were going to wor... work on the picture. So the camera local called an emergency meeting of the membership to vote on whether I should be allowed to come and work in New York. And they voted 108 to three in favour of me coming to work and the three that voted against were the three members of the executive on the union who’d decided the policy. So I went to New York, not quite knowing what I was going to find, whether I would be welcome or not. And when I got there, the crew couldn't have been more friendly. I had a wonderful op... operator called Tom Priestley who’d worked with Ondricek and Rotunno and, you know, a lot of the European cinematographers and was a great operator, and a very good focus and loader and... and I... everything was fine.

And we started shooting the picture; Going in Style written by Martin Brest and directed by him, straight out of the film school. The cast was George Burns, Art Carney and Lee Strasberg. The story is of three old men living in Queens, living on social security, bored out of their minds not knowing what to do with life except, you know, go and draw their pensions, go into the park, feed the pigeons. And the George Burns character, who’s very sharp, he watches a lot of movies and he noticed at the local bank, that, you know, money seems to be going in and out and there didn't seem to be all that much security, so he devises a plan to rob the bank. And so these three old men dress up in disguises, they steal... they steal or borrow... guns and ammunition from the nephews of one of them who’s a gun fanatic, and they rob a bank, in all these funny spectacles and moustaches, and they get away with it. And of course, it's all over the television, what's going on with our old people that they have to resort to robbing banks? Well, as a result of the robbery one of the three, Lee Strasberg dies – of a heart attack – and George Burns and Art Carney, not knowing what to do with all this money, decide that perhaps they will go to Las Vegas. So they fly to Las Vegas and play the tables and win a fortune and come back with all this money which they then give to a nephew who is in need. The... the bank never gets its money back and eventually George Burns, who is by then the only survivor, finishes up in prison. And that's the end of the story, with George Burns saying: ’Well no place like this is ever gonna hold me’.
So it's a comedy but it's also a lot about old age and the boredom of old age. And it was fascinating working with George Burns, because he's like a metronome. He's got a certain rhythm with a scene and you could play it 20 times and it was always the same, it was exactly the same performance every time. Whereas Art Carney, who was a much more of a spontaneous actor, varied enormously from one take to the next. And Lee Strasberg who was of course one of the founders of the Method school of acting. You know, he coached Brando and Mar... Marilyn Monroe, he was rock solid. So we had these three wonderful characters and a novice director. And I had a really hard time because it was like having a film student in charge. I'd just about... a year earlier I'd had my first experience of working with students at Beaconsfield, and I came onto this picture with this... with this young man who was very bright and very nice, very nice personality, but he didn't want to accept anything that I had to say. He... everything had to be proved, so that when it came to getting a set-up, we'd set the camera and he'd say: ’Let's move in a foot'; 'No, let's change the lens’; Change the lens; ‘Oh, let's move back a couple of feet'; No, that's not right. 'Let's try another lens’. And it was a bit trying to work it out by numbers, as if you were, you know... working with someone who... well he hadn't made a movie before you see. And... gosh! It really... it was really tough going to have to, kind of, accept that he was in charge and yet the whole time he was feeling his way, not sure how to how to do things, and not rea... really willing to listen you see. He had the set painted three times because he couldn't make up his mind on the colours you see. And, I would talk to him about the way the... the set should be shaded to make it look aged, and, you know, the art director understood what I meant because that was... that's the way you do a set. But he wouldn't have that, he wanted to do it differently because he didn't think it would look right, so all sorts of things like that that he was completely naive about and yet wasn't willing to listen. He'd gone to all this trouble, and fought tooth and nail to get me there, and then when... when I was there, he didn't really want to listen.
So I found it very frustrating, but it was a good picture, fortunately. It was a good picture, it was very funny, the cast were great and it... and it did well, but I didn't work with him again. He went on to... to make some quite successful pictures including Beverley Hills Cop with... with Eddie Murphy, but I couldn't go through that again. He’s nice... he was a nice guy but I couldn't go through all that, you know, palaver.

First picture I shot in Canada was called The Silent Partner with a screenplay by Curtis Hanson, who went on to direct LA Confidential. Lovely script, and it's about a bank teller played by Elliott... Elliott Gould and a tough character, a bank robber, played by Christopher Plummer, who disguises himself as Santa Claus in order to rob a bank. And he makes an initial attempt to rob the bank and it... it goes wrong and the bank teller played by Elliott Gould, cottons on to what's happening and gambles on the fact that this Santa Claus will make a second attempt to rob the bank. And so the bank... teller deliberately takes out money from the vault and conceals it. Right? Then when Santa Claus comes back and robs the bank, he doesn't give him all the money that he's taken out of the vault. He keeps it for himself, so in fact the bank teller has robbed the bank, the thief has got away with a certain... so many thousand dollars, and yet when the robbery is announced, it's said that he's got away with a great deal more money than he's already got. So the Chris Plummer character — Santa Claus — realised that he's... he’s been... been fooled by the teller, so then he then pursues him to get the rest of his money. And it's a really exciting thriller.
Susannah York is also in the picture. And we shot it partly in the studio in Canada and partly in a... a shopping mall known as the Eaton Centre which at that time was the biggest shopping mall in the world, and... full of, you know, shops and escalators and all that sort of thing. And we... we set up a bank within the Eaton Centre and called it the something or other bank of Toronto, put a sign up, and it was our set. And we had people coming into this bank wanting to open accounts! And so... they build this artificial bank, you know, in... in this very busy location, which seemed a very strange thing to do. And I remember at that... that time I had really gotten into bounce lighting. This polystyrene had arrived, white boards, and I was lighting with a lot more soft light. But the problem I found with... with soft light is if you've got a lot of glass, and in a bank you do have a lot of glass partitions, that you've got the problem of hiding the reflections, because the bigger the... the source of light, the bigger the reflections, so I had to find other ways of... of, you know, overcoming that. It was very enjoyable picture and what's quite interesting is that... the executive producer of The Silent Partner was a man called Garth Drabinsky... Garth Drabinsky, and he came to me one day and he said, ’You know, I've got a new idea for cinemas’. He said, ‘I'm going to build cinemas with more than one screen’. He said, ’We're going to have several screens all in the same building so that we can cut down on all the... all the number of staff and projectionists and we can stagger the starting times so that we only need to have one or two projectionists and we can, you know, run all... have all these films running at once’.
And that was the beginning of the multiplex, it was his idea, and Cineple... he called in it Cineplex, that was the name. And shortly after we finished this picture he started with this idea and of course it grew to what it is today. And Cineplex was taken over by Odeon, who became Cineplex Odeon, and then of course it mushroomed and you've got what we have today with the multiplex being the commonplace thing. But it was the idea of... of this... he was a lawyer — tax lawyer — and he put the money into The Silent Partner. What a great idea. It’s funny how things progress isn't it? I remember the original... some of the original multiplexes were conversions of old cinemas, and what they had to do to get the image into various parts of the building was to go through mirrors. They had to bounce through two mirrors to project into a... a room which had not been intended as... as a viewing room so that you... you got a lot of soft focus and loss of definition. But now, of course, with... with purpose built multiplexes, you... you know, if it's well designed you get direct projection on them all and a good picture and the sound system has improved enormously too.

I've only done one science fiction picture, Saturn 3. And it... the idea was created by John Barry, who was the production designer for Star Wars, and he also did the second unit on Star Wars. And he wrote the original treatment for Saturn 3 and directed it. It was his directo... directorial debut. And I was very thrilled when... when he invited me to photograph it for me at Shepperton Studios. Stuart Craig was the designer and we had some wonderful futuristic sets, long, curved tunnels made of a kind of black plastic material which, you know, offered all sorts of dramatic set ups. And this is all supposed to be in a space station in the future and the characters were Kirk Douglas and Farrah Fawcett and Harvey Keitel. It was just a threesome. Harvey Keitel is the bad guy who has created a robot, and the robot, is meant to perform certain functions in this space station. But the robot gets out of control and starts to destroy everything and become a threat to them all. The robot was big guy in a suit with all kinds of antennae popping out and all of a... really weird costume. And it turned out to be nightmare every time we had to do a shot with the robot, because it took so long to put it all together.
So we started, and I thought things were going very well. I was getting on very well with John Barry, he's very visual, as you... as you imagine with a production designer. And, things were looking good and we'd been shooting for two weeks. And Monday morning we were called on to the set to be told that the director had been replaced and that the producer was now going to direct the picture and the producer was Stanley Donen, who was lovely, really nice man, but it wasn't his cup of tea. I mean he was a director of musicals, Singing in the Rain and things like that and directing this robot wasn't exactly like directly Gene Kelly. And... you know, we plugged along and... there was a huge investment in this picture by Lew Grade who also financed Voyage of the Damned. And... you know, a big name cast but in the end it didn't... it didn’t really hold together. And although we spent a lot of time making the film, they then had to put the special effects on. It went to Hollywood to do the special effects and when you look at them now, they... they just don't hold up, things... things were advanced so much in post production that a lot of the... the space scenes of, you know, in orbit and so on, just don't hold up. But it was quite an interesting thing to do, something completely different from anything I'd done before. And... it's always a... a disappointment when things aren't quite a success.
What was wrong with the first two weeks work? Nothing. Politics. There was nothing wrong with the first two weeks work, except that we were a little bit behind and we were behind because it was taking so long to... any time we had to do something with the robot. And Kirk Douglas had complained that the director was spending too much time with the robot, but it... but it was inevitable, in fact the picture went weeks and weeks over schedule because you couldn't avoid the fact that the robot had to be in certain scenes. Like he has to play a game... the robot played chess with Kirk Douglas and so the robot had to do all the move, picking up hand... picking up the pieces with a kind of claw-like mechanism... Takes time. So he was all these animatronics which had to be worked out.
You had to have a single light source I suppose, out in space? Well we were inside a space station you see, and this space station had like got its own methods of generating light. And I designed some lamps to look like futuristic lamps. And, I didn't know where to start to be honest, but... so what I did, I... I got some... some lamps — I think they were about 1000W — they had a round shape, and I got the art department to paint a black... a black sphere in the middle of a diffuser frame. So you had like this black dot in the middle of a white globe. And I had dozens of these, perhaps a hundred or more of these, in banks so that you had this light source with these strange black dots all over, rather like frog's spawn. And it looked different, but I was just searching for something that looked different from conventional lighting. And that was quite fun. And of course, you know, certain things were fuelled by the sun obviously. But... but there’s... it was a bit weak, the whole idea wasn't... wasn’t really worked through.

In 1978 I got a phone call from the National Film School at Beaconsfield inviting me to come along and do a workshop with the cinematography students. So I went along, not knowing what was expected of me, and I had about a dozen students who were at various stages of a three year course in... in cinematography. And so I thought, well, why don’t I... I've got so many people, why don't I make two crews? And I'll have one crew filming an interior shot, an exercise which they would have to light, and have the other crew filming the way that it was... that it was achieved. So that one... one crew was outside showing how all the lights were set and the other crew was inside filming the action and... so that... that worked quite well, it was just my introduction to teaching. Now, people talk about teaching and one being a tutor and this was in 1978 and it opened up a... a whole new chapter for me. And, it was Chris Menges that said to me recently, he said, ’How do you teach cinematography?’ and I said, ’Well, you don't really teach it, because if you're going to be a cinematographer you've got to have something within yourself, a creativity, an appreciation of certain things, which are developed within each individual according to their aesthetic’. The things you teach are... or demonstrate if you like, are the tools that are available, how to use them, how to get certain effects, but I think most of all how to encourage and give confidence to young filmmakers. Because in the end, however much you might demonstrate how to do a certain style of lighting or how to get a certain effect, the pressure comes when that individual has to take on the responsibility of determining the placement of the camera and the composition and... where they're going to put the lights and how they're going to achieve whatever's required. So it's a question of... of building up the confidence of the individual, encouraging them to express themselves and experiment, try out something new and bring out their latent talent. And of course this varies enormously with... with each individual.
Well this started in 1978 and it was almost like another career because I... I've continued working with students and young people until this day. And it's been good for me because it's forced me to examine what I do, what my role is, how I fit into the whole pattern of filmmaking, and what is expected of a cinematographer, and how one can develop one's appreciation of what a story is about and how do you capture the essence of a scene and... of course by working with many different directors and actors over the years you... you do gain a certain knowledge and understanding of... of what's important about certain things in filmmaking and what can be discarded. And when you're put in the position of being a tutor with some experience, it’s... it’s... I feel it's an opportunity to impart one's knowledge. I mean, I learnt a lot from my father but that was mainly technical things about the cameras and the lenses. I felt that... what... what it was my position to do, and my opportunity to do was to encourage them to tell the story, to make the visuals interesting and to really put something of themselves into their work.
So it started off in a very simple way and gradually evolved. And I found myself invited back to do seminars sometimes, where you just talk about things, and workshops where you have a practical hands-on. And then I was invited to America to the International Film... Film Workshops in Rockport, Maine, which is a beautiful place on the coast. And they hold these summer workshops for all branches of filmmaking, including film lighting. And, many times over a period of about 15 years I went there for a week or so to talk to students who were paying a fee to be there. And the... the first time I went I think I had 43 students in the group. And the idea was to split them... split them up into four groups, each with their own package of equipment, and send them off to four different chosen locations and to develop their own... story with the rest of the crew working as actors, to create whatever interested them. And... and each person became the director of photography for two hours, so they had two hours each to do their piece and then they became part of the crew. And I was amazed at how much enthusiasm and energy and imagination there was present in this atmosphere, where people were paying at that time $600, which is... 20 years ago that was a lot of money.

So I... I began working with students in... in Rockport, Maine, mainly American students but also from... from all over the world, but then they were fee paying, and I found there was a huge difference in the number of questions I would get from the students in America as compared to... to those in England in that the moment I walked through the door in America I would be asked a question and those questions would continue throughout the day which started at eight in the morning and finished at 11 o'clock at night so they were constantly on the go. I found in England I'd get the first question as I was leaving, on my way out somebody would ask a question, because there's a certain reluctance there seem to be, main... mainly English students, to actually ask a question and... and I've tried since then... since those early days, to impress on the group that I'm with, ‘Look I'm here to answer your questions and there's no such thing as a silly question. If it's something you want to know or don't understand then... then ask about it, and we can talk, and... and if I know the answer I'll give it to you’.
Because, what was good for me, being put into this position was that, you know, most of my working life, you know, I'm photographing on set, I'm working very closely with the director, and my operator and gaffer and so on. And coming from what my discussions have been with the director, and what the script tells me and what the actors are doing, I just go out and do it, light the set and so on. It's very rare for anybody to question what I'm doing. Although occasionally, like John Schlesinger did once or twice, he's saying well...John would say, ‘well, you know, that doesn't look quite right, do you... do you really need that light there or couldn't you do it a bit differently or...?’ And so on, and he'd make a really positive contribution to what I was doing. But it was... it's very rare for anybody to, kind of, question what you're up to, because you know it’s, that's ones job, you're left to do it. So what was good from my point of view was perhaps to look at a film I'd done in the past, to look at it with... with a student group and for us to discu... to discuss how it was done and why it was done. Why did you put the light there, you know, why didn't you put it somewhere else? And, why did you make it blue and...? Things like that. And so you are then forced to re-examine what your thoughts were when you did it in the first place, and... and to communicate, this was really what it was about I think. To communicate your though... your thoughts and your vision, to be able to express in words what you're trying to put into pictures. And you... I found I could do it sometimes by illustrating a certain method and also encourage the group to express themselves because as time went on, I found the best way of doing these workshops was to write a series of exercises, little scenarios in which we could have two actors playing out a scene. And the... each scene that I'd written would have a different feel to it in terms of the dramatic content of the scene and the time of day. Like I would write scenes of a day interior perhaps with the curtains drawn and the curtains being opened so that the light would change, or there would be scenes by candlelight or scenes by firelight or scenes with an intruder coming in at night with just a torch as source of light.
So that, you know I wrote several little scenarios so that each student would have half a day to photograph a given scene with a couple of actors. Sometimes they'd have a whole day, it would depend on the schedule. But they'd be given sufficient time to... to tell a little story. And, that... that seemed to work, because, by putting them in the driving seat of actually determining with the gaffer where to put the lights, where to set the exposure, how to tackle things.

Finally I came to try and... in trying to kind of analyse ones approach, an... an approach which... which I've had for many years now without realising it, is that one works obviously from the script and the breakdown of the scene resulting from the rehearsals. But when one's rehearsing... when the actors are rehearsing and I'm on set with the director and various other crew members and you’re watching to see how things play, and trying to see where is the best place for the camera to be at certain times. And then when the rehearsal has been completed, to have discussions with the director and operator about where we put the camera, when we track, and what size we're going to be, and when we need to be in close and when we need to reverse, these things come out of... of the rehearsal. But there's a thought process which is also going on as to how it's going to be photographed. And the first thing that... that I'm thinking of when I'm... I’m perhaps setting up a shot, is what is the direction of the light going to be? What's the main direction of the light, is there a very obvious source like a window or a practical lamp, or could I make the source anywhere that I liked because there's no obvious source? So that you're thinking about where the source of light comes from. And this also applies when you're working on exteriors, particularly in sunlight... is that if the sun is behind you for instance, you have a very flat picture. When the sun gets into a cross light position, especially when it's... falling a little bit, you get lovely shapes and textures, of the texture of the land and the hills and so on, and things become more sculpted. And then when it lits into three quarter back light, things become more rim lit and dramatic and then when it goes into full back light you see, you get this halo effect round things. That backlight picks up the mist more and the atmosphere that surround, or if you're using fog and you backlight it, it shows up much more.
And so the first consideration... what is... what is the direction of the light? And if you're in the studio of course you have a certain amount of choice as to way you place that key light. And of course you have to take into consideration the placement of the actors and how you want the actors to look, because certain angles of light are less flattering than other angles, so the direction of the light is the first consideration. The next consideration is, is it going to be hard light or it is going to be diffused through a frame, which will soften the shadows. Or it is going to be very, very soft by bouncing off a big white frame, which will give you even less shadows. So that's the second consideration, is... is what I call the quality of light. Hard, diffused or very soft. The third consideration is what is the contrast ratio. Are you looking for extremely contrasty, which is more dramatic of course, or, you know, the more fill light you put in the less dramatic it becomes. So how much fill light do you want to put in, in relation to this key light. Because if one says that it's an eight or a 10 to one ratio, that's... that’s a contrasty, if you get down to four or six to one, that's more kind of middle of the range and then the flatter you get the, you know, ratio can be one to two, but that's a very flat look. But there might be times when you want to do that. So that's the next consideration, is the contrast ratio.
The other consideration, the next one, is what is the colour the light. Is it... is it all white light or is it a mixture of perhaps colder light coming through the window with a bit of tungsten light inside. And if that's the case, then the tungsten light should have a warmer look than the daylight, so what filters are you going to put on the lamps to create this difference in the colour temperature. So that's the next consideration, is the colour of the light. Then the... I think the final consideration is, what are you going to put on the camera. Are you going to be put any kind of colour filter, so that the overall thing has a... a colour bias or are you going to stay just with the 85 if you're on exteriors or with no filter inside, and are you going to put any diffusion on? Do you want this thing to look what we call clean, which means there's no... no diffusion, or you want one of a choice of many, many different kinds of filters marketed by Tiffin and various other manufacturers, which diffuse the image. They all break down the image to a certain extent, make it less sharp. Some of them create a little flair around the highlights; some of them just reduce the contrast. There's only one filter that increases the contrast and that's the pola screen, which you wouldn't normally use inside, but I always use a pola screen when I'm on location because it enhances the sky and can reduce unwanted reflections off water. A pola screen is... is the only one that increases contrasts, all the other filters are a means of reducing contrasts. I always favoured black nets as diffusion, various degrees of density in black net that... there's such a choice now of different... different filters that you can do all sorts of things, and graduated filters too are very useful for taking down a sky that's too bright, just a... a neutral density... soft edged neutral density you can bring down and reduce the sky... bright sky or make the clouds more dramatic. So, all of these things I try to encourage the... the group to think about, to have a pattern of thinking as to how you're going to achieve the desired effect.

I was saying about pola screens, and it's the one... the one filter that I will always have with me when I'm shooting on exteriors, and I use... I had a pola screen that was combined with an 85, so that it was all in one piece of glass. I never liked putting too many pieces of glass on the front, especially if you're using a zoom lens, because you get a sort of internal reflection building up sometimes and unwanted flares with more and more pieces of glass. So I used a pola screen combined with an 85, and I was saying it’s the one filter in which you can increase the contrast by cutting down the mist. But if you were using it say, with a sun flare on the water, then it would reduce the contrast by rotating it. And you... you can determine how much you want to reduce it. And I think it's the one filter which gives you enormous possibilities of control on location. I have used it very occasionally on interiors where you've perhaps got a reflection, a glass or something or a window that you've got to get rid of. But of course with a pola screen you lose nearly two stops, and on interiors to lose nearly two stops is quite a disadvantage. Whereas if you're shooting, say on a sunny location where you would perhaps be shooting at 16 and you don't want to stop down that far, by putting on the pola screen you can open up nearly two stops to more like eight, which is sometimes a... more of a stop you want to work with, you know, because the stop you're working at affects the depth of field. It depends how much depth of field you want to achieve.

						When I first started working in features, it was the accepted practice in England for the director to get the set-up with the camera operator. And for the lighting cameraman, as one was called in England we've never been called lighting cameramen anywhere else except England and I don't know how we got this title, because our original title was cinematographer, that's our trade description, and I think it's one that best describes what we do. In America, the cinematographer became the director of photography which was a little bit contentious I think with directors because I think they felt that perhaps the cinematographer was stealing a bit of their thunder. So as I say in England it was accepted that the director got set up with the operator and the lighting cameraman kind of stood by and perhaps made a comment or a suggestion and generally didn't make a major contribution to the setting up of the camera, that was the feeling I had when I first started doing features in England. When I went- started working in America in the late seventies, although the first picture I did in Mexico in '72 with an American director, I found that the American directors always came to the cinematographer to get the set-up and the operator was kind of a bit left behind. Everything was discussed between the director and the cinematographer and sometimes the operator wouldn't even be present, he'd be kind of in the background and I thought- well this doesn't seem to be the best way to work, there's got to be somewhere in-between where everybody can contribute and get the best result. Coming from documentary of course where you get your own set-up, you don't have a separate operator, I was initially a bit frustrated that I wasn't there getting the set-up. And- through, you know, working with David Harcourt who was very understanding and not at all put down by the fact when I explained to him that I really needed to be involved in getting the set-up because I think the work that the cinematographer does starts from where you put the camera, and where you put the camera comes out of what the director is searching for, the director's vision and the way the actors have performed. You then decide where you're going to put the camera. 


					
It seemed important for me to be able to put the camera, knowing how I was going to light it, the placement of the camera, and the direction and the type of light I was going to use, where I was going to put the lamps were a part of the whole thing and one couldn't separate the set-up from the lighting. They were part of the whole package or the whole look of one was trying to achieve. And so as I became more experienced, I became more involved with getting the set-up, but I always wanted the operator to be a part of it and to be listening and to... contributing. Because at a certain point once the things have been agreed, I always like the operator to... to see it through and to make it all happen with the grips and so on and laying the tracks and getting everything worked out so that it happens smoothly. And for the operator to have plenty of time to rehearse the timing and collaborating with the grip. I... I never wanted to light and operate, although I would sometimes operate a second camera on occasion if it was felt that by putting in a second camera we could get that little bit extra, perhaps the sort of the thing you might not get a second go at, so you put another camera in with a tighter lens. But I've always been happy to work with an operator. And it's important of course that that relationship should be... should have a good understanding and a... and a good appreciation and... with both of you working for the good of the... of the picture, for the good of the set up, not, kind of... with having any kind of conflicting egos.
So that... that, you know, has worked out very well and I've been very lucky that I've had so many good operators to work with who’ve... who have been willing to... to work using that system. Of course, at the... what... what is inclined to be happening now is that at the film school the cinematography students are encouraged to operate, and so that when they go out to work initially perhaps on lower budget work, they're operating and lighting. And the advantage of that of course is that it makes for a smaller crew. Some directors prefer to only have to speak to one person, but there are other directors that would still prefer to work through an operator, to have the operator kind of working very closely with him. So a lot depends on the way the director likes to work, but I think once you get into the bigger productions where you... you've got big sets to light and a lot of area to cover and a big crew, then to light and operate on... on pictures like that is... is really tough. Because you can't be with the camera... lining up the camera, and at the same time with your gaffer working out the lighting pattern. So that... you know, I... I'm always glad of the fact that I've had an understanding operator, but there are one or two... well, there are more than a few people out there, like Roger Deakins for instance who’s...  was a film school graduate, he... he left just before I started going to film school. And Roger Deakins lights and operates and his work is absolutely outstanding, but I... it's a heavier workload for anybody doing both jobs. Because, as you know, operating’s a very... can be very physically demanding when you're having to climb around the dolly and hold a difficult position for a long time, it... it can be physically draining. And to have to also be watching the lighting as well is... is, I think, requires an... immense concentration. But... but there are people that do both very well, so I think it's... it’s a question of what you're most comfortable with.

In the spring of 1980 I was sent the script of On Golden Pond, which was going to star Katharine Hepburn, Henry Fonda and Jane Fonda, and directed by Mark Rydell. Well I'd never met Mark Rydell and in fact the job came to me largely through my friend Vilmos Zsigmond who’d worked with Mark on several pictures. So it was agreed that I would go to New Hampshire and look at the locations with... with Mark and see if we liked each other before any deal was made. And so I went for a few days and we met, and I met Stephen Grimes who was English who was the production designer. And we looked around this wonderful location called Lake Squam. It was a small protected lake in New Hampshire renowned for the loons, very rare birds which feature in the course of our story. And so I had a good look round, and the... the film was going to be shot about 50% on exteriors around the lake and... and the remainder in this beautiful house which was set on the shores of the lake and for which Stephen Grimes had taken out certain partition walls inside and... and built a second story upstairs because we needed that in the course of the story. So then I came back home for a few weeks while the preparations were made to... to shoot, and during that time I was sent another script by Richard Attenborough, Gandhi. And I went to meet Richard and we had worked previously for a few days, in fact in which you were the camera operator, Neil, a few days on Young Winston, when Gerry Turpin, the cameraman was away sick and we did a... a few... a few scenes on a railway, and so we had worked once before. Anyway, the... it was a huge script in two parts, and I read the first part in one evening. And I knew that... that Dickie was going to India the next day to kind of carry on with the preparations for the film, and so having read the first half, I sent him a cable which he would receive before he flew away to India and I just said: ’Yes, love Billy’, because it was an absolutely marvellous script.

I went off to shoot On Golden Pond. Now we had a, you know, a few weeks of preparation and during this time we talked about how we were... you know, the look of the picture, so to speak. And Mark said, ‘Well I'd really like you to soften it a bit and diffuse it because, you know, I don't want things to look too... too sharp, too hard edged’. And I think it was partly because of the films that he’d done with Vilmos in that Vilmos was... was always experimenting with things like flashing the film and, you know, using various filters to kind of soften the image a little bit. Now, I wasn't too sure about this, because the story is of this couple, Henry Fonda who, celebrates his 80th birthday during the course of the film, and his wife Kate who is supposed to be in her mid 70s. And so it was a story of an old couple coming on holiday — vacation as the Americans say — to this... this idyllic spot on the lake, which they'd been doing for years and years. And their daughter, played by Jane Fonda, who has been estranged from her father for many years because she always felt her father wanted a son, comes to the house with her new boyfriend who’s a divorcee and who has a son of about 14. And this young boy becomes the... the son that Henry Fonda never had and they become great buddies in the course of the film.
Well I felt that we shouldn't do anything on camera to make our actors look younger. I felt that, you know, they should be photographed, you know, in an attractive way but not to be diffused at all by anything that we put on the lens or anything that we did in the processing of the neg. So I was a bit reluctant to go with this idea and... and also didn't want the... this beautiful lake to look too pretty, I didn't want to have a kind of chocolate box look to the picture, because there are certain scenes in the film where, you know, it becomes very dramatic. And it becomes a... a less attractive place, and a threatening place during a storm. So I reluctantly went along with the minimum kind of diffusion that was available at the time, which was a low contrast filter made by Tiffin. So we started shooting, and we were shooting on the lake and one used to get tremendous reflection off the water, especially if it were sunny. And, to counteract this I always use a pola screen, which you can adjust to varying degrees of how much you want to hold back of the reflected light. And of course it also enhances the sky if you... if you want to bring out the clouds more and it cuts through the mist, so it's always an invaluable filter to use. So I was using the pola screen and also using this low contrast filter. We shot for a couple of days and when the rushes came back, I could see that we had a problem. Because when we shot towards the bright water, it created a... a flare which infringed onto the darker areas, whereas when you looked away from the water towards the forest, you didn't get that effect, so that I could see problems of cutting... inter-cutting scenes that had bright water in them and scenes that didn't. So I discussed this with Mark and he agreed that the filter wasn't a very good idea, we took it off. So the only... fortunately the only shots left in the picture using this filter are... are the first two or three shots when... when Kate and Hank arrive in the car to begin their holiday, so, you know, I was happily able to get back to not using anything on the lens. And the only diffusion I used at all was when we got into close-ups this... this big on... on Kate or Jane, when I used a very fine black net just to kind of smooth things out a little bit.

So we started shooting and we had a lot of scenes to do… fishing, when Henry Fonda and the boy, the 14-year-old boy Billy, go out fishing together in this beautiful boat, very powerful motor boat that they fish from. And we’d had built a raft which was about 20' square I suppose which had a couple of small motors, very quiet motors, because we were always trying to move quietly in… in order not to disturb the loons, because when we were shooting the interiors this raft would go off with the second unit and try and capture shots of these birds that were very shy. So we had two small motors and on the raft we put the two Panaflex… Panavision cameras — Panaflexes — and reflectors and, you know, all the crew and the soundman had a rowing boat so he could manoeuvre into the best position to get to dialogue. And we shot the fishing scenes, we always used two cameras, one wide and one tight. Because, you know, when you're playing with a fishing rod and, you know, you've got two people in shot and it’s... can be very difficult sometimes to match things. And the other advantage of shooting with two cameras was that the weather in New Hampshire can be so changeable. There's an expression, a local expression, that... people say: ’Well if you don't like the weather, wait five minutes’ because it could change from pouring with rain to brilliant sunshine in... in less than five minutes, it was very changeable, so that there was a problem with lighting continuity. And Mark said to me, ‘Well look’ he said, ‘I really want this picture to look right. There are certain scenes we've got to do in sunlight and certain scenes we’ve... must have overcast. So he said ’We'll have two call sheets and we'll decide in the morning what we're going to shoot according the weather forecast’. So, you know, I had a director on my side who really wanted the right conditions and so we had the luxury of waiting from time to time as one does, you know, for the cloud to clear or the cloud to come over, depending on... on the conditions we wanted. And although the schedule was 10 weeks, we in fact finished about three days under schedule so that whole system worked out well.
 

Now when it came to the interiors, which were all shot on location in the house, I had a lot of day interiors and also dusk and night interiors. Now when... when I went into the house in daylight, it was almost dark, because the house had a very deep, what we would call veranda, I think the Americans call it a porch. It was about 10' deep and so this porch prevented the light coming in on the whole of one side of the house. And on the other sides there were... there were some windows but the house was surrounded by trees, so the interior was very dark. And I thought well, it's not going to look... it's not going to look right if I play the day interiors with the lights on, and then when I come to the night interiors the same lights are still burning, I wanted a contrast. So I cheated and put light — soft light — as if it was reflecting from the lake or the ambient light from outside, I put soft light through the windows. And I had a mixture of... of lighting, I had two brutes and some HMI lights. Now the HMIs had only arrived a year or two before so they were relatively new, and the... the largest one I had was a 4k; 4k, 2 and a half, 1200W and I think 575 and then my... and I think the smallest one was a little 200W so... by testing with my colour temperature meter I could get a balance between the brutes and the HMI so that they looked like the same source of light. Because I had... I had the brutes coming through the main windows and then the smaller windows in the house, each window had some light coming through it from an HMI. Sometimes it was bounced from a white foam-core and sometimes it had diffusion on.
And then inside I was fortunate in that the... this large room had a pitched roof with exposed beams, so that any lighting that I wanted to put up in the roof... just had to put up a G clamp and attach the lamp. And you could move the lamp anywhere you wanted in a, you know, in just a couple of minutes, so... so that was a huge bonus. So that's how we shot the... the day interiors and of course the problem with shooting on location in mixed weather conditions it that the... the outside light can fluctuate enormously and of course the outside always had to be brighter than the inside, sometimes by two or three stops, so that if it suddenly dropped outside then I had to put neutral densities on the...the lighting, all of my lighting to kind of, you know, keep it in balance, and, you know, one had to be aware of that happening. Then I had a lot of scenes to do at dusk, at the magic hour, where I wanted to see what was outside, but we didn't actually shoot any of the day interiors, or the dusk interiors at dusk because it's such a short period. What I did was to filter the windows with neutral densities, sheets of an acrylic neutral density about 1/4in thick so you could reuse them. And I had these made up in packs of... of various densities going up to about seven stops.
So the grips... this was the job for the grips, to bring these into position according to how much I wanted to cut the light down outside, so I had this certain amount of daylight still outside which looked blue. Because when I shooted the... when I shot the interiors of course I took the 85 off because I was using tungsten light inside. So I’d got... and I kept the interior lighting warm using perhaps probably quarter CTO on all the lamps, so that the.. .the interior lighting was always a little bit warm and the dusk outside was blue and that worked very well. Well, when it came to the full night, there were lots of scenes where it was completely night, I didn't want to blackout the windows, which is what one sometimes does in those occasions. I thought: we've got this beautiful lake out there and when the sun was out there was a... lovely sparkle on... on the lake. I thought: why don't I stay with this idea of the neutral densities but increase the level going up to six or seven stops so that it looks like night outside. So I’d got a day for night look through the windows and the sunlight sparkling on the water looked like moonlight. And so I let this go blue and I suppose it was between two and three stops underexposed outside with a normal exposure inside and it looked great. And there was only one scene where I couldn't retain that look because we had a... a sequence where people had to go in and out through the... the doors and so that kind of prevented me doing it on just one particular sequence. There was only one night sequence in the whole film, a real night for night when they go skinny dipping in the lake, otherwise all the night interiors were shot throughout the day, because particularly with an ageing cast, you see, we didn't want to shoot at night. And... so it was a way of getting the best out of our time that was available.

Now the climax to the picture is when Henry Fonda and the boy, Billy, go out fishing intent on catching a huge fish that they've nicknamed Walter that's been eluding Henry Fonda for years and he's determined to catch this great fish. And they go fishing in to an area known as Purgatory Cove which is dangerous and full of rocks, but Hank has this idea that this fish might be there. And so off they go. Well the weather changes and it becomes stormy. And Kate gets very worried about their safety and so she drives to the... the local boatman who delivers the nail... the mail and they go searching for the missing couple who have been fishing and have... haven’t caught Walter of course. But they decide that because it's getting so dark that they ought to be going home. And they have this difficult problem of getting out of Purgatory Cove because it was getting dark and because of all the rocks. And so Henry Fonda goes up the bow of the boat to navigate and point out where the rocks are and give instructions to young Billy who's... who’s driving. And... and Hank sees a rock coming and he says: ’Reverse, reverse! and by mistake the boy goes into forward gear and the boat hurtles forward straight into this massive rock. And Hank is catapulted off the front of the boat into the water and comes up with great gash on his head. Young Billy jumps in to help rescue him and they manage to get to a... another rock which was already there in the lake. It was in the right position as far as the action was concerned, and they hang on to the rock there. And of course during the whole of this process it's gradually getting darker and darker. So, some of it I had to do at the magic hour and some of it I had to do earlier in the day but filtering it down. I used the 81EF instead of the 85 to give it a little bit more blue and I underexposed a bit. The stunt of course, was performed by a stuntman, but we had to put Henry Fonda into the water on two occasions.
Now, he was a sick man, he'd got a pacemaker and only one lung and he was 76 years old and quite frail, but very game. And for weeks we'd been considering how we were going to do this sequence. And at one... one time there was even talk of shooting it in a tank in Hollywood, which filled me with dismay because I thought, oh this is never going to look right. But finally we agreed to go for it. Well the climax of the... of the scene is when Katharine Hepburn and the boatman discover them. And it's... it’s by then getting very dark and they're using a flashlight — a torch — to look for them and they spot them clinging to this rock. Well in the script, the boat draws alongside the rock and there's a conversation between Kate and Hank about... you know, what's he doing out... she says... he says to her: ’What are you doing here... out here at this time of night?’ And it's a... it's played for laughs, the scene. So in the script the boat was to draw alongside. Well prior to shooting the scene, we have a... a discussion — a... a unit meeting — about how it's going to be done you see. And Kate said, ’Well’, she said, ’Why don't I see them from a distance with the flashlight and take off my coat and dive into the water and swim towards them?’ And... and I thought well what a marvellous idea. Everybody agreed it was a great idea, but I realised I would only ever get one take, this could ever only happen once. And so, when it came to the... to the day we prepared everything, we got our raft in position by the rock, we lined up with the stand in, we got the rescue boat with Kate and the boatman about 50 or 60 yards away in position with two frogmen in the water behind it holding it in position and pushing it forward. And I had to shoot it at the mag... magic hour because I wanted the flashlight to show up with a good strength of beam and I wanted the running lights on the rescue boat also to show up, but at the same time I wanted the reflection on the water and the distant mountains.
And it was a re... it was a re-enactment really of... of the time of day when I shot the... the scene in... on the lake in Woman in Love, but I would only get one go at this, I wouldn't have more than one attempt because it was... it was the sort of thing that, you know, it couldn't be... there wouldn't be a chance with the health of Henry Fonda and all the drama that was involved. So we set up two cameras and I had a bit of fill light coming from the raft with tungsten lights with blue on to match the daylight, so I had a bit of filler so I could see some detail in the faces. We got everything ready; we got the stuntman... the stuntman out of the water and put Henry Fonda in. They're hanging on there, he's got a bruise on his head, and they're both kind of exhausted and we go for it, and Kate did her stuff to perfection, stripped off, dived into the water. And when they showed that scene in America the whole audience cheered and clapped like... you get this participation from American audiences, it was wonderful. She swims towards him, they're reunited, they speak the lines and it... it was great. The only trouble was, they put a dissolve in at the end and we had a bit of loss of quality on the image. But it was a terrific scene and of course I was... I was greatly relieved when I saw the rushes because it was one of those shots where one was, you know, right on the edge with exposure and, you know.

We had a rehearsal day and Kate and Henry Fonda had never worked together before. And we rehearsed the first scene of... of the car arriving where they get out and start to prepare for their holiday. And she came on set with a brown trilby hat and in front of the whole unit, she went up to Hank, as we called him and said, ‘Oh Hank’, she said, ‘I'd like to have... you to have this as a... as a good luck present, it's Spencer's hat’. She gave him Spencer Tracy's hat and it was a battered brown trilby. And of course it was such a moving moment you know; the unit were in tears. And he wore the hat on the first scene when they arrive in the car and they both get out of the car and Kate says: ‘Norman, Norman, the loons, they're welcoming us back’, and Hank says: ‘I can't hear a thing’. Then he goes into the house and all the furniture is covered in dust cloths and it's sort of rather dark. And he goes over to a mirror and looks at himself in the mirror and takes off this old battered trilby of Spencer Tracy's and hangs it up and picks up a fishing hat and puts on the fishing hat. Well later in the film when the boy arrives and joins Hank, they go fishing together, he's given a fishing hat. Well when the picture ended, Henry Fonda, who was a very good painter, particularly in watercolour, did a still life of these three hats on a shelf, the Spencer Tracy hat and the two fishing hats. And he gave the original to Miss Hepburn and he gave a signed copy to every member of the crew which I still have and treasure. It was just a lovely moment... a lovely, lovely thing to do.

Well of course the next day was the first day of shooting and we're all set as we’d rehearsed it the day before, everything’s in position, the light’s good. And we’re waiting for Kate, which was... which was unusual because I had worked with her before on The Glass Menagerie and she was never late. She was always there first thing, absolute dynamo, full of ideas, full of energy, a real driving force. And she was... she was a bit late, and when she came on set she was dressed in the most extraordinary costume. She looked absolutely fantastic, she had on a black silk polo neck and black silk matching trousers and a beautifully brown suede tailored jacket and a matching sort of Robin Hood style hat. And she looked like Coco Chanel and... it was extraordinary. She came on and she said: ’Right, I'm ready’, she said, ’Let's shoot’. And Mark Rydell said, ’Well Kate, this isn't... this isn't your costume’. And she said, ’Yes’, she said, ‘I love it, I think it's perfect, I really... this is what I want to wear, you know, let's go’. Well there then developed the most incredible argument and the language from Miss Hepburn was unbelievable and it was directed straight at the director, not at the... not at the costume designer not... or anyone else, straight at the director. And this went on for quite a while and it was hugely embarrassing because everybody was there. ‘All right’, she said at the end. It went on for a while. And then she says, ’All right’ she said ’Come and... tell me what you want me to wear’ and she gave in. And we went to her dressing room which was a cabin on the lake where there were all these clothes that had been prepared and broken down, all old clothes, sort of things which you'd wear on holiday. And something was chosen and she dressed, she came back on set. We did the day's work without another hitch. At the end of the... this first day Mark Rydell came to me and he said, ‘You know, George Cukor’ — with whom Kate and Spencer Tracy did several pictures — he said, Kate... ‘George Cukor warned me; she'll test you on the first day’, and that was the test. Because I think if Mark Rydell had yielded to her he would have been off the picture, because she wanted to be sure that this director knew what he was about and that he was going to stand up to her. I think she needed someone that would stand up to her to an extent. She needed someone that she could respect. She had never worked with him before and so that was the test. And it was amazing.
Well after that, things were pretty much plain sailing but there were al... there was always the odd moment when you really felt that she was trying to steal the scene. And, there was a scene where Hank has lit a fire and rather carelessly he's left a lot of newspapers around and he's gone outside onto the porch and, you know, he's talking to... to the boy and Kate comes into the room and all these newspapers are alight and it looks like the house could catch fire. And so she shouts, you know, ’The house... fire!’, and the two of... the boy and Hank rush in to... to the fire. Now in the script it's essential that the boy puts out the fire because that upsets the old man who really feels he's getting past it, so this was a key point in the script that the boy should put out the fire. And Kate wanted to put out the fire, so there was a bit of a ding dong about that and in the end the boy picks up a bucket which is full of... of fish that they've caught and water and throws the whole lot on the fire including the fish and then of course the fire is put out. Well after that she would always come to me to talk about what she was going to wear. And there was a scarlet cardigan and she was obviously very keen to wear it. She kept bringing it to me and saying, ‘Billy, Billy, I'd like... well what about this lovely red cardigan?’ And I was a bit reluctant because it was such an eye catcher, this colour and it... the... the whole of the interior of the house was kind of muted and in the end she said... she said, ’Well why don't you like this colour?’ And I said, ’Well it, you know it's... it’s so... it's really very bright’. And she said, ’Well, haven't you ever seen any of the French impressionist paintings?’ And I said, ’Yes’, and she said, ’They've always got a little bit of red in them’. And I said, ’Yes, and your eye goes straight to it’. And she said, ’That's exactly what I want’. She knew that if she was wearing red, whether she was in the house or out on the lake, your eye goes straight to it. So we this little struggle for a while and in fact she... she did eventually finish up wearing it in one scene but I managed to kind of tone it down a bit and it didn't look at all bad. But she'd play these games and... and would always come to me about what she was going to wear.
But... she was a... a delight to work with, so stimulating. And... and she was, you know, she was 76 I think, no, 73 when we shot the picture and about six weeks before we were due to start she was playing tennis and she separated her shoulder and the doctor said to her, ’Well you... you can't possibly do this film now, you... you've got to rest, you know, and give it a chance to heal. She insisted on doing the picture, so in spite of the fact that she’d got a lot of physical things to do like rowing a canoe, carrying huge loads of logs in for the fire and... and things like that, and she was just game for anything. Absolutely a marvellous personality, I shall never forget her. And on the other hand, in contrast, Hank was terribly easy going and whatever you asked him to do he... he would do it.

There was one sequence in the film where she sends him off to pick strawberries and he goes into the woods and Mark wanted a very kind of Ingmar Bergman atmosphere, a very dark threatening atmosphere in these woods. And so we chose a spot where there was a little bit of sunlight coming through but in other areas there was extreme darkness. And he gets lost and he panics and can't find out where he is. And for this sequence I didn't use any lights, I just took some little bits of white card and just reflected enough light onto his face to capture his expression. And we finished up with a really dramatic scene that we shot during the daylight. But, then he comes back to the house and he's very distraught and you know there's a... a scene where they come together and she tells him that he's her knight in shining armour. And we did a very long take with the two of them starting in mid shot and tracking very slowly in until we're in a tight two with no cover and it played beautifully. We didn't have video assist in those days but it played beautifully. And that was it, no coverage and I... I thought that's great, I think, when the director's got the courage to do that it's absolutely great.

There's a scene where Henry Fonda is 80 and Kate Hepburn had to come from the kitchen with this large cake with... with 80 candles burning on it and move from the kitchen through the living room into the dining area where her husband Henry Fonda, daughter and boyfriend and young boy are all waiting to celebrate this birthday and Mark Rydell came to me, he said, ‘I don't know how to shoot this scene’ and I said, ’Well why don't we put the camera on a track and start by the kitchen area, Kate comes out of the kitchen with these 80 candles burning so we've got this lovely warm light glowing onto her face and we track with her for a little while and then let it go past her so we've follow on her back and we reveal the dining area with the others waiting for her, she joins Henry Fonda who makes a little speech about the joys of becoming 80 and then they all lean forward and help him blow out the candles and the... the camera tilts down, they blow out the candles and it goes dark and that's the cut and it worked beautifully and we did it in one, we never... we didn't do a single cutaway or... no coverage at all, we just did a couple of takes and it’s a great scene. But I've... I’ve found there are many times when you can be working with a director who’s got plenty of confidence, knows what he wants and then suddenly one day there's a blank, you know, he can't sort of work out what he wants and these are the time I think when... when you know, the cinematographer and the operator have to come forward a bit more and find a way of doing things.

It was a very happy picture. I had a house on the other side of the lake and Ann came out with my four daughters, Claire, Helen, Jo... Jo and Kate and we enjoyed some time on the lake. Of course I was working six days a week but it was lovely to have them there and... I've always enjoyed when they've been able to come and be with me for a while on location. It was such a happy picture and of course it was a success, it was a huge commercial success, but it wasn't such a success for Lew Grade because he'd financed the picture. And this was the third picture I'd done with him and he'd made a lot of really big budget pictures, not very many winners. And just before we got the end of shooting On Golden Pond he released a film called Raise the Titanic and it was a complete disaster. As a result of that, he had to sell his distribution company. I think it was called General Distributors. So when On Golden Pond came out, although he'd produced the film, he didn't have his distribution company anymore. Universal released the picture and I think they take a third of the profit, so he lost all that revenue. From a picture that was... I think that and The Pink Panther were the most successful films that Lew Grade ever made. And, I recently did a commentary for the DVD which was... which was nice, in which I talk about some of these things that I've been saying to you.

For the... for the night interiors I wanted a warm look, but I wanted to use soft light — diffused light — but controlled and my gaffer showed me some lamps by Mole-Richardson and they were like a giant Zaplight. They'd got quartz bulbs which reflected into the lamp and bounced back a soft white light. And these lamps were about two, 2.5ft square and you could have one or four bulbs burning, each bulb was 1000W, so you could vary the intensity of the lamp. And what... whether you had one or four lamps on you had this soft light coming out. And they'd got metal egg crates that you could slide into the front, rather like I'd used on the lamp that I... was called the Billy Lamp that I used on Saturn III, so you could slide this egg crate in and control the light so you didn't get a lot of spill falling in areas that you didn't want it. And if you... if you wanted it even more confined you could put a second egg crate on the front to make it more extended. And that turned out to be an ideal... an ideal way to light because I had the advantage of this... of this pitched roof with... with these beams that I could clamp to, and so I could... I put a lamp anywhere I wanted. And of course with the American system they've always got plenty of grips and diffusion. They have nets, frames, they call them American grip nets with a... a black gauze on them. And a single gauze is a half a stop and another one has got a double gauze which is a stop and then there's anoth... a third one which is three gauzes which is a stop and a half. And so you can use these as... to... to shade the light, you know, if you just want to reduce the intensity a bit. And very often with using this soft light principle if somebody walks a bit too close to the lamp, they may come towards you and get too bright and then walk away. And what I would do is... is for one of my electricians as... as they come more forward and walk towards the lamp, is just to bring one of these nets across so that it kind of fades it down and then as they go away again to open it out. And you can do that sort of thing providing the camera’s moving and you... you're never aware of the fact that the light level has dropped. I prefer to do it that way rather than use a dimmer. Because if you use a dimmer the colour temperature gets more orange so I didn't want that problem of the colour changing. And... and, you know, I've used that method for... for years now, even... even on location if... on exteriors if you're using your lamps outside you can... providing you've got some diffusion on the lamp you can do what we call float something in front. And you might leave it there or if they move away again you can take it away. So you get... you get a lot of control that way.
For some of the exteriors I'd got shooting to do in amongst the trees. And of course the sun is always moving and you might start a scene in shadow area and then before it’s... the sequence is finished you've got harsh sunlight. Now I didn't want harsh sunlight on the faces of either Jane Fonda or Kate, and so if I got into that position where... where, you know, I'd got too much sun I'd get the... the grips to cut large branches, because we'd got plenty of trees around, and saplings, to cut some, put them in a flag sand and create my own shadow in... in an attempt to kind of match the light. But very often, the camera would pan from... shall we say a shady area into the brilliant sunlight of the lake. And... I always do stop changes on those occasions, sometimes as much as two stops, so that you can still keep it looking dark in the shady area, but not so dark that you can't see anything. So, you know, one might start at 5.6 in the shadow area and then as you pan out to the bright lake you might go to a stop of 11 or whatever. So... and... and providing the camera's moving, the stop change doesn't notice. And I've used that technique for years, especially going in and out of buildings sometimes you can do it, if you're going from an exterior to an interior, as you track past the door, you just open up the lens a little bit, because it has to be done very carefully and you can't do it if the camera's static.

We'd been shooting with... with Katherine Hepburn and Henry Fonda for a week or two before we came to our first scene with... with Jane and when she came on set her makeup was very dark, she looked sort of very much over made-up, so I called the makeup-man on set and said ‘Well, you know, what's.. what’s happened with the makeup?’ and he said, ’Well, Miss Fonda did it herself’ and this brought back memories to me of when I'd had a similar experience with... with Orson Wells so I thought well I... I must, as discreetly as possible, talk to her about this so I went to her and said ’Look Jane, you know, your makeup does look very dark’ and she said ’Well I want to look suntanned because I've just come from Los Angeles and everybody in Los Angeles has got a suntan and I think this is right for the role’. And she wouldn't budge. She did her own makeup for the whole of the picture and to my eye she always looked made up and she looked too dark because Miss Hepburn didn't wear any makeup apart from a little powder and lipstick and she had a very pale skin, so when the two of them are together there's a big contrast which... which troubles me but there was nothing I could do about it. That's what she wanted and... and I had to accept it. Can't win them all.

There's another scene that I had to shoot at the magic hour which is set on the porch of the house with the lights on inside and the interior lighting was… was sort of warm, slightly golden, and out on the porch the young boy is gutting fish and it's at the end of the day so I wanted it to look dark and the light to be cold. So I had to wait until it got towards the end of the day until I got this atmosphere, but I'd… I set up a big white reflector with an… HMI bouncing into it so I could put a little bit of light into the foreground so that it didn't get too underexposed so I'd get a little bit of modelling on the face of the boy and Henry Fonda is also sitting on the porch. And it was a scene with several cuts and I almost lost it because it gets dark so quickly and, you know, I just about got it before it was too dark but… those scenes are always tricky and you can stretch things a little bit too far but it worked, it was okay.

Whilst I was shooting On Golden Pond in New Hampshire preparations were... were going on for the shooting of Gandhi. And because I wasn’t available, my gaffer, Alan Martin had to go to India to do a recce and research how much lighting equipment we'd need. And apparently he came back with a list, presented it to Terry Clegg the production controller who looked at it and said: ’We can't afford all this, you can only have half’. So we took half of what was estimated. So when I got back from... from New Hampshire I was able to spend a little bit of time preparing camera equipment and so on at Samuelsons. And we took a generator which was 1000A, very similar to the one I'd used in... in New England. And it was split, 50% DC — because I had two arcs and you need direct current for arcs — and... and the rest was AC which would... which would burn HMI’s or... or tungsten lighting. So the genny was shipped well in advance and I said, ‘Well, could I have a Chapman crane?’ Having used it previously, particularly in Mexico on Eagle's Wing. And it... it's a... just a great... a great tool. And Dickie Attenborough said, ‘No’, he said: ’We... we can't afford to... to ship the Chapman, because it's going to take several weeks on... on a ship and we're going to be paying for it all this time. And in any case there's a new crane come out, a newly designed piece of equipment called the Louma crane, with a remote head which you operate separately from the camera by watching a monitor. And this new piece of equipment has... has just been designed in France and we're going to be the first people to use it on a major movie’.

We were given a demonstration on the roof of Samuelsons in Cricklewood... Cricklewood, Broadway. Where we were shown that this, you know, if you... providing the ground was level, you could track with this crane and you could go up to about 20, 25 ft, and down... right to a few inches from the ground because the camera was underslung. And it looked quite revolutionary you see and, well this is... this is going to be great. And it all dismantles and packs into a couple of boxes so that it could be flown anywhere. So that it was obviously going to be in some ways more convenient, but of course it was largely unproven. So it was agreed that that is what we should use. In addition we had a dolly and two panaflexes. I think initially two... just two or three Arriflexes and a package of anamorphic lenses because we were shooting anamorphic and still using 100 ASA stock. And so everything was... was shipped off.

I went out to India about a month before. And I flew with Ben Kingsley, who was going to play Gandhi of course. And it turned out that his father was born in the same State as Gandhi, Porbandar, so he had a Yorkshire mother and an Indian father and so, you know, he looked... he looked the part. And of... of course Dickie Attenborough spent 18 years trying to set up this film and had never been able to get the script and the finance and the actor all together until this moment. So, for Dickie, it was a... it was something of enormous importance to him because he had believed in this film for so long and dedicated so much time to it. And, you know, I was so proud to be and delighted to be associated with this film, because not only was it a marvellous visual subject, but it was about a man who, you know, one had to admire for his beliefs of settling problems without resorting to violence. And... you know, he was perhaps unique in that respect.
And... so we spent quite a bit of time researching the life of Gandhi. I mean I read various books and looked at hours and hours of newsreel footage because this had been quite well covered by the newsreels over the years, you know, the fasting that he did, the salt march to the seas to claim salt, his meeting in London with Ramsay MacDonald when, you know, the independence of India was first discussed. And of course it didn't happen until 1946, wasn't it, and... '47, and so it was many years after that that independence was eventually granted and then of course, immediately after independence we had partition and there was this terrible bloodshed which... which broke Gandhi's heart and of course it was, you know... everything was divided between India and Pakistan. But... so we went to India four weeks ahead and I had a chance to absorb the scene and get the feel of the country, visit countless locations. And by that time I had my gaffer with me and so we were preparing various things. We were obviously going to need more equipment for certain scenes. We had one very big night scene which we shot in Bombay and we needed lots more brutes. And Alan went along to this rental place where, for an agreed fee, they rented I think it was four more brutes. But then he discovered that he was actually only renting the housing and that the man's cousin actually had the mechanism. So he then had to go to this man's cousin and pay another fee to rent the mechanism for the brute, because without it you couldn't run it. And then it was a further fee for the Molivator stand, so they were pretty smart at getting every penny out of us. And then we discovered that they didn't have any cable. Because when you shoot an Indian movie – a Bollywood movie – and you've got brutes on location, you set up the camera and you put the brutes near the camera and you put the genny alongside. And the genny is not silenced, so you've got this terrible noise and they post-sync everything. Everything's done to play back or it's post-synced, they don't worry about original sound. Well of course that was no good to us, I mean we had this wonderful sound mixer, Simon Kaye, who wanted as much as possible to get original sound. And so when we did these big night exteriors we had to park these Indian generators as far away as possible, enclose them in a building. But we didn't have any cable, so the cable had to come out from London. So it was all very complex and... but we... we did it and it... it came... everything... it came out well, we got some good... very good night work.

One of the things which we... proved to be a great asset to me was that just before we started the picture, Rosco, who make various colour gels and diffusion materials, had... had brought out a new reflective material called Rosco Scrim. And it was silver with lots of little holes perforated in it, it was made of a kind of plastic material. And it gave you a lovely soft reflected light. And I thought well, I'm going to have a lot of sunlight in India, harsh sunlight and I... I really don't like using lamps to fill in if I can do it with something softer. So if I do use the lamps I try and defuse them as much as possible or bounce them off a white reflective material. But this new material, Roscoe scrim, seemed to offer another opportunity. So I got some frames made up 12ft square and I had two of these which you could mount on stands and take up to, you know, whatever height you wanted. And they provided the most amazing fill light, I could have one each side of the camera and I could fill in a crowd of 100 or two, it was just marvellous. And it was soft, it was shadow-less. And it was really the answer to shooting vast scenes without resorting to lights. And of course it made us much quicker; we didn't always have to use the generator. In fact the only time I used the brutes was to come... put lights through windows or on one scene where we were under a lot of trees and... and I couldn't get the reflected light in, so it was a great time saver. The only trouble is that the material is rather fragile and we finished up having to back it with some muslin so that it... it gave it a bit more strength. But it was... it was great and it's still used to this day, but that was the first time that it was used, you know, on a big reflector. The other thing we needed was a tracking vehicle and there was no such thing in India, we couldn't find a tracking vehicle. So we eventually found, from the French Embassy a little Citroën that they didn't want anymore and we had the top cut off and we finished up with a... just... just a platform which we reinforced, and that... that was our tracking vehicle when... whenever we had to do tracking shots on the road. And of course with that soft suspension it was... it was ideal.

The Indian crowd were just marvellous. We... whenever we had a big crowd scene we’d have perhaps a couple of hundred, and we'd call... actors from Bombay, extras, and they would be called front-liners. And they had all the best costumes. And then behind them in the background were the local people who were coming in on a daily basis and they were just provided with water for... for the day. And they... they would come there and sit for hours and hours. And then further away from where... further away where we went shooting, there would be hundreds, sometimes thousands of local people watching us work from a distance. I mean they couldn't see very much but they just sat there all day. And... didn't cause us any trouble although we always had a lot of police with us, you know, to keep control in case there were any problems. But it was just extraordinary how... how people would want to be there and just be present and... watching this re-enactment of the founder of the nation, their great leader.
The day before we... or the first day of shooting it was, we had a special ceremony, a religious ceremony conducted by a Hindu priest in which the film was blessed and we were all garlanded with marigolds to wish the film success. Of course it worked, it was a success, and it was an extraordinary scene on the first day.

Dickie had this tremendous belief in the film, I've... I’ve never worked with a director who worked so hard, it was absolutely non-stop, and even until late into the night because we had an office in London and we used to get telex messages on the teletext and it... you know, this went on late into the night. So he was working really, extremely long days. It was a tough picture because it was very hot; there was a lot of dust. We had a camera maintenance engineer, Nobby Godden, who looked after the equipment because... every day the cameras had to be cleaned. Because you know, if... if you allowed the dust to settle it became like cement, so things had to stripped down at the end of every day. And I was thoroughly enjoying the picture, it was... I suppose it was the script that I really felt had something important to say about the human condition and where we... where the world was going and the influence this man had had on history and so I was really very emotionally involved in the film.
And after we'd been shooting for six weeks, unfortunately I got a slipped disc. And I had some treatment, in India, which... which wasn't successful so I had to come back to London and we had to find someone to take over for me. And I suggested Ronnie Taylor, whom I'd worked with when he was camera operator. He'd also done Young Winston and Oh! What a Lovely War, which were Dickie Attenborough's first two movies; he'd done those as a camera operator. He'd since become a director of photography and I thought well, Ronnie would be the ideal person temperamentally. And... and I felt that, you know I could talk to Ronnie about what... what we'd been doing and that you know he could match what... what I’d been... the lighting style I'd been using. I'd approached the film in a very sort of naturalistic way, I wasn't using any fancy colours and I wasn't using any diffusion. One got a lot of dust at times which added to the atmosphere of the landscape. But photographically it was... it was very straightforward. I was using soft light of course on the interiors and these lovely reflectors for the exteriors. And so when it was clear that... that I was going to have to leave the picture Ronnie looked at a lot of material that I'd shot and he came out there and we had a meeting and discussions. And then I came back to London and I was put in traction to relieve the pressure on this slipped disc. And so Ronnie shot for about four weeks and then I seemed to be better and I went back and I shot for about four weeks, and would you believe it, it went again, the disc slipped again, so I had to come back to London for further treatment. Fortunately Roddy... Ronnie was still available and he came out again for about another four weeks and I then... you know... they fin... that was the finish of the... the shooting in India. And I completed the scenes which were done at Shepperton and on various locations in London.

There was one particular scene where Gandhi goes to meet the Viceroy in the Presidential Palace in India, in Delhi. And the President of the country wasn't very favourably disposed towards the making of this movie and the... the setting up of the movie had been largely due to Mrs Indira Gandhi who was the daughter of Pandit Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India. And she very much believed in the film and in fact set up a fund through the National Indian Development Corporation which provided about a third of the budget in soft currency, in rupees. So that paid for, you know, the Indian... the crew and the Indian location and the airfares and you know. Without that, I don't think the film would have been made. So Mrs... Mrs Gandhi had a very big hand in bringing the film to life at all. Well, she was in favour of the film, the president wasn't. So although we were allowed to shoot in various government buildings from the outside, he wouldn't allow us to go inside. And so we had this scene of... of Gandhi arriving at the Presidential Palace and we had the Louma crane and I said to Dickie, ’Why don't we start... on the foot of Gandhi as he takes the first step’, and it's a foot just with the... he just wore sandals and a loin cloth, and we start with these steps and a foot comes in and we pull back and pull back and go up on the crane and we see this little man going all the way up this long flight of steps to the Presidential Palace and going into the palace. We couldn't shoot the interior there of course but we got this marvellous shot of him arriving. We shot the interior at the Institute of Directors in... Pall Mall and John Gielgud played the Viceroy and so that was all done in London.
Something else happened which meant us shooting in London, was that Gandhi is tried... sent for trial for sedition. And the trial judge was going to be played by Trevor Howard and we wanted to shoot it in the actual courtroom where he was sentenced to seven years imprisonment. And we went to look at this courtroom and it was still in its original condition and still in use. And we were trying to get use of it for a few days to shoot this sequence, you see. And there was a lot of humming and hawing and... it's very difficult to get permission with government bodies. India, you know, it's got very much a civil service based on our own and people were scared of giving permission in case something went wrong and they might lose their job. And so they kept us waiting for a long time and in the end Richard Attenborough said, ’Well, we've got to give up the idea... of shooting in India, we'll... we’ll do it in England. And so it was left to Stuart Craig, a wonderful production designer, to find somewhere to do it and he found Staines Town Hall. And the interior of Staines Town Hall was the right size for a complete reproduction of this courtroom, with matching furniture, matching gallery, everything was reproduced in great detail and built inside Staines Town Hall. And we had windows and we put palm trees outside the windows. We bought in an Indian crowd — extras from London — and we had Ben Kingsley and John Clements and various other character actors and we shot the scene in Staines Town Hall and it worked, you never thought for a moment you weren't in India.

Of course Ben Kingsley had... had to play the role of Gandhi from when he was about 26 until he died in his mid 70s, so it was a 50-year span. And so for the early period when he was young, he wore a... a wig, black hair, because he had a certain amount of hair but not as much as that. And I had to light him to look as young as possible, and then through the course of the film he gradually ages until he's the very old man. Now we had a marvellous makeup man called Tom Smith and Ben used to go into makeup for a couple of hours. And, he'd had his head shaved of course and Tom had sort of, little flaky bits he put on his skin and he actually painted the ageing lines. They weren't prosthetics; it was drawn with a pencil. And it was really a work of art. And Ben would come on set in the morning out of makeup as the old man — dressed in his loin cloth — and he stood like an old man and moved like an old man. And we've rehearsed the scene and because I knew I would perhaps be 20 minutes setting everything up I said... I said to Ben one... one day, I said, ’Oh Ben’ I said, ’Why don't you have a sit down while... while we get ready?’ Because I really felt... I believed that I was in the presence of this frail old man and... and Ben, he just looked to me and smiled and he nodded his head the... the way Indians do and... he was 36 and I was 50, and so... he was so convincing and it was such a performance. I mean it was you know... it really... his performance was... I... I think carried the film in many ways, it was so convincing.

We had, going back to the Louma Crane, we had a lot of shots that we needed to use it for and we soon found out that using it in the rough ground in India and in those conditions was rather different from the demonstration on the roof of Samuelsons. Because the ground had to be perfectly levelled if you were going to track and the other thing which I'd experienced so often before, is that in these hot countries you might have a nice calm morning but the wind gets up in the afternoon and with the Louma crane as soon as the wind got up, especially if it was a cross wind, the camera started to wobble. And the first time this happened I... you know, we were actually... we were in a tent and... but the wind was still coming in and the ground wasn't perfectly level. And I thought this look... doesn't look all that steady, but we didn't know until we got the rushes that... that there was a problem. So we sent for the designer from France and he came over and kind of played with it and made a few adjustments and we carried on, but then it persisted, especially with... with the wind, the wind was the worst problem and we lost several scenes. And I said to Dickie, ’We... we've got to do something about this, we can't go on taking a chance with it’. And eventually, I think quite reluctantly, Dickie agreed that we had to part with it and the only thing that was available to us as an alternative was an ancient crane in the Bombay studio which was manual, it had to be pushed by about a dozen grips. And so it was a step backwards in a way, we were using equipment that you probably wouldn't see in a British studio now. But I mean it worked, but it was cumbersome and it was slow, but at least it didn't shake around in the wind. So that was... that was quite a drama to get that sorted that out and, you know, that was when I wished we'd had the Chapman because with the Chapman you can go anywhere and it's not affected even... even in a strong wind it's such a solid piece of equipment but there we are. Well of course since then I think those cranes have been improved but although I think it's still... in high winds you can't use them.

At the filming of... of Gandhi was a marvellous collaboration between the British and the Indian crew. Because I had... I only had one English camera crew using a Panaflex and the second camera was an Indian crew. The second unit had a director cameraman called Govind Nihalani who did some lovely work including the battle scenes when the partition of India came. A marvellous sequence that he did as a director cameraman, so he made a big contribution. And we had Indian electricians working alongside, you know, our English gaffer and best boy. And we had an English production office and an Indian production office because the organisation was extraordinary. I mean, we'd... we’d be shooting in one place with a crowd of 5000 one day and the next day we'd be, you know, 50 miles away somewhere else with another huge crowd and all this had to be co-ordinated, we had to have translators and... David Tomblin, the first assistant director did an incredible job of communicating everything and keeping it all under control. It was a great work of collaboration and we finished on schedule and we finished on budget, and the picture was edited. And then of course we went into the grading session at Technicolor.

Dickie had gone into the picture without a distribution deal. And it was made with independent finance. And so after we'd been shooting for about six weeks, he made up a show reel and sent it to Hollywood and created a great deal of interest and then a few weeks later he enlarged the show reel and he really got the major studios competing for this picture. It was a marvellous way of handling things and it was working because we were getting good material. And so in the end Columbia came up with the best deal, worldwide, and the picture was released on a selective basis in December. And it was shown to the Academy Members and it... I think it got 11 Oscar nominations, which was absolutely tremendous. I think it was the most a British picture had ever had. And... of course then it... having got the nominations it... it went into a general release and the Academy awards were in March and together with Anne I went to the awards ceremony. I'd been there the year before because I'd been nominated for On Golden Pond and hadn't succeeded. And so you sit there in a line with your fellow nominees, your fellow cinematographers, but you don't know if you're going to win. Nobody knows except the two scrutineers from Price Waterhouse, they're the only people that know the winners, and it's a very closely guarded secret. Which... what’s... it’s what makes the Academy awards so exciting is that there are all sorts of guesses and bets about who is going to win. We had no idea we were going to win eight Oscars, including cinematography of course. And I had to go up and receive two Oscars, one for me and one for Ronnie Taylor. Because Ron... unfortunately Ronnie couldn't be there and, you know, I... I thanked Ronnie and the... all the... everybody for all that they'd done. And also thanked Anne for her... for her love and support. And it was a marvellous moment, you know, a tremendous feeling of exhilaration. And, the picture went on to receive critical acclaim and become a commercial success, and so we were all rewarded. It was a wonderful achievement I'm most proud of, yes.

The dialogue scenes in Gandhi were... were all filmed with one camera, although we had a second camera we never tried to get a second camera in when we were doing intimate scenes. And it was only when we came to the bigger scenes with crowds that we introduced extra cameras. And, you know, some of them would be getting cutaways of the crowd, some would... the two principal cameras would be getting different sizes on the principal, that was usually Ben of course, so that one could get the maximum amount of... of coverage without having to repeat scenes that were quite complicated to set up. I mean, in particular the funeral scene which Ronnie Taylor shot, I think they used about nine cameras including a Steadicam because there was only going to be one... it was only going... only be done once, in one day. And they did it on the... the anniversary of the independence of the nation so they already had... it was a public holiday. And thousands and thousands, I think about a quarter of a million people turned up to watch the re-enactment of Gandhi's funeral and it was re-enacted in great detail, with the... all the... the army and the air force and all the dignitaries and all the leading political figures. Another thing that was interesting is that the main characters were all cast to be good lookalikes. Nehru and... and Jinnah, who had a streak of white hair, they were all cast to be as close as possible to... to the real... real people. So the film... we tried to make it as authentic as possible and a lot of this library material that we watched was... was of a great assistance in this. And the salt march, the great salt march to the sea where he goes to take salt, we... we relied very much on news reel material for the, you know, feeling of that.
 

Now we were shooting anamorphic and I've always enjoyed working with anamorphic because you have a larger negative a... as opposed... compared say to 185 shooting you're using more of the... the negative so your grain structures improved. The other big difference is in the focal length of the lenses; if you were shooting spherical you might use a 25 and to get the same... similar frame size on an anamorphic you use a 50 and so that... those focal lengths are doubled all the way across the range, of course this results in a reduced depth of field which can be used to advantage because with anamorphic you can keep the background softer than you would shooting spherically. On the other hand if you want to do a split, split focus, it’s more difficult on anamorphic unless you stop down more. But I preferred... prefer the look of anamorphic to super 35 which came later of course.

One of the disadvantages with shooting anamorphic is when it... the film comes to be shown on television, particularly when television is 12 by 9. It's not quite so bad now that 16 by 9 is coming in. But you see you've got a... a format that 2.35 to 1, which is very much wider than the television set and so a system known as pan and scan was introduced, where there was a post-production process which selected which part of the frame to use. Sometimes it was the middle, sometimes the left or sometimes the right. Or sometimes there would be an arbitrary scan of the full wide screen during the course of the shot so that a pan would be introduced which was never part of the original concept, so a static shot could be turned into a very slow pan in order to encompass everything that was in the frame. I much prefer it when anamorphic movies are shown on television in the original format, so... but then you get a black band on the top and bottom and in fact you get a smaller picture on your television. Whereas in the cinema, you get a bigger picture, because the tabs widen out from 1:8:5 to 2:3:5 to give you a bigger picture. And there's always discussion before you go into a movie, is it going to be 1:8:5 or is going to be 2:3:5?

After shooting Gandhi I went to Rome to shoot a contemporary drama called Monsignor, which was about a financial scandal in the Roman Catholic Church. And the lead was Christopher Reeve, and... who played the Monsignor who gets involved in some commercial shenanigans with another man that he knew as boy, who in the course of growing up had become a bit of a crook. And it involved shooting in lots of churches and, you know, cathedrals and so on and... there were some wonderful sets and wonderful colour within the scene. And, it was visually a nice film to do. Unfortunately the script had been messed about with and altered from the original by Abraham Polonsky. It was a very good originally script but certain things had been cut out and certain things had been altered. And the producer had an undue influence in my opinion on the director. I've never worked on a film before where the producer was always on the set, right behind the director, talking to him and influencing him the whole time. And I don't think that helped at all. The other thing which I found quite surprising was that the director wore headphones throughout the shooting and never watched the action. He just stood behind the dolly and listened to the sound. And that really concerned me. And it... it proved to be quite difficult because if you've ever worked in Italy you’ll know that it's very difficult to get the crew to stop talking. A lot of Italian films are done using post sync and Italians talk more than any other crew I've ever worked with. And trying to get silence was almost impossible, because as soon as there was a cut, they would start, and then trying to get quiet again, it was quite amusing actually. But, I enjoyed doing it but it wasn't... it wasn't a great movie.

I went on to a film in... back in, back in America called The Survivors with Robin Williams and Walter Matthau directed by Michael Ritchie. It was the story of two characters who both get fired. And the Robin Williams character becomes very insecure as a result of this and decides that in order to survive he must go on a survival course. And so he leaves New York and goes to Vermont on a survival course which is run by a crazy guy who thinks that society is going to collapse and the... the only way that the individual can survive is to learn to live in the rough and use weapons, learn to handle guns, because the whole of society is falling apart. It’s... in fact, an anti... anti-gun movie which I think was one of the reasons why it didn't have as much success as it might have done ‘cause it was a very... it was a very good movie, it was very funny; Robin Williams is quite the most hilarious actor I've ever worked with. And he's spontaneously funny. When we have these moments when you're waiting between takes, he would just entertain us. And it wasn't just, you know, stock jokes that he had, it was grabbing everything out of what... whatever was going on, he'd make it funny. And he was a just wonderful guy, a very generous man to work with and very committed to what we were doing.
Well, as I say, we shot in New York and then we had to go to Vermont to shoot all these scenes in the snow. And it was January and it's a winter sports resort and there was no snow. And so we shot a few interiors and at the same time we brought in a snow-making machine. It was bitterly cold and at night it would be minus 15 or 20. And with this machine which shot water up in the air under great pressure and it came down as snow. And they covered an area about the size of a football pitch with snow, which allowed us to do a certain amount of filming, but we still had no real snow. And everybody was – particularly the studio – was starting to get worried about what we were going to do, so they sent off... started doing researches as to whether we could shoot in Michigan which was even colder, but we couldn't go there because Walter Matthau had a heart condition. And in the end they found there was a lot of snow in Lake Tahoe in Northern California and that maybe we should think about moving. And so after we’d been in Vermont three or four weeks and done as much as we could, it was decided to move. And so the whole circus, all the trucks with the grips and electrical and props, started driving, I think it's 3000 miles across from New England to California. And of course we didn't have mobile phones in those days. So once the trucks got rolling it was very difficult to... maintain contact. So the trucks left and we stayed behind with a small amount of equipment to shoot some inserts and so on. The day after the trucks left it snowed, and it snowed for two or three days. And we went to the local airport and flew to the West Coast, leaving behind this idyllic landscape that we wanted, and of course by that time the equipment was almost in California. So we got to California where fortunately it continued to snow and it snowed nearly every day, it was a freak weather condition. And so we had this snow, which wasn't... it wasn't particularly cold but it kept snowing, whereas in... in New... in Vermont it thawed and they didn't get any more snow for the rest of the season, so we made the right decision.

My next film was Ordeal by Innocence, Agatha Christie — a whodunit — which we shot in and around Dartmouth. Desmond Davis was the director, who was a camera operator, lovely man, and the lead actor, who was in nearly every scene, was Donald Sutherland, whom I'd previously worked with, he'd a small part in Billion Dollar Brain. And prior to shooting the film we had a meeting with Donald and he said... he said, ‘I don't want to be shot with any wide-angle lenses’. And I said, ’Well, what do you call a wide en... angle? And he said, ’Anything wider than a 40’. And I said, ’But, you know, we're shooting a... a mystery thriller and we're on location in small rooms’, I said, ’You know, that's... that's going to be difficult not to shoot wider than a 40’. And he said, ’Well you know, as long as when you come closer, when you do the closer shots you don't use wide angles that'll... that’ll be alright’. And he said, ‘The other thing...’ he said, ‘I don't want any shots of me... of looking up at me; I don't want any low angles’. Well Donald is about 6'5"; he's one of the tallest actors I've worked with. And so that... I felt, well that... that's going to be tricky. But anyway.
The first day... the first shot of the first day is of Donald entering this house in Dartmouth with a package which contains an important prop. And he goes into the hallway, it's quite a large hallway with a circular table, and he places this package on the table and he starts to unwrap it. And he's with Annette Crosby who’s very short. Now because he was looking down, I set the camera looking up at no more than that angle on a 40. So we're inside this hallway, we bring him in the door and he puts the package down and he's looking down at the package and he starts to unwrap it. And this is the first setup and we rehearse it and straight away he said: Why have you got the camera looking up at me like this?’ And he went straight for the director. He said, ‘I thought we understood there were going to be no low angles’, and he really tore into poor Desmond Davis in a similar way that Katherine Hepburn had three or four years before. He didn't address me at all, he just went for Des... Desmond and he really upset him. And... and you know, it affected the rest of the movie because Des was really quite kind of unhappy and unsettled and... and it was a great shame. And the result was that... that quite frequently, Donald would come into the room on a shot and sit down so that the camera wasn't looking up at him. And I... I thought, I can't understand this but I had to live with it.
Well we had an extraordinary cast, Christopher Plummer, Ian McShane, Faye Dunaway, Sarah Miles. Now Faye Dunaway whom I'd worked with a few years previously on Voyage of the Damned was playing Sarah Miles' mother-in-law, but they're about the same age, so... no sorry her stepmother not her mother-in-law, she was playing her stepmother, but they were about the same age. And Faye wanted to look as young as possible, she'd got the same make up man that she'd had for several years. And she was made up to look as young as possible. And it was just out of character. And she did something that had never happened to me before on a set or since; she had to move around the room in various positions and I received instructions via the makeup man that wherever she was, she was only to be lit with front light so that she was facing the light which is the most flattering light. And that there was to be no cross light and no three quarter backlight hitting her face, so everything that might cause that, had to be flagged. Which of course made it much more complicated. So I lit the set and she came on to do the final rehearsal and she walked round the set with a mirror and checked her position to see that every lamp was, you know, where it should be. And I thought: oh this is ridiculous, but had to go along with it. It was made by some producers called Golan and Globus and they'd spent a fortune on the cast, not very much money on the script or the props, and after we’d finished the film they found it was too short. See, it had to be 90 minutes or something to qualify for certain feature status and it was a few minutes short. And so they had to go back later with another unit which I couldn't be part of because I was somewhere else to shoot some extra scenes. It was quite a good story and... you know, it was a very good cast, it was some good stuff in it and Dartmouth was a wonderful location.

In 1984 I was sent an absolutely delightful script, Dreamchild, written by Dennis Potter. It was directed by Gavin Millar and again, it was based on factual events and it was the story of the little girl that Lewis Carroll wrote the story of Alice in Wonderland. Now, Lewis Carroll was a mathematics... mathematics teacher at Christ Church College, Oxford, and his real name was Dodgson, Charles Dodgson... mathematics teacher, also a very fine photographer of... of children, particularly young girls, and little Alice, Alice Liddle, was the daughter of the Dean of Christ Church and one day in 1864 I think it was, he took Alice and her sisters and a companion on a... a rowing trip and he told her the story of Alice in Wonderland; that was how it was first recounted and then a couple of years later he wrote the book. So the real Alice existed: she had sisters and she lived in Christ Church, Oxford. When she was 80, she went to New York, to Columbia University, to celebrate the centenary of the birth of Lewis Carroll and to be part of the celebrations. When she got there, she became a celebrity and in fact, made quite a lot of money out of sponsorships from radio commercials and that sort of thing — sponsoring products.
Well, in this screenplay of... of Potter, the film alternates between the 1860s, when she's a young girl — 10 or 11 — into the 1930s — 1932 — when this old lady of 80 with a lady... a young lady companion sailed on a great ocean liner called the Berengaria...  the Berengaria... sailed to New York and so our film was in two very sepera... separate parts: Victorian England and Art Deco New York and I had the notion, because I'd always wanted to shoot more black and white, that it might look rather good if the New York material and all... all the material on the 1930s liner was in black and white and the Victorian scenes, and also scenes with the puppets that... and the strange creatures that Lewis Carroll created, the gryphon and the mock turtle and the caterpillar and the March Hare, and things like that... those... those puppets were all created for the movie by Jim Henson, Jim Henson's Creature Shop it was called, and they were all animatronics and everything and they were all very sophisticated. I thought if those scenes could be in colour and the Victorian scenes in colour and the kind of more of a present day scenes in the 1930s black and white, it would give the film a very distinctive quality. Also, we needed a lot of library material of New York from the ‘30s of when the ocean liner arrives, and so we need scene... scenes of New York. I put this idea to the director and the two producers and they all agreed that it was great, that we should do it. Now on the film I'd just finished, Ordeal By Innocence, I'd already experimented with the technique of using colour negative and by making, I think it's called a pan master, in the laboratory, you could print black and white on to colour stock, so you... in the same reel of film you could go from a colour scene into a black and white scene without making a splice and then back to colour, or whatever you wanted to do. I'd used that for a short sequence in... in Ordeal by Innocence so this... this idea was accepted and... and we started looking towards doing this.
We had a final conference with Dennis Potter, who not only wrote the screenplay but was the executive producer, and he's a very authoritative figure, and we had this meeting and nobody brought up this idea of black and white, you see and so finally I... I said well... to Dennis, who was in the chair, I said: ’Well, you know, how about shooting the modern Art Deco scenes in black and white?’ ‘Absolute... no, no, no, absolutely... it... it wouldn't work’, he said, ‘be... be a complete distraction’. Nobody came to my assistance; I was just shot down and Dennis Potter, not the kind of man you could argue with, especially given his position on the movie, so it never happened. So I really lost this whole thread of having a distinction between the 1930s and the 1860s, so we shot it, more or less conventionally, except, you know, I was using a lot of soft light.

The cast were marvellous; Ian Holm played Lewis Carroll and Coral Browne played the old lady. Well, Coral is a very elegant lady who was in her early seventies and for the part she had to be 80. Well, if you'd met Coral Browne in the street, you'd have sworn she wasn't more than 50, she was so beautiful, and beautifully turned out, very elegant lady. Charming, lovely lady to work with full of fun, always good for a laugh. She hated going into makeup; she'd have to go into make up for a couple of hours and come out as the old lady and of course, I had to light it to make her look older, so it was... it was a really interesting picture to do, to be going back and forth between these two periods, and we had all these wonderful puppets.

The most challenging shot in the movie — the most difficult to shoot — is the opening sequence, which is also the closing sequence. Now, in the script, it described a rocky sea shore with a... with a boat, an old boat and distant rocks, and it was intended to have a kind of unreal atmosphere, you weren't quite sure whether it was real or stylised. And the production designer, Roger Hall, built a seascape. We had a backing... he built a seascape and the sea was made of dark, blue-green silk which was waved and wafted, partly by hand and partly with wind machines to make it look like the waves and there was a real, rocky seashore and a broken-down old boat and in the distance were the silhouette of two huge rocks. Now, I designed this shot which we used... for which we used the hot head and a crane arm and we buried the camera in the silk, the billowing silk, and we scattered a lot of sequins on the silk to make it look like the water sparkling.
So we buried the lens... it was 3 to 1, a 20 to 60, and we started on the 60mm, and as the camera comes out of the sea, so to speak, the lights — it starts in almost darkness — and the lights come up on dimmers — I had 5000Aon dimmers — a huge change from this darkness to light up the whole stage to give a dawn effect, dawn and sunrise, and the camera pulled back and tracked across the sea with all these billowing waves and for a... a second or two, it looked like the real thing, it looked like the ocean, and then of course, you realise that it isn't, it's stylised. The camera pulls back and across the beach, and in the distance you see these two rocks and the camera then tracks sideways and moves towards these two rocks in silhouette and as the camera comes to a halt, I dim up another bank of lights to put light on the rocks and in between these two rocks is the figure of an old lady in a hat, which is the... Alice at 80, and two rocks either side turn in to, on the left, the mock turtle, and on the right, the gryphon, who gets up and raises his wings and they go on to a dialogue scene with the old lady. And part way through the dialogue the old lady turns into the young Alice when she was 10, played by a lovely little actress called Amelia Shankley, who was... a ballet student. And this was just a marvellous scene to open the picture. It was full of mystery and really challenging photographically, and it's the same scene that ends the picture, but you do it in reverse, and what disappointed me so much was that they took this really good shot, which I'd shot at 30 frames to make it float a little bit more, and they put the titles over it. So you could still see it but you're distracted by the titles.

We were shooting this at Elstree... it was an EMI picture, one of the few pictures that they were financing, and the studio was full, all the big stages were full; the only stage we had left was the scene dock, which was just over 20ft  high, and we needed the biggest stage possible. I think it was about 100 by 120, which was quite a big area... area, but we didn't have the height, so in order to get the height, the production designer hung gauzes like you would in the theatre — theatrical gauzes — and painted cloud formations on the gauzes and because the stage had a pitched roof, we were able to take these gauzes up to about 35ft, right up into the roof... all my lighting was actually, you know, just a foot off the roof, and because of this clever idea of... of putting clouds on gauze — I had two layers of them — and by working with dimmers, I got the feeling of the dawn coming up, so throughout the whole of this pull back across the sea, it was getting lighter and the colour of the light was changing from blue to gold and first sunrise and... so it's got a really, almost magical quality about it.

The other sets that we built, we built the whole of the deck of the ocean liner, the promenade deck, to scale and we used wind machines and we had various scenes when we were supposed to be sailing into New York on the ocean liner, with the wind blowing and this was intercut with actual footage of a ship arriving into New York, probably around the 1940s. Well, of course, the colour quality was so different; this was what... something that troubled me, that all the library material that we got of the ship arriving in New York was old material which we had to try and match to our original shooting, but didn't really come off and then, because we needed the New York harbour when they come off the Berengaria — there are scenes on the quayside and in the customs sheds where Coral Browne, with her companion, comes off the ship — we went to Liverpool, because Liverpool has got a lot of Art Deco architecture and by putting the camera inside a booth and shooting through a glass with a painted glass top, we were able to sort of recreate the skyline of New York and with foreground period vehicles, make it look as if it was 1930s. And then we did other shots in... in Liverpool with a... a gangplank and somebody standing, you know, against a rail and going out, you know, as if you were, going out to sea, so we faked the whole thing of being on an ocean liner without actually going on a ship, and it worked, it worked really well, the audience would never know that we hadn't sailed to New York; we never... and of course, we never went there. But there's a lot of lovely Art Deco architecture here in London; the Park Lane Hotel we used; there's a beautiful ballroom there which is pure Art Deco, and we filmed in there and did a ballroom scene that was supposed to be on the ship. And then we went to Oxford, where little Alice was born, and we shot in the garden of the Dean's house, scenes on... on a lawn with the girls playing croquet, scenes in the library, and then we intercut that with interior sets in the studio.

Lewis Carroll was a very noted photographer, and there's a scene in a darkroom which we shot in a makeshift studio in Oxford as a weather cover, and we had a window with a backing and the scene starts in daylight and Lewis Carroll, played by Ian Holm, and the little girl are together alone in this small darkroom and he's got all the equipment, the period equipment, which we borrowed from the... the photographic establishment, so it was all authentic. And it starts in daylight; he draws the blind and it... it goes into almost darkness. He lights the match and lights a candle so it goes from white light to yellow light and then he picks up a red filter, which was an authentic red lamp filter, and places the red lamp over the candle and the rest of the scene is played in red light, so I'd got the trans... transformation with three different coloured lights and three different exposures, all in the one shot, and in order to do it I had to cut... cut a hole in the side of the set, just under the candle, to get the light in and that worked very well. But it's a scene where you are wondering what kind of man Carroll is, because there's been some doubt over the years whether he was a paedophile, and this is a theme which runs through the film which, in the original script was quite sort of pronounced, but when it came to the editing stage, they... they cut a lot of scenes which had references to, you know, him and young children, so that in the final film, it's sort of just there, but not in a very obvious way. So we had this scene in... in the... in the red light with this mature man and this little girl and she’s... he's asking her about whether she will get married when she's older and... and will she... will she invite him round and give him cucumber sandwiches and... it's beautifully sensitively played scene, Ian is such a lovely actor, and you never for a moment felt scared for the little girl, but in the context with the rest of the film, you know, the audience are given sort of, clues as to, you know, what kind of man he was really like, but as I say, it was a lovely film.

I went to Andalucia to do a picture with Peter Yates called Eleni, starring Kate Ne... Kate Nelligan and John Malkovich and Linda Hunt, and once again, it was based on a true story. In fact, it was the story of the writer, a man called Nicholas Cage [sic], who’d written a book of his experiences, and the book became a best-seller and now it was being made into a movie. And the story is of Eleni, who was his mother, and his name was Nicholas and in the film his mother is Eleni and Nicholas begins as a boy of about 10 or 12, living in Greece. The whole film is set in Greece but we filmed it in southern Spain. So half the picture is about his life as a young boy, with his three sisters, which goes from the... before the First World War [sic], through the First World War [sic] and into the revolution in Greece when the Communists took over, so it's a long period of history. Well, when the boy is about 12, his mother arranges for him and his sisters to escape because the regime is getting so politicised and so dangerous that she fears for his safety, and so she plans his escape and a number of other people escape at the same time and he escapes with his sisters to America, where his father lives. His father has lived there for a number of years because he couldn't come back because of the war. So his father is in America. He escapes as a 12 year old boy. Shortly after that his mother is executed by... by firing squad – executed by the Communists. When Nicholas was in his forties, he went back to Greece to find out what had happened to his mother, to seek out the people who ordered her execution, and he finds the man who was responsible, whom we've already seen in the film, and he traps him and draws a gun on him and is about to shoot him when this man, who's then quite an old man, when this man's granddaughter appears in the background of the scene and Nicholas finds that he can't go through with it. He doesn't shoot him and he goes away and throws away the gun, and that's the true story.

The film is divided between the Second World War and the Greek Civil War, and the kind of period of ‘70s and ’80s. Now, we didn't shoot in Greece because we didn't feel that we could get the facilities there or the crew, whereas in Spain, as you know, they've got wonderful technicians and wonderful craftsmen, and production designer Roy Walker, built a Greek village on the mountainside of... in... in Andalucia, and it was superb... had the schoolroom, cottages, Greek Orthodox church and it... it really looked great, and of course, we had the similar weather conditions. And there was one scene in which in the script the young boy, Nicholas, goes with his mother to church at Easter; now in the Greek Orthodox Church, the men sit on one side and the women on the other, but because he's reached a certain age... you know, until then he's sat with his mother, but when he reached a certain age he would join the men, and it was... this was the occasion.
And I said to Peter Yates, the director, I said... you know, when you're in a Mediterranean country and you're out in the bright sunlight and you look into a church, it's very dark and you might just see a few candles and if you go into that church, it's still dark for a while but after you've been in there for a little while, your eyes get accustomed to the darkness and eventually you can see quite a lot of detail, the sort of things you couldn't see when you're outside in the sunlight’. I said, ’Why don't we start the scene outside in this brilliant sunlight and bring Eleni and her son, Nicholas, track with them, with the rest of the congregation, the people who were going into church, bring them in, go in on their backs into this darkened church and it stays dark for a while and as the camera keeps tracking, we open up a lens and the boy and his mother go right forward to the front on the church where all these beautiful Greek icons are on the walls, and they're all illuminated by candles... there's a blaze of warm, golden candlelight... so that as we go forward we open up until we get into the candlelight, when we've got a full exposure’. I put this idea to Peter and he said: ’Yes, let's do it. And so we did it. So I had, you know, lights on dimmers, and filt... colour filters for the gold light of the candles, and I started outside at a stop of 18, I think it was, and I travelled inside and I finished up at something like 2.5. I know it was about five stops or five and a half stops of opening up the lens — the shot lasted 30, 40 seconds, I should think — gradually opened up the lens, so you've gone from sunlight to darkness into this lovely feeling of candlelight and it worked. And, you know, that was... that gave me quite a thrill.

The night before the children are due to leave their mother and flee to America, she draws them together in a group, and tells them that tomorrow they're going to escape and that she will have to stay behind, but that she will join them later. Well, she knows that it's more than likely that she won't ever join them and she never does because she's executed. And we rehearsed this scene and I noticed that when she started speaking, she took the hand of Nicholas and held his hand throughout the whole of this kind of little, you know, discussion... what she was telling them, what... what the children had to do and what was going to happen... that she first of all took his hand, so I said to Peter, ’Why don't we start on a close-up of that, with her voice over, so we start on a big close-up of her hand taking her young son's hand and then pull back, to reveal where we are and then just play the... the rest normally?’ And he said: ’Yes, let's do it, fine’. And we did it and it worked. It's lovely when you can work with a director who, if you've got an idea you can feel free to suggest it, and if, you know, if he hadn't liked the idea I... you know, it wouldn't have bothered me enormously but at least one feels that, you know, you've got the ability bring forward ideas and suggestions which... which might help to tell the story visually, and it's things like that, I think, which is part of our responsibility if you like, or opportunity to... to use. And, working with Peter was such fun anyway, lovely man, great sense of humour and I was later to do another picture with him, called Suspect, but this... this was a good movie. I'd love to see it again.

In 1985 I went back to New York to shoot The Manhattan Project. Its English title was A Deadly Game. Scripted and directed by Marshall Brickman, who was a one-time co-writer with Woody Allen, who lived in New York and he'd written this screenplay about a nuclear scientist, played by John Lithgow, who sets up a nuclear research laboratory in New Jersey, in a residential area or just outside a residential area, and eventually it produces nuclear weapons-grade plutonium. Now, a very bright college boy and his girlfriend, played by Nicho... Christopher Collet and Cynthia Nixon, get wind of this and are so disturbed by it that they decide to try and steal some of this plutonium by breaking into the research laboratory and getting away with some of this plutonium, and being a smart kid, he... and having visited the site because the nuclear scientist chap is making a ploy for his mother, who is separated and so there's a slight romantic involvement there, and so this kid has been inside this nuclear research place and worked out a few things and the fact that it is very heavily protected by security devices, so he works out a plan of getting into this place but he has to wait for a storm, an electrical storm, which will upset all the electronics and allow him to break in. So we have to create a storm which meant lightning and rain and it was the best lightning and rain I'd ever worked with. We had a special effects guy called Brian [sic] Ferren, who was an absolute genius, and instead of using the old scissor arcs for lightning or a lightning box, he'd developed this method where he had huge banks of Xenon lamps — I think they were 1kW each bulb and there were... there were banks of them — and we had to have a huge generator because they took an enormous amount of power and when he pressed the button, these lights went off in a random fashion, so you had this extremely bright lighting eff... light effect, but it was moving the way lightning does. You know, when lightning goes across the sky, you get a kind of movement with it, and with these lamps you could break it down into smaller units if you just wanted a little bit of lightning coming through a window or something and... or you could have 20 or 30 of them if you'd got a big area to light and it was the best lightning I've ever used, it was so convincing.

Well, previously, whenever I've done rain effects, the... the special effects turn up with... with these standpipes which are about 12’ high, and they put them in a ring round the set and sometimes they put them on platforms and the water's forced up, under pressure, and the rain comes out in circles, you've got rain doing like this and I've always found it very difficult to get a consistency and to make it look believable that the rain is falling, because with these standpipes it's doing this, you see. Well, in New York, we had this marvellous device which was like a giant Catherine wheel. I suppose it was about 25, 30’ in diameter and it had got outlets... water outlets all the way round this giant wheel. The wheel was hoisted up on a cherry picker to a height of about 60 or 70’ ; the water pressure was put on and when that happened, this wheel went round like a Catherine wheel and the water was shot out and of course, came straight down, like rain does. And it covered a huge area, almost the size of a football pitch, and it... it was so convincing. And of course, if you wanted to move it, all you had to do is drive it down the road. It was so easy to move from one setup to another. We had a very extensive rain scene, both at the back and the front of this... this science research laboratory on location.

So we got a great storm sequence, and during all of this, the... the boy breaks in, he breaks into the laboratory and there's a robot in there, and with the help of the robot which he's figured out how to use on a previous visit, he steals a bottle of this so-called plutonium, which of course, was just some mixture of a green-coloured liquid. In order to get it out... he couldn't get it out of the laboratory without triggering the alarm; now, he's also found out on this previous visit that there's a laser beam being used in this laboratory, and a laser beam can cut through metal, so he strikes up the laser beam and because it's not pointing in the right direction, he's got several mirrors with him and he redirects the laser beam all around the laboratory, it goes off about four mirrors — and this is what amazed me, I'd never worked with a laser beam before, but it is a very, very bright source of light, it's a sort of cyan colour, and very narrow, but extremely bright and sharp — and this laser beam is bounced off three or four mirrors until it reaches the point low down in the building, and it actually cuts a hole through the building... and with the help of a radio-controlled toy, he gets this nuclear material out of the building without triggering the alarm.
Now if you're shooting any beam of light or if you, you know, if you want to show up a back light or if you want to show up a torch light effect, you need a certain amount of smoke or mist. Now, in my experience up to then, it had always been how difficult it was to control this level of smoke because you put it in with the fog machines and then you switch them off and you wait until it's level, and you start shooting, and then after you've done a couple of takes, you have to top it up again and it seemed that it was such... it’s such a hit-and-miss arrangement it’s... of trying to get the same level of smoke all the time, and then of course, if you do change from a wide-angle to a long-focus lens, the long-focus lens picks up the smoke more. Well, this special effects guy had built a special device that... like a thermostat if you like, so that we had these smoke machines dotted around the stage — it was a big stage — and they switched on and off according to how much smoke was in the atmosphere, and it was just a little click and you couldn't hear it unless you were right on top of it, so the smoke level was consistent, and of course, I just needed enough smoke to make the beam show. I thought, this is brilliant, why has nobody thought of this before, and it worked a treat. Of course, we had to fake the beam of light cutting through the metal... we had to fake that with an acetylene cutter because our... our laser beam wasn't strong enough to do that, although, you know, there are laser beams which... which can do that sort of thing, but ours was not powerful enough, but because of the danger... there was a danger to the operator if the laser beam should happen to hit the lens, that it could damage his eye, and so all the shots that we did with the laser beam had to be done with a remote head on a crane arm and be operated with a monitor, just for safety reasons.

They built this set in a New York studio called Century Studio; we had wanted to do it in Astoria which is a huge studio with... with headroom of up to about 40’- we had 21’ and the production designer had built this atomic research laboratory which manufactured plutonium, which had a huge robot, and he built it from floor to ceiling in order to get the maximum out of the space, and I had no room to put any lamps. And so I... this set me thinking; there was no chance of getting a rail up and if I'd hook conventional lamps up, then they would look like conventional lamps, so I designed some lamps. I made banks of lights with about 500W mushroom bulbs encased in a box, so they were rectangular shape and then I put diffusion paper underneath and I positioned them all round the set as if they were the actual light fittings, and they were all on dimmers so I could do whatever I wanted from the floor and change the lighting pattern and change the level of light, because I had shots where it had to go from being a brightly-lit room to when the light goes out and it's just left with the emergency lighting during a... the storm, you see. So, there was this lovely challenge of designing lamps to... to actually fit into the set. And, you know, we had to time... I must say, working on American pictures, you usually get more time than you will on a British one; British producers and production managers are very mean, they try to keep the cinematographer off the payroll until the last minute, but that production is... time, preproduction time is so valuable, because not only can you work out something like that, but you can make a lot of decisions upfront which can save the film money. And, you know, my experience of working in America is that they value the fact that you can be there to make your input ahead of time.

1986 I got a second opportunity to work with Peter Yates on a film called Suspect, which is set in Washington DC, in lots of the government buildings and courtrooms — it's a courtroom drama — and it's about the murder of a young woman, for which a vagrant is arrested under suspicion of having killed her – played by Liam Neeson – who turns out to be deaf and dumb. An attorney is appointed to defend him, played by Cher; a jury is formed; Dennis Quaid is one of the jurors and throughout the course of this investigation and trial, he starts to put a few things together, which he then passes on to the lawyer defending this vagrant – played by Cher– illegally, because there's not supposed to be any communication between the... the jury and... and any of the counsel... so anyway, it's a thriller, with lots of scenes in the streets of Washington where the buildings are nearly all white and there's no advertising in Washington, so it’s... it's a sort of black and white city almost, and at night... lovely opportunities to create night exteriors that... that look like a black and white movie and I'd wet down the streets to give a bit of shine and a bit more contrast to everything, so there are lots of street scenes and streets in derelict areas, in railway buildings and a lot of really unusual locations, and also, extensive court room scenes. Well, we shot in Washington in a real court house, and we did prison scenes down in the cells and then the major court room drama itself was shot in Toronto for entirely commercial reasons. The whole unit, after five weeks in Washington, was uprooted — when I say the whole unit, it was the key people — were moved, and the key artists moved to Toronto where a studio set had been constructed of... of the court room, so there’s this great upheaval in the middle of the film which... which, you know, I could never understand the economics of, but it’s all to do with the rate of exchange and things being cheaper in Canada.

Cher was the star of 'Suspect. She was about 43 years old, I think, at the time and she wanted to look absolutely flawless, and this was made clear to me by the makeup man, who also worked with Faye Dunaway, and so I... the only way I could light her was by a soft light directly above the lens or maybe slightly to the left or right, and with good make-up and a little bit of diffusion, that could be achieved. But when she went into make-up everything was pinned back to draw everything tight and then she wore this very dark wig, so all the scenes in the court room had to be lit by a front light, but we were shooting a thriller and so there were many occasions when I wanted to shoot with cross-light or three-quarter backlight, so I had to kind of try and make the two things work by just treating her separately from the rest of the scene. Towards the end of the picture, there's a chase sequence which takes place in the real cells beneath the court room in Washington and I was able there to change my way of lighting her, because instead of using a soft light, I used hard light, and you get a harder light with a... a Fresnel lamp by opening the door, so I did it mainly with 2Ks; by opening the door you get a really sharp effect from prison bars and so on, so I had her moving in and out of light and shade, which created, you know, an exciting and dramatic effect, which, you know, made a change from seeing her always flatly lit.

In 1988 I received a call from Ken Russell's producer; would I like to do another film with him, The Rainbow. Well, I hadn't worked with Ken since Women in Love, and the reason was that he... he invited me to photograph The Devils, and after a lot of soul-searching and in view of the nature of the material, I decided I didn't want to do it so I turned it down, so he'd gone for a long time using several other cameramen and now he'd asked... asked me to go back and film another story by DH Lawrence, The Rainbow, which in fact was the novel before Women in Love and it's about the same family. And he also invited the same production designer that we had on Women in Love and Glenda Jackson and Christopher Gable, who had a small part in Women in Love. Also in the cast were Sammi Davis and Paul McGann and David Hemmings, and... it was a much lower budget picture and unfortunately, we didn't go to the coalmining areas to shoot; it was shot in Oxfordshire and London and the Lake District. And we... we had some nice locations but they didn't look like the coalmining areas where it should have been set. And although it was... it was great to work with him again, and we just came together as if we hadn't been apart all that time and there was no kind of hard feelings, you know, that I’d... he never mentioned the fact again that I'd turned him down. And we came back and it was... it was like old times, except — old times — except we... we were both a lot older. And, although the... I mean, it was a... it was a good film, but it didn't have the impact of Women in Love-, I... I think it didn't have the originality; we didn't have any wonderful night exteriors or dusk scenes or mining communities and it lacked that gritty earthiness which was so essential.

There was one scene right at the beginning of the picture when Glenda Jackson is on this... on location in this house in Oxfordshire and she's got... an iron bath on the table and she's washing the baby and her husband, played by Christopher Gable, comes in and the baby has to be crying and Christopher Gable, who's the father, says: ’Oh, sing little blackbird, sing’, and Glenda carries on and, you know, there's a scene that follows. But the... we had to have a very young baby. Well, my first granddaughter had just been born and she was four months old and I... I spoke to Claire and Matthew – her father – and said, ’How would you... how would you like Amy to be in a movie, and I explained what was going to happen and they were both very pleased and thrilled about it and so they came on set with... with Amy and she was put into the bathtub and Glenda was lovely with her and we started shooting. Well, what I should say here is that... in... in the years since I'd worked with Ken before, he'd become the camera operator and he operated everything on a slip head and this... this was a tracking shot, starting looking down on the... on Amy in the bath and tracking back to reveal Glenda Jackson bathing her and then Christopher Gable comes in.
Well, we did a few takes and Amy started off fine, she was gurgling away because she liked the bath and after about three or four takes she started to get a bit grumpy, and we kept on shooting and the longer we shot the more angry she became, and the problem was that Ken couldn't get the tilt up right, and he had this... I mean he was obsessed with headroom, and if he didn't get the headroom on a shot perfectly right, he would go again. He would just say, ’Oh, I'm just making an adjustment on the camera and we'd do another take, regardless of the performance. And so, we were continually doing this tracking shot, pulling back from Amy to a wider shot... it was 18 takes before Ken got the camera work right, by which time Amy was purple with rage and although it was good for the scene because she was yelling her head off, when I came to grade it, I had this problem of... of starting on a purple baby coming up and having to have the correct skin tone for Glenda but... it was my granddaughter's debut into cinema and it... it was quite a coincidence because her father was an actor and his parents were both actors so she had become a third generation actress if you like; and also, you know, my daughter, Claire, is the third generation in cinema, because Claire went to the National Film School where she graduated as a director and that's where she met Matthew. So a lot of things kind of came together there and I enjoyed doing the picture. It was a... and... and we had a lovely score by Carl Davis. And, that was... it was good fun; it was good to work with Ken again. I did some more commercials with him and another film for television, part of a series called Dusk Before Fireworks, which we shot at Shepperton and again he insisted on operating, but if he got to a shot that was a bit too difficult for him, he'd say, ’Oh well, why don't you do this one’ you see, so I'd get the geared head out — it's usually a tracking shot — I’d get the geared head out and I'd... I’d take a shot and then he'd take over again... ‘cause he didn't like relinquishing the... the operating. But he'd also in the process he'd become the writer as well as... as well as the director, and sometimes the producer, so he’s... was wearing too many hats, I'm afraid. But he was a lot of fun, a great sense of humour. I like Ken.

Just Ask for Diamond, the screenplay by Anthony Horowitz, directed by Steven Bayly, and it was a children's film with... with money from the Children's Film Foundation, but that wasn't the original title. It was intended to be called The Falcon's Malteser and it was a spoof on The Maltese Falcon, but the key prop, instead of being the falcon, was a packet of Maltesers, of which the barcode was the key to opening a treasure chest of diamonds. And two boys, a... a 12 year old and an 18 or 20 year old play the detectives and the 12 year old boy, Colin, is really the hero of the piece. And, we had a... quite a... you know, a distinguished cast of supporting actors like Susannah York and Patricia Hodge and Michael Medwin, you were on the picture. Jimmy... Jimmy Nail. Jimmy Nail and Bill Paterson, and it was a comedy for children, but it was made in the film noir style with film noir references and film noir lighting style, so I... I had to, you know, introduce long, hard shadows against the wall and shadows against a glass door of an office and things that echoed the film... the earlier film. And it was lot of fun to do but I think from an audience point of view at the time, it seemed to fall between two stools because young children didn't really understand film noir and film noir audiences didn't... weren't particularly drawn to a... a story that was principally for younger... a younger audience so on its release it didn't do particularly well. Well, the DVD came out very recently; I showed it to my eight year old granddaughter, Hannah, and a friend of hers of the same age, they both thought it was marvellous, they thought it was really good picture, so there's an audience there for it. But it was a lot of fun to do, shooting around London and at Elstree Studios, very enjoyable picture.

Stella was a remake of Stella Dallas, with Bette... Bette Midler in the... in the starring role and the film was for Walt Disney and at that time she was her... their biggest star and so a great deal of trouble was gone to... to ensure that I knew how best to photograph her. In fact, they arranged for Dante Spinotti, the Italian cinematographer who'd just finished a picture with her, to stop off at London airport and to come here and, you know, have lunch with me and talk about how to photograph Bette Midler. Well, the outcome of it all was that she always had to be in close-up, she had to be  on the... the right of screen, looking right to left so that we favoured the left side of her face. And when I got to meet Bette and we talked about this, she was quite happy to see the other side if she was in long shot, but as soon as we came in close we had to find a way of... of getting round to her best side and in fact, the... the set was designed with that in mind so that the entrances and exits were... worked the right way for us, and once we got shooting she was fine. She was... a tremendous amount of fun, a really nice person but very sadly I didn't get on with the director, who didn't like to have any jokes on set, so the whole filmmaking process was rather serious and... it wasn't a... a happy time but fortunately I had my long time gaffer, George Cole, with me and also a very good Canadian camera opera... camera operator, Andy Chmura.

In 1990 I was sent a script called Agaguk. Now, it was adapted from a book which is well known in French-Canadian history; it's the story of the Inuit in the Arctic and this particular story is about the life of the Inuit and how, with the arrival of the white man, who came to trade furs with him, they were corrupted by alcohol. Our lead character in the film, Agaguk, was played by a young American called Lou Diamond Phillips, and his father in the movie, who is also the Shaman, was played by Toshiro Mifune, the great Japanese actor, who'd done so many marvellous movies with Kurosawa. Donald Sutherland was also in the picture, and Jennifer Tilly plays the wife of Agaguk, and it was all going to be shot in French Canada, the finance being French-Canadian. Well, they called me about two weeks before the picture was due to start, which I thought was, you know, a very short time to prepare, so I went off to Montreal and met the director and the producer and so on and we talked about what they were going to do. And we went up to the Arctic on a recce and during the course of this recce I began to realise that the director didn't have much experience of directing, in fact, he'd been a producer all his working life, and he was now in his mid -40s. He'd directed one small film beforehand and this was an epic, it was the most expensive and the most ambitious Canadian film ever made. So when we came back from this recce, I felt this isn't going to be good news and I offered to leave the picture. Well, producer and the director came back to me and pleaded with me to stay and the producer said, well, ‘Really’ you know, ’We want you to take care of the camera and the setting up and everything and Jacques — Jacques Dorfmann, the director — he’ll... he's very good with the actors, he'll work with the actors’ and so I was persuaded to stay. Well, they'd spent a lot of time preparing this picture; they had a very creative production designer, but his ideas weren't always very practical and certain decisions had been made long before I came on to the show, which were to give me really serious headaches.

The story takes place on the tundra in the Arctic, in an Inuit village in the snow, and certain decisions had been taken prior to my joining the production, agreements made between the production designer and the producer and the director, not to go outside Montreal which would have involved a... more travel time, but to shoot the majority of these scenes in a quarry about half an hour's drive outside the city. Well, this quarry was of a grey, blacky-grey slate material. It was 100’ deep and it was about a quarter of a mile square; it was absolutely huge, and the production designer had built an Inuit village – igloos – at the bottom of this quarry and I said: ’Well, what are you going to do about all this black slate behind?’ He said: ’Well, I put water pipes all the way round and I'm going to trickle water down and because it's very cold during the winter... and at night it get down to -20  or so’,  he said: ’All the water will freeze and we will have cascades of ice, so we'll have like a glacier behind them’. And I thought, well, let’s... let's see how it goes. So during the short period of preproduction that we had, he set this in motion and the weather was very cold and after a few days these thick layers of ice had formed which blended into the snow that was already on the ground, so that, you know, you got this sort of believable icescape with a village tucked in underneath, like a cliff of ice. And so we start shooting on the exteriors, with a certain amount of weather cover in a studio in Montreal, and we start shooting and the first few days were overcast and things go pretty well and the next day’s sunny. And of course, we start off the day at half past seven or eight o'clock in the morning and as the day progresses and the sun comes up, a giant shadow goes right across our village, which of course, didn't match anything that had gone before and there's no real... there’s no explanation of where this giant shadow comes from, and then the sun goes round of course and eventually it goes behind and drops and we're left in shade again. So this was the pattern of shooting for some weeks. There was a lot of material to be shot in this village and it was a nightmare trying to match scenes. We had scenes there where an aeroplane has to come in and people get on the aeroplane and it taxis off, takes... takes off, so it was... it was impossible to match and this really strange shadow was a perpetual menace to me.

We were partway through shooting the scenes in the village, when we had a thaw and all the ice disappeared and finished up in the bottom of the quarry, so we came back after the weekend of thaw and we had no backing. We just had our Inuit... Inuit village against this black rock and it was a disaster because there was water everywhere and no ice, and our inventive, ingenuous production designer then brought in the painters, who... who started painting the walls of the quarry to trick... try and get rid of all the black and I mean, it was an impossible situation; we just lost so much time because we were running out of weather cover, you see.

We went into the studio and we had igloos made of fibreglass, obviously they couldn't be made of snow. We had fibreglass igloos and it's an extraordinary feeling being in an igloo because you have no sense of distance because every... everything is round and white and in one side as you come in the igloo, always on the left, is a small fire burning in a piece of soapstone... soapstone and... and they use whale oil or seal oil and they burn a... a wick of moss, and this provides light at night and they also cook by it, there's a little cooking stove hanging just above this flame. And of course, just above the fire you get a certain amount of melting from the snow but otherwise the temp... temperature inside the igloo is below freezing and that's the way they live. And it, you know, it was wonderful, sort of studying how... how the igloo [sic] lived years ago because this hardly exists now, living in igloos except occasionally when they go on hunting expeditions. So we were recreating the way they lived... the picture was set in the 1930s.

Now there's a sequence right at the beginning of the film in which our hero, Agaguk, kills a polar bear with a knife and brings home the pelt, which his father, the shaman, gives to the white man, who was a French-Canadian actor, gives it to him to pay off his debts for alcohol. Well, this leads to a great row between Agaguk and his father, a very dramatic scene, and gosh, working with Mifune, I was so impressed with his screen presence. He had this marvellous screen presence, absolutely riveting on screen, but there were sort of strange contradictions because he had a full beard and the Inuit don't have facial hair, so he was the only man in the cast with facial hair. We had a lot of real Inuit in the... playing the crowd scenes and one or two dialogue scenes, so we just had Toshiro Mifune with a... with a speckled beard and... and he was just marvellous, but he didn't speak any English, or just a few words, so his dialogue had to be worked out with a dialogue coach from Los Angeles who... who was Japanese but spoke perfect English, and all his dialogue had to be worked out phonetically. And we had idiot boards all round the set so he had to go from one idiot board to the other to get his dialogue right; which was incredibly difficult. I mean he did it very well but it was incredibly difficult to get it done, but it was worth it because of the sheer presence of the man.

We had this bear fight, a polar bear fight, which had not been resolved you see. Nobody figured out how it could be done and it was left right to the end of the picture, when we finished all of our shooting in Montreal; it had to be worked out when we got to the Arctic, but before that we had another dramatic scene to do, which was a whale hunt. Now, the other half of the quarry that we in... we were in... one half had the village in; the other half had a huge tank. I think the tank was about 3 or 400ft long and about 30ft wide and about 6 or 7ft deep, and the... effect... Effects Associates at Pinewood had created a mechanised whale in two pieces. They created like the front half of the whale and then the tail fin, and it was all articulated and placed into this tank on rollers so that the... the whale could go through the water and come out and blow and then the tail section would come up afterwards. Because this whale hunt was absolutely essential to the picture and we couldn't do it, obviously, with a real whale, so it all had to be faked and this... this whale made at Effects Associates was very convincing, it got lots of speckled quality and it’d been very well made, but it was only made of plastic. Now, when we came to shoot the whale hunt, we didn't want ice on the water because the ice would damage the whale and as luck would have it, the weather was very cold and the ice kept forming on the water, so they had to bring in generators which would agitate the water to keep it moving, because if you keep the... the water moving, the ice won't form. So we had these generators activating the water to stop the ice forming. We also had giant icebergs which were up to 40’ high, which this production designer had made, which were scattered all round this tank, so it looked as if we were really in the... in the Arctic with these ice floes painted and then covered with snow and then we... when we threw in some mist to try and hide some of the cracks; but it was a... it was a mammoth operation and eventually we got a sequence shot. Because Agaguk has to jump onto the whale and kill it... kill the whale with a... with a spear as they did in those days, so all that had to be faked and it worked out quite well.

I had a big night exterior to do and I wanted to light this... this vast area with a single source of light like it was moonlight, and I asked for a lamp known as a Moscow light, which comes with its own generator and it's articulated and you can take this lamp up to about 100’ and it's made up of 15 6K, HMI power lamps and each of these 15 lamps is articulated and can be directed to wherever you want it. And so, by putting this thing up 100’ in the air, you could get, you know, a marvellous single source of light which you could direct to wherever you wanted it, and it was virtually one shadow although it did fringe a little bit. Well, the night that we first wanted to use this was very cold and we get to the location for this night shoot and the operator of the Moscow light can't get into the cab because it's frozen, everything is frozen, so we then have to start thinking of what we can do as an alternative and we started rigging brutes, not brutes, 12K HMIs — I beg your pardon — on towers so that we can at least do something and eventually, he gets into the cabin of his Moscow light and we start work you see.
Well, it was about -20 I suppose, and after we'd been working for a little while, one of the lamps went out and then another one went out and in the end, I'd only got about three or four lamps that were working, the rest had just cut out for no reason except the cold. So that, the idea of using the Moscow light in these conditions just... just didn't work and of course, I was left trying to salvage the operation. At other times it was so cold that the 12K HMIs just exploded, they just blew. They'd been burning for a while and they just went bang, like a bomb. It happened two or three times, it was so cold. We were using an Arri BL and when it got below about 15... -15, it was picking a little bit, when the... when the assistant checked the gate, there was a little bit of dust, emulsion dust in... in the bottom of the camera which nobody could quite explain. It wasn't until the next day that we saw the rushes that the film had got a... a sort of judder on it and, you know, we... we got in touch with the rental company and we got another camera and they sent somebody out and we did everything we could to keep the camera warm and we found that it was fine until about -15, but when it got to -20 we got this trouble again and so we had that problem. So when we came to go the Arctic, we decided that... that we couldn't take the risk of going with the Arriflex because of this problem with the cold, we switched to a Panaflex which got more heaters.

We went to the Arctic, to a place called Frobisher Bay — the Inuit name is Iqaluit — and when we... we landed it was the beginning of March and we got off the plane first in the morning... it was -36- and the production manager met us and she was a lady and she said: ’Ah, we're going out on a recce now’. So we'd got all our protective clothing... my gear, the... the clothes that I was wearing weighed 30lb, we'd got all our gear and we'd been forewarned about frostbite in that when you get frostbite you don't feel it. If you see any white spots on the face of your companions, you must take off your gloves and mittens and... and massage the face until it's warm, otherwise you'd get more serious frostbite; so we'd been warned about that. So off we go on this recce, and there are about six of us, and we each had an Inuit driver, who’s all hooded up in furs, and most of these Inuits have all got scarred faces from frostbite; and we get on the back of a skidoo and I'm hanging onto this... this Inuit, who is as wide as he is high, and I'm hanging on to this Inuit and I've got everything that I can think of, except I'd forgotten my face mask. I had a face mask made of goose down, which was a protection against the wind, and I'd forgotten it, so off we go and when you get up to about 30 mph, this chill factor becomes about -50 or -60 , it was unbelievable... it cut through everything that I'd got on. So when we finally arrive at the place where we're going to recce, we’re all... we've all got bits of frostbite, nose and cheeks and so on. I was absolutely dying for a pee, so I found a suitable... suitable rock, and had a pee; it never touched the ground, it froze. Everything froze. But fortunately the camera didn't; the Panaflex was great, it never gave us any trouble.

Now we came to the question of shooting the bear fight. We built a real igloo — it's fascinating to watch the way an igloo is built — it can be built in an hour or two and you just cut... you... you need the right kind of snow and you need a knife, like a long knife about that long, and it's usually done by a man and a woman. The man cuts the ice blocks and they're a bit like oversized breeze blocks, and he cuts them and with his wife, builds the igloo. And she fills in the cracks with snow and they build it in a perfect sphere and then they leave a space at the top for light to come in. And we watched the film, Nanook of the North, the 1920's film, we looked at that for reference and we saw that Nan... in Nanook of the North that they took a piece of ice and used that as a window, so that you got light in during daylight hours so, you know, we faked that. But once we're inside this igloo, it was altogether different from the igloos that we'd used in the studio because the light was different; it had a sort of bluey-green quality and it... it had a very different atmosphere of... of stillness, you couldn't hear anything, and it was a really extraordinary sensation. And so we built this igloo to shoot in and... and then the... the local people, the local Inuit, also built a big Inuit [sic] which was like the Unit Restroom, where you could go in and have a cup of tea. Which was about 12’ diameter, I suppose, and sitting in this... it is an uncanny feeling, sitting in this all having cups of tea with this freezing weather outside and of course, still freezing cold inside. So we built our igloo and the scene is of our hero, Agaguk, asleep during daylight and the polar bear appears and has to smash through the igloo, treads on Agaguk's rifle, so he can't use his gun. It... our hero escapes out of the igloo and attacks the polar bear with a knife and kills the polar bear. It needed a lot of cuts and we hadn't... it hadn’t been worked out how we were going to do this. We arrive in... in the Arctic and the producer introduced us to a new member of the cast. He'd hired a giant, a giant wrestler, who was 7' 10" tall and weighed about 28 stone, I think. It was the biggest man I've ever seen and he was beautifully proportioned and immensely strong and everything about him was big, except his feet. He didn't have big feet.

The night that he arrives, I'm called in to wardrobe where they're fitting him into a polar bear suit — a genuine polar bear skin — and they're trying to adapt this polar bear suit so that it... it’ll fit, especially when he's on all fours, you see, and the polar bear suit is in two pieces, with the head separate. The head was a separate item which was about another 18in or twoft’, you don't realise how big a polar is until he stands on his back feet. So all this was going on you see, and it... it was a mixture of... of laughter and thinking: well how we were going to make this work. And the next day we go out to shoot the scene and I'm travelling along with my Inuit driver and we're overtaken by another skidoo, drawing a sledge, a very long sledge, and lying on the back of this sledge is the polar bear, well, the actor inside the polar bear suit, being towed out onto to the frozen sea, which was a most magnificent sight, wonderfully photogenic, and he's being towed out to the location and when we get there, this guy, who can just about walk with... with this suit on, he sits on top of a huge packing case and he said: ’Oh, somebody give me a cigarette’. So I got my still camera out and got a picture of a polar bear smoking a cigarette. Then when we came to shoot the scene, of course, we had to put the head on, which made him about 9', 9' 6" tall, and he'd just got little holes to see through and we start to shoot the scene. Well, all we got out of it was some big close-ups of like a paw and just quick cuts of movement and one or two extreme long shots, because it... it just didn't stand up any closer and... and so we... we finished with a half... half-finished scene. After all the main unit was finished and I'd left the picture, they got a small crew together and they went to Siberia where a circus polar bear had been trained to fall from right to left after he's knifed by Agaguk and they did some other close shots of the polar bear, so this polar bear had been specially trained. Well, he'd been trained to fall right to left, and they cut the sequence together and when they went to shoot this extra material they found the bear had been trained to fall the wrong way and so everything that had been shot had to be flopped in post production, so that it would... so you got this extraordinary mishmash of cuts which kind of works because it's so quick, but it was another example of... of all the things that hadn't been properly worked out on this picture.

So here we were in the Arctic with the real tundra and a... a horizon, which... which I'd never seen when we were in the... in the quarry in Montreal; we were always looking down on things. Now we had this wonderful landscape or snow-scape with wonderful ice floes, sunrise and sunset, beautiful low light and we shot some lovely scenes there. We had Donald Sutherland with us there, with a... a sledge drawn by huskies, and we did some beautiful material which, you know, was cut into what we shot in the quarry. A difficult match, of course, but it was a marvellous experience just... just going to the Arctic and working in those conditions. We had a Steadicam there too and that worked very well in the cold.
But of course, I was working with Donald Sutherland again, after Ordeal By Innocence, where I'd experienced this business of not... not being able to look up at him and so I talked to his makeup lady, who'd been working with him for some years and I said: ’How long has Donald had this business about not shooting a low angle on him? And she said: ’Oh, it just happened suddenly on one picture a few years ago and he's pursued it ever since and every picture he says he doesn't want to be looked up with a low camera. So I devised a little game because we had a lot of scenes with him, particularly some really good scenes when he was with Toshiro Mifune — together they were absolutely marvellous — and so we'd get the set up and we'd mark everything and we'd carefully mark the height, you see and Donald would then go off and I would say to the... the grip, I’d say, ’Put the camera 2 or 3in lower than I've just told you’. So I light everything and Donald would come back on the set you see and I'd look through the camera and I'd say,  ‘I’ll just bring the... bring the camera up’, so I brought the camera back up to where I'd originally want it to be and Donald would say, ’Oh, okay’. And I did that all the time, it was a great gag, you know, and he fell... and whether he fell for it or not, I don't know, but anyway, he went along with it and he was no trouble. He got on... the director was such a marvellous raconteur and a personality that there... there was no... no problem and things went... went beautifully in that respect. There was one occasion when we were in the Arctic when we were having breakfast and I looked out of the window and I... there were three suns in the sky... there was the real sun and on either side there were two more suns, and it was some kind of, you know, atmospheric reflection, I don't know what. It had gone before I had time to take a picture of it.

We were shooting Super 35; it was my only experience with Super 35 and I didn't like it very much because I didn't like having to compose just for the middle section of the frame, with the top and bottom going to waste, which might be used later on if it was presented on 12:9 television, because what you would... you... you shot with spherical lenses, you see, composed for the middle section, then you had to go to an optical squeeze to... to squeeze in that... that central section that you'd composed for and then when you projected it you had an anamorphic print, you had a squeezed print which was un-squeezed on the projector. And I didn't like it ‘cause you’re only using half the negative as against anamorphic, real anamorphic, which uses the... double the frame and also protecting the top and bottom. I just didn't like having all that waste there but that's the way the producer wanted to go. You've got to keep the lights out of the top... Yeah... yeah. And the tracks out of the bottom. Yeah, very difficult, with microphone and lights. And in the end I... I made a compromise: instead of shooting it dead centre, I shot it with a 1:8:5 headroom. Because also, they wanted the possibility of making flat prints 1:8:5, instead of anamorphic prints, so by having a 1:8:5 headroom at least that was taken care of.

The other thing that attracted me to the film, apart from the fact I like the story of telling this, you know, historical... you know, the... the corruption of the... of the Inuit by the white man, was that it was a chance to do a film that was almost black and white, because nearly everything was in the snow, apart from the interiors and the trading post, everything was against white and the Inuit clothing was kind of... they were furs, so everything was like browny-sepia, so it was almost a black and white movie; and that attracted me because I'd always wanted to do another black and white film but after my first feature I was never able to persuade the producers to... to shoot in black and white again. I love black and white, it's so dramatic; I think some subjects work better in black and white.

Inside the igloo in... in the studio I'd got day scenes to do which I lit assuming that there was a window of ice, so I had a certain amount of top light and I could push a certain amount of light through the sides which revealed a kind of pattern of the layers of... of frozen snow — it’s a bit like brickwork — and so I was able to push a little bit of light through there, to give the feeling of the exterior light. So it was principally coming from the top when we were shooting days scenes; now, when we came to the night scenes the... the only light source is from this little flame which burns on the outside wall which illuminates and both cook... and also cooks the food, so I had to kind of try and fake this as the only light source, which was a bit tricky. And it was very difficult shooting in the igloo... we had like cut-out igloos in the stage, and the problem was with so much white, was kind of, retaining any sense of shape. It... it was... it was difficult to handle.

I had a marvellous camera operator called Jean Lépine, who was actually a DOP [Director of Photography], but when he worked as a DOP he also operated and he wanted to come on this picture, he was interested in the subject matter. And he operated nearly everything from a small crane arm on an Elemac, with a fluid head, and he'd adjust the camera according to where the actors were, so that actors didn't really have to worry too much about hitting their marks because he would just move the crane arm over so that if somebody was getting a bit masked, they would be revealed, or he could drop it and raise it, just by the strength of using his bodyweight and I think physically it was very demanding, but he'd perfected this technique over the years and it… it worked a dream. And he'd got a coordination with the grip that he got a signalling arrangement that if he wanted to widen a little bit, that the grip would track back a little. He always put the Elemac on a board so that the grip could move the dolly a little bit as well, and so there was a fluidity to the shots… I mean not only… we weren't using Steadicam but it was not unlike that, of being able to kind of drift around, according to where the… the actors finished up and… yeah he was a really very good operator and I'd never seen that technique used before.

For me, the key relationship on set is my relationship with the director. Now, as a cinematographer of course, we are always chosen, we don't really choose who we're going to work with. We… the director and the producer approach the cinematographer and make a decision as to who they want to use, so we come on to a project, having been chosen for our previous work usually, or recommendation. So when we come on to a… a project, I feel that it's my responsibility to interpret the script in visual terms, but in close conjunction with the director's vision, and usually the director will express certain ideas, certain references perhaps to other movies, perhaps to certain works of art, paintings and so on, certain photographers, particularly if they're looking for an unusual style or a particular style. And gradually, if you have good product… preproduction time… I think this is where pre-production is also very valuable; if you're working with a director that you… you haven't worked with before, it's a chance to get to know one another, to build up an understanding. Because it's very much, as well as a... a technical relationship, it's very much an emotional relationship because, you know, I always feel the... the cinematographer there is... is there to give the maximum support to the director. I feel the director is a bit like the captain of a ship, he's got the responsibility of the whole enterprise and the ship in the course of the film-making process is going from A to B. And the cinematographer is the chief engineer, he's going to make it happen; he's the driving force on set really, because, you know, the director rehearses with the actors, certain things are worked out regarding the placement of the camera and the movement of the camera and the movement of the actors and the coverage.
When that's all determined, the director usually leaves the set while it's… it’s all put together — the tracks are laid and it's lit — and so the cinematographer with his crew — camera crew, grips and electrics — then have to make it happen in the shortest possible space of time. And of course, the first… first assistant director is a key person also in making this happen, because he's also organising other things that have to be ready at a certain time, like make-up and hair and wardrobe and having the actors ready when everything else is ready. So it… everything has to be coordinated and the assistant director is largely responsible for that, but he's working closely with the cinematographer and his crew as to how long things are going to take… what do you need to, you know, facilitate all these things. So the closeness… my feel… my closeness to the director will very much determine how the pace of the film is. If a director is a little bit slow in working and takes a long time with rehearsing, then sometimes that… that time has to be made up by not having so much shooting time because movies have to be made with… within a given schedule. Sometimes they go over and sometimes they can't go over because there's not enough money there to allow it to go over. And so… speed is terribly important; it's been said that a producer wants three things of a cinematographer: he or she wants the work to be… to be good, and she… he wants the work to be done quickly and he also wants it to be done as cheaply as possible. So he wants a… a good cinematographer, a fast cinematographer and an inexpensive cinematographer, but in real… reality that producer will only get two out of three of those things, because if a cinematographer is good and fast, he's not going to be cheap. If he's fast and cheap, he might not necessarily be good and if he's good and cheap, he might not necessarily be fast, so the… the producer is looking for… for three things and, you know, as a cinematographer one is… is working always to, kind of, make things happen as quickly as possible, also to fulfil the director's vision, to photograph the actors in the right light, to create the right mood with lighting, to convey the character or the age of the character, to create the time of day that certain things are happening, so it's quite a complex issue, really, with a lot of different things happening at once, particularly if you're working on location with changes of light.

Recently I did a seminar at a film festival, Camerimage, in Poland and I was addressing a large group of students and I'd done a kind of personal assessment of all the directors that I'd worked with. I thought it might be interesting to know where they'd come from, what they'd been before they became directors, and it was extraordinary, the diversity. One had been a cinematographer and one had been a camera operator; a couple had been editors; a couple had been first assistant directors; one had been a designer; one had been an architect; two had been to film school; one was a producer – and that was a disaster; there were two or three whose lineage I was uncertain of; but four had been writers and eight of the directors I'd worked with had been actors. Now, what does that say? It says to me that the principle concern of the director is geared towards the storytelling and the acting, because I've noticed, working with… with the directors who’d been actors, how good they are with the actors, how understanding they are, how sympathetic they are, how good they are at getting the right performance. And I think that if the cinematographer can work together with that, with keeping the actors comfortable, giving them plenty of room to work, not confining them with too many technicalities, giving them some space and if you can do that efficiently without making too much of... of a drama of it, then keeping the set calm — because, you know, things do get a bit overheated at times — and I think if a cinematographer can keep cool, it helps to, you know, prevent things getting out of hand. And I've enjoyed that relationship; sometimes it works better than others; I've had some really good friendships with directors, others where it doesn't work so well, but that's the way it goes. You know. It's so much a question of personality. I think the directors I've most enjoyed working with are those that have got a bit of sense of fun, and… and can, at the right moment have a laugh and a joke before going back to the serious issues. Directors that don't have a sense of humour, I think, are really missing out as far as I'm concerned. But… but I've… generally speaking, I've had a lot of fun filming, a lot of satisfaction too, a lot of enjoyment.

So I've worked with a lot of… lot of different directors from varied backgrounds and there's a great variety in how a director approaches the setting up process after you've rehearsed the scene and done the blocking. Some directors have a very clear picture in their minds of where they want to put the camera, how much coverage they need when they want close-ups; some are very clear, some do storyboards. Others are less clear and encourage one's participation so that one is sort of sharing in the process of… of what… what's going to happen with the camera and there are others who… who have said to me: ’Well, here's the action, you get the set up.’ And we'll talk about the breakdown of shots but they won't actually be closely involved in what the camera does. And I worked with one director, who had been an actress — her name was Lee Grant — and I'd worked with her on Voyage of the Damned. And she was the one who insisted on doing her own makeup and painting the white lines in. 20 years after that she asked me to photograph a film in French Canada — Montreal — which she was directing, and the leading lady was a little bit older than she should have been for the part and she invited me in to… to photograph the film. Now, it was interesting working with her because straight up she said, ‘I've got no idea about lefts and rights.’ She said, ‘I don't know how to work out the cutting of when somebody should left… look left or right, or where the camera should be, so I…’ she said, ‘I'll leave all that to you’. And there are other directors who have rehearsed the scene then turned to me and the operator and said, ’Well, how do you want to shoot it?’ So, there's a tremendous variety in the responsibility you're given, so in addition to our other functions, we also need to have an understanding of editing and how something might cut together and how things are going to match, and also giving the editor sufficient material to play with. The other thing I'm always interested in when one's shooting a scene is what… what the beginning of the scene is and the end of the scene is — what goes before and after — and I'll often confer with the script supervisor about what precedes and what follows the scene that we're doing in an effort to make a cut that will… that will flow. Or we'll make a dramatic cut, depending on what you need. But then, so often, scenes get moved around in post production and the scene might become a flashback and so all sorts of things change in the editing but at least one makes the effort to… to put things together so that they will flow and match and keep it interesting.

I think it's very easy, when you're working out with the director, how you're going to shoot a scene and how you're going to cover it, it's very easy to fall into a certain formula and I try to shoot scenes in different ways so that as a… as different scenes progress, there isn't a repetition in terms of technique or angles; so that you try to bring to each particular scene, both in terms of light, composition and movement, something that's relative to that scene which will make it stand out from other scenes that might follow. So I think you… what one is trying to do is get to the essence of the scene: what's the scene about, who's got the most important lines in this scene, who should we feature more than another, and most importantly, where… where is the camera going to be.

There was a development in the late ‘70s — two developments — which really affected the way we were filming. One was the beginning of Steadicam, the development of Steadicam by Garrett Brown, an American who had this idea of… of providing a camera which… which balanced itself and maintained its level, even if you were moving around. And I got to see this camera when it first came out and put on the harness and tried to do it, and found that it was incredibly difficult and very heavy and physically very demanding. It needed a lot of skill, a lot of practice, and the use of the Steadicam caught on very quickly in America; there were many, many pictures using Steadicam. In England it took a long time to be accepted and I… I don't know whether it's because not enough people chose to specialise in it, but it's only in recent years that you've really seen more use of the Steadicam.
As I say, in the early days it was very slow and whenever I've gone to America, there are always plenty of guys with their own gear, who are good Steadicam operators, and you have a big choice of people that can use... who... who know the tricks and, you know, can do it well. I met Garrett Brown a few times and on one occasion I was doing a... a workshop in Rockport, Maine with a group of students and we were in a warehouse. And I was doing some... doing a we were lighting some scenes with them and Garrett Brown was also in Rockport with a group of students, studying a Steadicam, and I got a message that... that Garrett was going to come down and join us. And we went out of this building we working in and coming down the main street was Garrett Brown, carried aloft on a platform by about six bearers, and he was walking down the main street, about 10’ up in the air. And he came down the main street, quite a long way, and these guys were carrying him on their shoulders, you see, with poles, and when he got to where we were, we were all standing watching him in amazement, gently lowered him to the ground. He got off and walked in, through the building, into our set. And it was marvellous; it was a great moment. And we talked about it afterwards and he said, ’Oh, I had this idea’, he said, ‘if you were somewhere in a distant location, maybe you're in the jungle somewhere, and you haven't got a crane, but you have got a Steadicam’, he said- ’All you need to do is make up a platform, get a few strong guys to carry it, and you get up on the platform and there you are: you've got a crane and you can move around and it will remain steady, and you can go up and down.’ It was a brilliant idea. It was his latest device, and it was so simple, but then, a lot of good ideas are.

In the late ’70s, a new type of lighting was introduced. The first range were called CSI lights and they were using some kind of a pulse, I think, within the bulb which generated a daylight colour. The problem with them was that the... from one lamp to the next the colour varied, so CSI lamps never really caught on but very soon after that there was a new development of HMI lamps which provided daylight colour from an alternating current source whereas with brutes you see, you needed direct current. You could plug in these lamps in... into your household supply. And the first lamps that came out were 2.5kW, so you could plug them in to the household supply and you got this brilliant lamp of daylight colour- 5600K- and it didn't produce much heat; so that was quite an advantage when you were shooting in... inside, because previously, if we were shooting with... match... trying to match daylight, you'd have to take the tungsten lamp and put a full blue filter on and care... carefully check the colour temperature to see if it matched the daylight. Sometimes you'd have to put more than a full blue, so you'd use an awful lot of light level by adding this blue. So this was a whole new development and they started off just with a 2.5kW and then various other sizes followed. And it was a marvellous new development.
I was to actually make a mistake when they were first brought out because nobody realised quite how important the flicker was. You... because this is a pulsed lamp which is going on and off every 50 seconds, every 1/50th of a second, sorry, every 1/50th of a second there's a pulse, it means that you've got to synchronise the camera shutter to that pulse, and if you were coming off a 50 cycle supply and you were shooting at 24 frames on the camera, you had to have a shutter opening of 172.8 I think, and if you were shooting at 25 frames on the camera coming off a 50 cycle supply, you had to shoot with 180 shutter. Well, when the first... lamps first came out, we didn't realise that there was what we call a very narrow window where you wouldn't get any flicker and these lamps came out and I used them on a commercial and when we saw the rushes there was a slight flicker which couldn't be eliminated, and I was in a certain amount of trouble with the producer. And John and Benny Lee then went back to the drawing board and they produced a new... new generation of HMI lamps which are called Square Wave, which meant that you wouldn't get the flicker, even if you didn't have the correct shut... shutter aperture, so that you could then change the shutter aperture if you wanted to without... without getting the problems of flicker. So, these were things that we learnt along the way and now they're accepted on... on every shoot where you're involving daylight. What you do have to be careful with them, though, is when you first switch them on, they're not the right colour temperature. They have a... a cyan bias and it sometimes takes a minute or two while the lamp warms up until it's reached the proper temp... colour temperature and if you shoot before they're warmed up, you get a cyan bias on the skin tone, which... which can be really unpleasant. So I... I always check with a colour temperature meter all... all the HMI lamps just to make sure they balance one another.

The last film that I photographed was Driftwood, which we shot in Ireland. Directed by Ronan O'Leary with a lovely French actress ­– Ann Brochet – and James Spader. And it's the story of a man who’s washed up on a beach who’s... and lost his memory, he can't remember anything about his past and she tries to keep him captive. She brings him back to health and then wants to hang on to him, not let him go, and it was a charming little story and it was nice working in Ireland again because Irish crews are such a delight, they have a wonderful sense of humour and they really enjoy their work, and... but I felt after that well, perhaps it would be time to stop shooting and it... I think it was the 1st... it was the 1st January 1996, that’s right, 1996. I said: well now I'm going to stop shooting. And although I had some offers after that, I thought no, I'd made the decision. But when I made the decision I thought to myself, well, I would still like to carry on being involved with students and young people and doing workshops and seminars and things.

There's a film festival which is held in Poland in December each year, called Camerimage and I've been going there for the last four years now, and I shall be going again this year. And that's absolutely wonderful, especially, I think, for any young person who is interested in cinematography because hundreds of students go and dozens and dozens of leading cinematographers. During the course of the week they show about 15 or 16 films that are in competition for the best cinematography. They have a whole day devoted to student films. Last year I was on the jury for the student films and saw 42 films in one day. And some... some of the work was absolutely astounding. The film that won the... what's called The Golden Tadpole — that's the top award — was marvellous,; marvellous piece of cinematography, and it was done by a student. And so... and there's a lot of the, you know, experimental work being done by... by younger filmmakers that we can all learn a lot from and it's a great coming together of... of people who love cinematography. And I was greatly honoured when, in the year 2000, they told me they would like to give me a Lifetime Achievement award and they'd like to produce a book featuring my career, which... which they did beautifully. And on the Saturday, the last Saturday of... of the week, they have all the awards for the best film and the best student film and so on, and they make this Lifetime Achievement award and, you know, I was joined in this roster from previous years of people like Haskell Wexler and Vilmos Zsigmond and László Kovács, Conrad Hall, Vittorio Storaro, Sven Nykvist, Giuseppe Rotunno, Witold Sobociński and all these wonderful cameramen, and I thought how... greatly honoured I was to be included. So it was a great occasion and Ann came over to be with me and of course, I had to make an acceptance speech and I said that the really... the reason I was standing here was really due to luck because I was lucky that my father was a cinematographer and I was introduced to cameras and filmmaking at a very early age. I was lucky in the directors and actors that I'd worked with during my career and I was lucky that I'd had such a wonderful partner as Anne, who’s always been so supportive and understanding, and always reads the scripts of all the movies that I've done and... and she's given me wonderful support throughout my career and... and I've enjoyed it and I've had a marvellous time and I'm still having a marvellous time, so, you know, I'm happy.
