christian.de.duve

Belgian biochemist Christian de Duve (1917-2013) was best known for his work on understanding and categorising subcellular organelles. He won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1974 for his joint discovery of lysosomes, the subcellular organelles that digest macromolecules and deal with ingested bacteria.

To tell you the truth, I'm... I'm rather embarrassed by this whole exercise, I thought it would be fun and then somehow, as the date neared, I got more and more uncomfortable. It's not that I... I'm not a modest person by any means, but... it seems to me that I'm not the kind of person that people want to know about, you know, I'm not a genius, I didn't invent relativity, or discover relativity, I didn't discover the double helix, I'm not a colourful personality like Francis Crick or Jim Watson... or Richard Feynman and so on. So, I'm just a rather ordinary person with a slightly out of ordinary experience.

I think, probably the... the most unusual thing about me is my family background. And so, if you don't mind, I'll just start with that, and the story actually starts..., well, it starts, of course, with the... the first cell, but that's the near… the story starts not far from Brussels, exactly on June 18, 1815 on the fields near a little village in the outskirts of Brussels, called Waterloo. And... June 18, 1815 is the day Napoleon was defeated by the Coalition. And on the battlefield there were many wounded, and amongst the wounded was a young Hanoverian officer who came from a family that, at some time in the 17th century, was rather well known in Hanover... if you go there you will still see a street, a chapel, a fountain, biscuits, even a house, which was destroyed by Allied bombing during the last war, but still exists as a replica in the... in the town hall. Anyway, this young man's name was Herman Timoléon von Duve. He was wounded and sent to Antwerp, he was evacuated to a hospital in Antwerp where he was taken care of by a physician named Jean-Baptiste Sassenus. The Sassenus family came from the city of Leuven, Louvain, Louvain and it had Latinised its name was really Van Zassen. Between the Renaissance they had changed the name to Sassenus and that family was associated with the University of Louvain ever since its foundation in 1415. And first, as a printers, the first Jean-Baptiste Sassenus was actually the first printer of the university and since then the family remained associated with the university, and there was even a man called André Dominique Sassenus who died in 1756, if I remember rightly, and who was actually Professor of Biological Chemistry, in the Medical Faculty. And so the physician who took care of my great-grandfather, Herman Timoléon was the great-grandson of this André Dominique Sassenus. Well, it turns out that Herman Timoléon von Duve married the daughter of Jean-Baptiste Sassenus and settled in Antwerp, which his family in Hanover resented very much. But anyway, he became integrated in Antwerp's society; the name was changed from von Duve to de Duve. They... I think he ended up being the chief of police of the city and one of his sons, my grandfather, became what is called a notaire, a lawyer. And my father, who was the youngest son of Antoine de Duve, was supposed to study to become a notaire himself, a notary... a lawyer, I suppose you would say, but his father died before he could succeed and so he could not do that. The succession went to a brother-in-law of his and so he did the next best thing and started a real estate business.

I think my family, because of the Hanoverian background, remained very much in contact with... with Germans. Antwerp was, of course and still is, a thriving city, a harbour... a very important harbour, and it had, in those days, attracted many German merchants who settled in Antwerp and there was quite a... sort of whole German colony there and I guess my family did navigated in those circles, so that it turns out that my father married the daughter of a German... a wealthy German merchant in Antwerp and another of my aunts married a German soldier... we had... there was a German connection. And my parents, I think, had a lovely time, they married in 1906, had three children – four actually, but my eldest sister was killed in a motor car accident in... on the Belgium coast in 1913... you know, it's amazing that you could be killed in a motor car accident at that time, but that happened. Anyway, and so they... they had a wonderful life until, until the First World War broke out, which was, of course, a tragedy for that family. And my father was, I think, too old or maybe had too many children to be drafted in the army, and he took his wife and three children to England, where he arrived – with many other Belgians – as a refugee, a war refugee. I don't know exactly how he survived, I think he did some business there and... Anyway, they lived in a small house in Thames Ditton on the river Thames, not far from Hampton Court. And they made friends among their neighbours there, and so finally we come to October 2nd 1917, which is almost 88 years from now, when I was born while London was being bombed by Zeppelins, German Zeppelins.

The first years of my life... were spent, as a baby... in Thames Ditton until my family came back to Belgium. Probably 1819 [sic], 1918 or 1919, I forget exactly, and settled back in Antwerp. But we kept quite a number of connections with England, my elder brothers, who'd started schooling in England, went on to boarding school in... some school called St George's College in Weybridge, and my father continued, I think, to... have some business connections with England. I remember him, when I was a child, he would take the boat... the night boat from Antwerp to Harwich and spend a week or a few days in London. Anyway, so that's the start of the family until I was born, but then when the family came back to to Belgium something rather unfortunate had occurred. My German grandfather had... had, well a poor idea, it was very patriotic on his part, but he supported the Germans and bought German war bonds during the occupation, and as a result of this rather... well, poor idea, he... his... possessions were taken over by the Belgian government. So, he had to go back to Germany and settle in a small house on the banks of the river Rhine in Miehlen not far from a place called Godersberg where Hitler used to go, Bad Godersberg. And, well they got some support from the German government so they weren't really poor, they could survive, but for as far my father and mother were concerned, this changed their situation very much, but for a few years my father's business went all right, it was after the war, until, until the crash of 1929, which started the Depression. My father wasn't a very good businessman and so the family fortunes changed very much. And I was just 13 at that time, so it was not a very pleasant experience for me. Anyway, so that's the background, and this background included connections, not only with Antwerp, with Belgium, the Flemish and the French-speaking part of Belgium, but also connections with Germany where I had a number of relatives, my grandparents and also uncles, cousins and so on. And so I used to spend holidays in Germany, almost every year. At the same time, we'd kept our connections with England and so I did spend almost every summer holiday from 1930 onwards with friends of my family, friends that they had made... in... in England. And so a very young boy, I did grow up in a sort of multicultural atmosphere. Going back, English had in fact been my first... the first language I spoke as a baby, it wasn't much, not many words, but anyway, somehow this must have left some traces in my brain because when I went back to England with friends of my family, somehow English was not a foreign language for me to learn, it sort of came back, somehow those sounds had left some traces.

Well, I should say that... I actually spoke better English at that time than I do now because... the people I stayed with in England were really rather strict about pronunciation and so on and so on, I really learned what, in those days, was the King's English, would now be the Queen's English, I assume. But since then I've spent many years in the United States and my... my beautiful English has become corrupted so that I now speak a sort of mixture of English, American and French. Anyway, back to the story. So that's where I grew up and I went to school in Antwerp, it was a Jesuit school. And, at that time, the teaching was still done in both languages; it is only in 1932 that teaching in Belgium has become unilingual. So, at that time I still... half of the teaching was in French and the other half in Flemish, and so I learned French in French, Flemish in Flemish, Latin in French, Greek in Flemish, mathematics in French, history and geography in Flemish and so on, so I ended up being, being essentially bilingual, plus English and German which made me quadrilingual by the time I left school.

Now as a child I should say that... perhaps being slightly immodest, I was pretty bright. I learned to read before I was five, I had a governess who learned [sic] me to read, so by the time I went to school I could already read, I had read a number of books actually, and so I skipped a grade in school and went up quite quickly so that I left school, so-called humanities, at the age of 17, or not yet 17. And so, as I said I was pretty bright and I was pretty eager also, so I was the top of my class every year. I was really... this did not make me very popular because I was so tremendously... excited with having this brain that I could use all the time, solve problems and answer questions, and so on, so I was so eager... and the other boys at school did not particularly appreciate that... they liked to have their say from time to time. So, that's my recollection of school. I was also a very eager boy scout and as a boy scout I... I enjoyed, very much nature, I enjoyed tinkering with all kinds of things, outdoor life, sports. I was very active; I was really an active child. I think I was rather happy, on the whole, except for problems with the family fortunes and... and sometimes, not being quite popular with my schoolmates, but except for that I was rather, rather happy. Now the last point, perhaps, that I should mention, is religion. My family was Catholic, my mother in fact, had been educated as a Protestant, a Lutheran, but she had converted to Catholicism when she married my father. But among my other relatives there were Protestants, there were... in England there were Anglicans which meant they rarely went to church. And so on, so I was, again, the religious background was rather liberal. But, of course, I went to school, a Jesuit school, and I was... I was at that time, a very devout Catholic and I really felt that... being so bright I owed something to the world. I was very impressed with the... the parable of the five talents, I suppose it's called, where you know, you have to give back what you have received. And so I felt a certain responsibility, I took myself very seriously in a way, I mean it's rather terrible when I think about this, but that's the way it was.

So, came the moment where I should choose what I was going to do with my life. And what attracted me most at that time was what had been taught best by the Jesuits, that is literature, including old languages, I just loved Greek, more than Latin, philosophy, mathematics, those were the branches that I liked. Science was taught so badly that I was not attracted at all, I mean chemistry and physics, I found repulsive. Biology was a little more, but it was taught so badly that it wasn't really worthwhile. So, at first sight I thought I would follow, maybe in my father's footsteps and study law or... some branch of the humanities. But the studies attracted me but not the careers that went after the studies. I didn't want to become a lawyer, I didn't want to become a notaire, I didn't want to become an attorney, I didn't want to become a businessman, and so finally I decided that what I really wanted to be was a physician. I was attracted by the, sort of, man in white picture with a stethoscope coming out of one pocket and a hammer from the other and doing... good work, trying to heal the... sick and so on. So I was attracted by the rather romantic image of the physician. And so, yes, this meant I had to study physics, chemistry, biology, but those were the... that was the price... I was... I had to pay to become a physician.

There was no physician in my family. There were a number of chemists and engineers among my German family. Some of my cousins occupied rather important positions in the chemical industry in Germany, in the IG-Farbenindustrie, the Bayer Nobel factories in Germany. So, I... I had contacts with that side but not, not in my Belgian family, not that I can think of at all. No, they were all rather... rather... either... either, you know, interested in the humanities or even in culture. I had an aunt who was a very good marine painter, sister of my father. Her husband was a composer who had been the director of the conservatory, the music school in Antwerp who played the organ in the cathedral and composed, even, an opera that was played every year in the Antwerp opera. Another uncle was a sculptor and so on, so we were rather a cultured family but not at all interested in science. My father's main interest was the French language. He was a stickler for grammatical precision, for good structure and so on, he was very strict also about manners and things of that kind but science, no, nobody talked about science.

So, when I entered university, I was very young. I was just 17 and... so happens that in those days, the better students spent some of their free time in research labs... sort of a tradition at the university, there was a lot of free time in those days; there were only maybe 12 hours of lecturing a week... very few... very few... labs and so there was a lot of free time and the tradition was that the students, who wanted to, would join - or who were accepted - would join a research lab on a purely voluntary basis, of course; they weren't paid. And... I was attracted by that and by complete chance entered a physiology laboratory. Actually, I could have entered any, I wasn't attracted by any of the branches at that time, but it so happened that my digs were just in front of the physiology building so that's where I... and I had friends who worked there. And so, I entered the physiology laboratory which was a tremendous piece of luck for me, because the director of that laboratory, Professor Joseph Bouckaert, was about the only really good scientist in the whole medical faculty. He'd studied in England with a man called AV Hill. AV Hill is a very famous... he won a Nobel prize, specialist of muscle... muscle physiology and so Bouckaert was a really true... a true scientist. And suddenly, suddenly in his lab, after only a few months... it was a revelation... Suddenly I discovered science. I discovered what science was all about. I discovered the ways of science, how one... pursues the search for the truth by means of rigorous experimentation and reasoning, and so on. So the approach that I had learned from the Jesuits and had accepted, had adopted almost, which was the approach of philosophy and theology, that is starting with principles and deriving everything else from the principles, suddenly I realised that that was the wrong approach. It was top down approach, a dogmatic kind of approach, whereas science was the... provided the true... pathway toward the truth. And so I really, in... in just one year, fell in love with science. So much so that it was difficult for me to complete my medical studies. I decided I was going to be a scientist, I was going to be an investigator and therefore what did I need to learn about ear, nose and throat and eyes and obstetrics, and so on... I was never going to use any of those, but I felt that, perhaps, I should complete the studies anyway because of what the future held. I didn't know what the future held.

When I was young, coming from the family that I came from, there was only one possible university for me to join that was the Catholic University of Louvain. So I went to study at the Catholic University... I'm sorry I should have said that, but at that time was obvious, no other university was conceivable. So, let’s go back to the story, whatever, I was telling.
[Q] So you'd got to the point...
Yes. So anyway, as I... I said I had discovered science and fallen in love with it.
[Q] And it was difficult to finish your studies?
To finish... it was difficult to finish my studies but I did so. But, another interesting thing was that Bouckaert, who was the head of the physiology lab, had a very strange way of organising his laboratory. He felt that research in his lab should reflect his teaching, and so there should be a group working on each major chapter of physiology. Now how he was able to do that, with the very, very, very small budget that the university... the Catholic University at that time, was extremely poor, it lived on whatever money people gave at... on two Sundays in the churches. It was very poor, it paid its professors very poorly, if anything, because many of the professors actually enjoyed private means and refused to be paid by the university and... not Bouckaert, he wasn't wealthy. And so, I think to some extent his lab was paid by the students, by the medical students because they organised practical classes for the medical students and the medical students had to pay a fee for the practical classes and part of the fee went to... into the research part of the laboratory. Anyway, I think that's how it happened. Anyway, he had... he had several groups, mostly students like myself, but there were two or three senior people who conducted the research. But so he had a group working on heart, he had a group working on kidney, he had a group working on... nerves, the brain, he had a group working on metabolism, he had a group working on diabetes and insulin. It really covered almost the whole field. And so, when I was accepted in the lab I was sort of given the menu and asked which group would I want to join.

I had no special... special liking, but I had, entering the lab, seen a group working on a dog and they were actually removing the liver of that dog which was a tremendously risky operation and very... very interesting. I saw them all work and I was attracted by this kind of work. I wouldn't be attracted today, I think, but at that time, somehow I didn't have the respect that we now have for animals. And so, that group was actually working on insulin and they... they were removing the liver of dogs to find out whether... to what extent this would influence the amount of glucose taken up, under the influence of insulin. And so they worked on the mechanism of action of insulin, but with very simple techniques which was, basically, injecting glucose and measuring the blood sugar level and... and that was about it, except for the operations as surgery. So I was attracted by that group and started working with it and soon became extremely interested in the whole problem of how insulin... active insulin had been discovered only 15 years before, 1922, and there was still many things that weren't known about insulin, and one major problem that was being discussed at that time, and had been discussed ever since Claude Bernard, was to what extent was the liver involved in the action of insulin? And there were two main schools. One school was that... maintained that the liver was an important site. That when you injected insulin instead of producing glucose, from glycogen, which the liver does normally... or from other substances, which the liver does most of the time, it would reverse... insulin would reverse the flow and glucose would be taken up by the liver, under the influence of insulin and accumulate as glycogen and so on. The other school said, no, the liver has nothing to do with it, or the liver goes on making glucose and the effect of insulin is mainly on the muscles, on the peripheral tissues which take up the glucose, or more glucose under the influence of insulin. And, in fact, the reason why they took the liver out of those dogs was to find out whether this would decrease the amount of glucose taken up under the influence of insulin, which it did very much. And so, our group joined, I would say, the liver faction, in this controversy we said the liver plays a very important role and... I became more and more interested in that question.

Another war starts. The Second World War, 1940. I remember that day very well because I was living, at that time, I was living actually in the physiology institute, say that the assistants were not paid but there were a couple of rooms that were allocated to student assistants and I was fortunate enough to have a room... for several years I lived in the attic of the physiology institute, so I could work late at night and so on. And I remember being... woken up by... by another assistant who lived in the room next door to me, came at five o'clock in the morning, said, 'The war has started, the war has started!' and I had worked very late that night, I was sleeping. I said, 'It can wait' and I went back to sleep. But in the meantime, German bombers – Stukas – were actually bombing the city of Louvain and they were bombing, especially, the library. Now this is a... I don't want to go into that story, but the Louvain library was a sort of symbol because it was burnt to the ground by the Germans in the 1914 war and it was replaced by a beautiful building, built in the old style, with American funds. All over the United States money was collected, in every school and college and university, to rebuild the University of Louvain, which had become a symbol of civilisation against Teutonic barba... barbary. And so the first thing they did was to bomb down the new library. Yes, I should perhaps have mentioned that, of course, the war did not start as a big surprise. Having... spent many of my... part of my holidays in Germany, during the years between 1930 and 1940, having relatives in Germany, I had really experienced, from the inside, the uprise [sic]of Nazism and of Hitler. I even remember one year, 1939, I think, spending summer with relatives of mine on the island of Sylt, which is an island north of Germany, and Goering was there, so I... I saw Goering. Actually I saw him going down and taking... bathing in the sea, but anyway. So, I had seen all that and I had felt this rising menace of Nazism. I still see those newspapers with the big attacks against the Jews... Juden, Juden, Juden... so I was really very much concerned with the whole thing. And so, when the war broke out it was not a big surprise, but obviously it changed things very much again.
Anyway, what I did, when the war broke out, I... I took my bicycle and went back to Antwerp, to my family, then took my bicycle, went to Gent to enlist in the Belgian army. So I was enlisted in the medical corps; I had not finished my medical studies, but I was enlisted in the medical corps and I never did anything, because all we did was just to... to go down to France, they put us in a train and then we spent six days in... cattle wagons and finally got to France and were taken... taken prisoners by the Germans after a few weeks. And so, that was my only feat during the war, was to escape. I... I was in a column of prisoners marching on the road, the weather was beautiful, and I had stopped with a couple of friends in a café to have a drink, and suddenly a German officer came in and he started screaming at us and hitting us with a... he had a stick, and so I decided, no this is not for me. I can't stand it. And so I sort of stayed at the back of this column and there were cars moving along the column, French cars, and they still had, I don't know how you call them, marchepied in French, things on which you stepped to get into the car, you know, on the outside of the car, I don't know the English word. Anyway, so I just stood up... stood on one of these cars and we passed the column and the Germans just looked at us, and, of course the people inside the car were terrified, but eventually I escaped and so came back to Belgium. There are many other things that I could tell, but I mean these details are really not important. What it means is I was able to get back eventually to Louvain, to the lab and to... especially to, complete my studies.

And so in 1941 I got my MD degree. But by then, of course, it was almost impossible to conduct any sort of research because we couldn't get the chemicals, we couldn't feed the animals and so on, so I was left to... doing library research. But in the meantime there was a problem of getting a job, making a living. '41... I was an MD so what was I going to do? And so I went to see my professor, Bouckaert and I said to him, well, I don't want to become a physician, I want to do research, so I'd like to try and find a job to do research. He said, well, that's quite impossible and I think that's very stupid of you because you will never get a professorship at this university because you are not the son of a professor, you're not the nephew of a bishop and therefore there is no way for you to get a job. I said, but I don't really need to have a job at this university, there are other universities in the world, the war will be over one day and I'm a citizen of the world. Well, that's the way I felt when I was young, with the kind of background I had. And he said, yes well in any case, you can't do that now and I think you should not forget that you have an MD degree and that is probably the way you will be able to earn your living. And so I suggest that you try and take a job at the hospital as an assistant in one of... Well, two jobs were available for... two assistantships were available, one in internal medicine.

By the time I had... the war... the war had broken out and I had finished my studies, I had decided that what I wanted most to do in life was to solve... elucidate the mechanism of action of insulin on the liver. That was what I was going to do. And I had come to the conclusion that I would never be able to solve this problem with the kind of simple methods that were used in the physiology lab. Just injecting glucose, measuring the blood sugar level, was never going to get me anywhere; what I needed was biochemistry. Biochemistry was very poor at the university... not... not poor, but there was no biochemistry in the kind of field I wanted to go into. The French-speaking Professor of Biochemistry was an organic chemist and in the Flemish part he was a physical chemist, but there was nobody interested in metabolism. In any case, I felt that before I specialised in biochemistry I had to learn chemistry, and so what I decided, in 1941, was that I would study chemistry. I should go back to school and study chemistry, but in the meantime I had to make a living. And that's how I went to see my professor and told him what I wanted to do, and he said, 'You can't do that; you'd better get a job as an assistant at the hospital.' There were two positions available: one in internal medicine and the other in the cancer institute. I first went to the Professor of Internal Medicine because I wasn't particularly enthusiastic about the... the Professor... Head of the Cancer Institute. So I had been a good student... not very good, because I'd spent too much time in the lab and too much time – I didn't mention that – playing cards. And then... when the Professor of Internal Medicine was going to give me the job, I told him that I should mention that I'm going to study chemistry at the same time. So he looked at me and said, 'Listen, I need an assistant; I don't need a chemical student. So goodbye.'

So I went to see the Cancer Professor, who was something of a maverick... very strange personality. He... he was a highly successful cancer specialist and made pots of money treating all the important, wealthy people in Belgium and elsewhere. He was also an expert in... in pathology and he was a great traveller; every year... remember this is in... in the '30s – every year he would go to the United States for a visit of the main centres, and come back. So he really was aware of what was going on. He was in touch with... with the main centres in the United States and elsewhere; he was a very unusual man for this provincial university that we had in Louvain. He also did research and that's what made him a little... not very sympathetic to me. The kind of research he did was, in fact, what is being done today. It was epidemiology: the kind of epidemiological research that you could do in the lab. So the Cancer Institute was a big institute, with many patients; it had been built specially for this man called Maisin, m-a-i-s-i-n, with all the money that he was able to raise, but the basement... the whole basement of that institute was occupied by rats and mice, which, I can tell you, was not particularly... particularly pleasant for the patients, because rats and mice tend to... to, I mean, smell. And air conditioning in those days was not what it is today. But, anyway, he had thousands of rats and mice put into different groups and they would all be given a carcinogenic treatment; this was the early days of chemical carcinogens. Some would be fed what was called butter yellow, which caused liver cancer, and others were painted with carcinogens on their skin which caused skin cancer, and then he would divide his animals into many groups and they would be given different diets, for example, or they would be given injection of some vitamin or metals or whatever. Whatever came to his head, he would do and then he would simply follow the incidents of cancer in the various groups, trying to find out whether a diet rich in lipids would increase or decrease the incidence of cancer. Now today, this would have been a very modern approach but it has never appealed to me very much. I don't like this kind of approach – I like a more rational approach; and so I wasn't impressed with his science, but okay, I needed a job and so I went to see him, and explained to him what I wanted – and he said, 'Fine.' And I said, 'But I should tell you that I plan to study chemistry at the same time.' He looked at me and he said, 'De Duve, chemistry and medicine, that's the science of the future; you have the job.' Amazing man. He'd worked at the Rockefeller Institute, actually, with Murphy in those days. He'd also worked with a Nobel Laureate – Fibiger, a Danish laureate who actually... whose prize has been very much discussed since.

So I got the job and I was allowed to... to study chemistry and do all the labs in the daytime and I took care of his private patients at night. So I was... I was pretty busy. But nevertheless I still found time to read almost everything that had been written on insulin and diabetes, to write a 400 page book in which all this was... was described and discussed. The book was actually published in 1945 under the name Glucose, Diabète et Insuline – Glucose, Diabetes and Insulin. I used some of the work that I had done to get a kind of PhD which was called l'Agrégation de l'Enseignement Supérieur – a sort of glorified PhD that gives you a sort of licence to teach in the university. What else did I do? I got married. So, in 1943, I got married with a lovely girl who still happens to be my wife today, and we had our first child; our first boy was born in 1944. My wife was the daughter of a physician – a truly... a true country doctor in a small city in... called Saint-Trond... Sint-Truiden. But the family, also, was rather unusual because there were a number of cousins: four beautiful daughters, of which one happened to be... to marry Aldous Huxley, the famous English author. Another one married a Dutch artist who... whose daughter is a poet and a writer and used to be married – he's dead now – to a man called Robert White, in the United States, and Robert White is a grandson of the most famous American architect, Stanford White, and so on. I mean, it's an interesting family. So all that happened during the war, and September 1944 arrived and the city of Louvain was liberated, and suddenly life changed again. In the meantime, Louvain had been bombed very, very badly a few weeks before the actual landing in Normandy.

I had written my dissertation and... and defended it in '45, and I actually finished my chemistry... I got my... my MSc in Chemistry in '46. But, of course, by the time... by the time the war finished, I had only one idea... after being cooped up under German occupation for four years in Belgium, I had only one idea: move out and see the world. Well, there's still one episode that maybe I should mention here. To... in order to... to get my chemistry degree I had to do a small thesis on a subject... a small research thesis, and biochemistry was not recognised by the Science Faculty of the university. They only knew organic, mineral, physical chemistry. Three branches. And so I was... I didn't know exactly what to do; I couldn't work on insulin or glucose – that would not have been accepted. And so by chance one day, walking in Louvain, I met a young man whom I knew slightly. He was Flemish – a young doctor who worked in the laboratory of microbiology... bacteriology – and he had been approached by a group of business people and the professors at Louvain who, under the impulse of a man who had a rather big paper factory, wanted to create a new... a new pharmaceutical industry. They wanted to create an industry that would... that would do its own research. Not just packing of... of chemicals, but actually do research, and they had put up the money, or some money, for this, and they had decided that the first... the first thing they would do would be to make penicillin. They had heard, of course, of penicillin because – and some of the early works on penicillin were, of course, available – Fleming made his discovery in something like 1932, if I remember rightly. And so they wanted to make penicillin. And this young man was in fact culturing penicillin notatum, which is the mould that makes penicillin, from which penicillin is extracted. He knew how to assay the bacteriostatic effect of insulin on bacterial cultures, but he wasn't a chemist; he didn't know how to purify it. And so he said, 'Well, I want somebody to purify the penicillin.' I said, 'That's fine, I'm going to do that', and so my thesis for my chemical degree was to purify penicillin. Well, it turned out that that little work that we did together... the man was called Piet De Somer... that we did together, led to the creation of a new company that was called R.I.T., and R.I.T. grew because of my friend. He really developed this company: they made vaccines – polio vaccines; they made a lot of antibiotics; they made a number of very important developments. So the company grew; eventually the company was bought by the American company, SmithKline & French. SmithKline & French was eventually bought by Glaxo, and Glaxo was... was eventually called by... bought by Beecham, or maybe it's the other way round; I forget. Anyway, this little company blossomed into finally becoming a part of one of the biggest pharmaceutical industries in the world – Glaxo... GBK or BGK, Beecham, Glaxo, Kline [sic]... anyway, something like that. They have a big... in fact, in Belgium they have very big research labs and... and manufacturing facilities rightly. So I was... I was actually involved in the... this little adventure, but when the war finished, I decided, no, I don't want to go into industry; I want to go back to insulin and I want to become a pure... a scientist... to do so called pure science.

I had a chemical degree but I still had to become a biochemist. I had been to Scandinavia several times before the war, and so I felt that maybe Sweden, which had escaped the war, might be a good place, and of course, Sweden was a wonderful place for biochemistry, and so I decided I would try to get a fellowship to go to Sweden. And I had a small Belgium fellowship and also I'd made a little money with the book that I had written and so I used that to go to Sweden but I had to be accepted, and at first I had tried to get into a lab directed by Hans Von Euler. Hans Von Euler had discovered what we knew, in those days, as DPM, is now known as NAD. And I had a friend in that lab, actually, a Hungarian girl who I had met there before the war and she wrote to me and said no, this lab is passé, you should go and work with Hugo Theorell, he's the coming man, Hugo Theorell. So naively- I've always done naive things in my life, I just wrote to Hugo Theorell, sent him my book and said I want to learn biochemistry, could you accept me in your lab? And strangely enough, he did. And so I got there in 1946, and had a wonderful time. Theorell was a specialist in the biochemistry of haemoproteins, he'd been a pupil of Warburg, Otto Warburg in Berlin where he had started by purifying human myoglobin, or no, myoglobin, animal myoglobin and then back in Stockholm he had went on to purify cytochrome C, purify catolayse, purify peroxidases, so he was really an expert in the purification and study of haemoproteins. When I arrived I said I don't know how to pipette, I cannot measure pH, I've never done anything of that kind. He said that's okay and he gave- he asked his head assistant to take care of me, Akesson was his name. And he really taught me the rudiments of biochemistry; I mean the manipulations of biochemistry. The topic, at that time, had nothing to do with insulin, I said to Theorell, you just give me whatever problem to work on, I need to learn the trade before I go back to my own problem. And so the trade I learnt there was used to purify human myoglobin, so it was a small excursion for me, but anyway I got the crystals, which was important, in Theorell's lab, unless you got pure protein crystals you were a nobody. But I spent 18 months in that lab, and it was a tremendous experience. First of all Theorell himself was a unique personality, he had had polio as a child and so he could hardly walk. He went on crutches all the time and, in fact he walked on his hands better than on his feet and sometimes he would walk on his hands around the lab, singing some opera tune. He was an accomplished violinist and his wife, Margit, who died just a couple of years ago, maybe last year, was a concert pianist and harpsichordist, and so they would play together every day almost and they would invite musicians at their home, so on, so a very interesting background and I've always loved music and so I was very pleased with that.

But his lab, of course, had attracted more and more of young promising scientists, and so that's how I got to know several really prominent people. First of all, there was Theorell's first assistant... was a man called Sune Bergström; Bergström who shared the Nobel prize with Bengt Samuelsson... maybe sometime in... in the '80s, I believe. Another visitor there who spent a lot of time was a man called Britton Chance. Very interesting personality; Britton Chance was a very wealthy... the son of a very wealthy family in the United States and he... he was... I don't know exactly what his training was – I think it was probably physics, because during the war he was very much involved in building equipment... I think radar equipment, or something of that kind, for the American navy. But after the war he became interested... he worked with Roughton first in Cambridge, I think, working on the... the spectroscopic, or spectrometrics... spectophotometric study of enzyme kinetics. And, of course, haemoprotein enzymes are perfect material for that kind of study, because the haem group has a spectrum in the visible region, and part of it in the UV region, and you can follow the kinetics of the reactions they... they catalyse by following the changes in... the spectro changes. And Britton Chance actually built several pieces of equipment that were used for rapid... following rapid reactions. And he came sometime in '46; he came to Stockholm with six big boxes labelled US Navy in which he had all his equipment. He... Theorell made... crystallised the enzymes, and Britt would, with Theorell, study the kinetics of the reaction, and together they did wonderful work. Now Britton Chance was also a very enthusiastic sailor, and so was Theorell, even though his legs were not very good, and so they would sail together a lot; and Britt in fact had some of the best sailing boats in... in the world and participated in... in competitions. Eventually... let me see now, this must have been '48... in 1951, there was a second biochemistry congress in Paris and Britton Chance was supposed to come, and instead of coming he sent a telegram from Stockholm saying, 'I just won the gold medal in the Olympic Games.' So Britt had a gold medal in the Olympic Games for sailing, and everyone always expected him to get the second Nobel gold medal, and for... because he really deserved that, and for reasons that have a lot to do with the personalities, I think, he... he never got it. He's still alive – he's 92, I think, or 93, and I got a letter from him the other day, and he's just coming to London to participate in a... a meeting organised by the Royal Society. He still goes to the lab every day, every night. I mean, I've never seen a man like that: he's always in his lab, always working with his equipment; he has grants; he has students; he has post docs.

Besides Britton Chance there were several other very... I mean, very good biochemists in... in that lab... Jack Buchanan came from Harvard and he was an expert in purine chemistry... pure biosynthesis. There was a man called Ralph Holman from Minnesota, who was a lipid specialist, and there was Chris Anfinsen, who also was a Nobel laureate... I forget exactly when; and Theorell himself, of course, got the Nobel Prize in 1955 for his work, so that was all very exciting. But I wanted, eventually, to get back to insulin, and so naively again I decided the best... the best lab for me to work on insulin would be in the United States – St. Louis, Missouri, the lab of Carl and Gerty Cori. Carl and Gerty Cori in the '20s and the '30s were really the great experts in carbohydrate metabolism, and they had discovered phosphorylase and glycogen metabolism and so on. So they were really major figures in that field ... also very powerful because Carl was the editor of the JBC – the Journal of Biological Chemistry... more or less decided what was going to be published and what was not going to be published. Anyway, Carl and Gerty Cori belonged to the other group. I mentioned at the beginning the big controversy between the liver... the partisans of the liver and the muscles, with respect to the action of insulin, and Carl and Gerty believed that insulin not only did not favour glucose uptake by the liver but actually favoured the... the delivery of glucose by the liver into the bloodstream and favoured uptake by the muscles, and the theory was that under the influence of insulin the muscles would... or the peripheral tissues would consume more glucose and the extra glucose would be provided by glycogenolysis from the liver. That was their theory. And so rather naively... very naively, I said, ‘Well, you know, I have to confront the lion in his den, so I'm going to go to St. Louis, and I'll... I’ll tell Carl and Gerty they were wrong and convert them to the true theory.’ So I wrote to... I should say that I had written quite a number of papers by then, in French, but with Bouckaert I had written one review, in English, of all our work on insulin which had appeared in physiological reviews in... for... just about that time.

So I wrote to Carl Cori, and I still have his reply. By that time I could only spend six months away from... because I had started... I had been appointed in Louvain as a lecturer, and so he wrote and said, 'Sorry, but I can't take a fellow for more than... for less than one year, six months... so I can't take you. In addition, there is... with you, there is the additional difficulty that we do not see eye to eye, with respect to the mechanism of action of insulin.' So I was devastated and... but then a couple of months later I got another letter from Carl and he... the letter said, 'I want to get back to your request. Earl Sutherland in my laboratory has just found that the action of insulin on liver slices... the glycogenic action releasing glucose from glycogen is not due to insulin but to an impurity. I believe you have also done some work on this, and perhaps you might be interested in working with Dr. Sutherland.' Now, when he said, 'I believe you've already done some work', in fact, he was referring to what I would consider my first discovery. During the war, when I was writing this book and reading everything about insulin and trying to make sense of everything, I had run into a paper by a man called Bridge, published in 1938, in which he had truly found evidence that insulin would release glucose from liver glycogen. I won't go into the detail but the evidence was convincing. And so this worried me very much, because I said, 'Well, the evidence is there and I don't believe it is correct because I have other reasons to believe the opposite.' Fortunately, as I said, I had read a lot about insulin and in my reading I had read about an impurity that the early people who had started purifying insulin – in the United States, after it was discovered – had found as an impurity, and they had shown that this impurity could be removed when you crystallised insulin according to a rather complicated technique, developed by a man called Abel. And so crystalline insulin did not contain this hypoglycaemic impurity.

Well, in the meantime, a man called Scott... at Lilly... the Lilly Research Labs, a man called Scott had discovered a much simpler way for crystallising insulin with zinc... making crystalline insulin by a much easier method, and this method was adopted by Lilly to make their... their insulin. Lilly, or course, were the major producers of insulin in the world at that time, in the United States in particular. And without their knowledge, glucagon, which was the impurity that had been eliminated, and had, in fact, been studied by a man called Kramer in Germany... glucagon came back into crystalline insulin – that is, the zinc method of crystallising insulin did not remove glucagon – and so, unbeknownst to the experts who are using the insulin, this impurity had returned. And having read a lot about it, I came to the conclusion... because there was evidence in the literature, I came to the conclusion that this effect that Mr Bridge had found was not due to the insulin he used but to contaminating glucagon. And in the book that I wrote during the war, I even gave that as a possible explanation, but I couldn't do any research. But the day... the day we were liberated, I must say, I celebrated, but the next day I went to the American army to find an American army doctor and asked him whether he could provide me with a couple of vials of Lilly insulin. And he gave it to me; I don't know how he did, but he did. And so I went back to the lab. I still had... I had some of the Danish insulin... Novo insulin that I used... had used for my work, and so with a young man called Gerry Hers, who stayed with me all his life after that, we were still able to get a couple of rabbits, because the keeper of the physiology institute kept a few rabbits because they could be fed with the grass from the garden and they could be eaten. During the war that was quite useful. So there were rabbits, and I will always remember the day when we injected this Lilly insulin into the rabbits and got evidence of a hypoglycaemic effect. And so my first discovery was really a re-discovery... a re-discovery of glucagon, and eventually this was published and came to be known. And so what Cori was alluding to was, in fact, this re-discovery that I had made, and so I was... I was accepted and went to spend three months only... September, October, November... four months.... four months in the... the Cori lab at that time.

It was very hot and humid – that I remember very well; my wife remembers it even more than I do. But it was a very exciting time for two reasons. One was that Carl and Gerty got a wire from Stockholm saying that they had just been awarded the Nobel Prize for their discovery of glycogen phosphorylase. And that, of course, was very exciting, and we became the Nobel experts to... to help them, because when we were in Stockholm we had been invited to the Nobel ceremony, and Theorell was a member of the committee, and so he got us invited with the students there; so we had... we had seen this fantastic display when the prize is given, we had participated in the banquet and the dance and so on – it was all very exciting – and when we came out at two o'clock in the morning from the... the Stadshus, the town hall in Stockholm, it was bitterly cold... it was freezingly cold and we had to wait for our bus to get back to our apartment and my wife shivered. She said, 'Oh, I wish... I wish I had a fur coat.' And I said, 'You will get a fur coat when I get a Nobel Prize.' Well, she got the fur coat. Anyway, at that time it was a joke of course. So... back to Washington University, to St. Louis, so we were the experts and my wife Janine was the advisor for Gerty who was really not very much concerned about... about her dresses or... she told her how to dress and so on. So that was one exciting thing, and the other exciting thing was that I spent four hectic months with Earl Sutherland actually demonstrating that glucagon is manufactured by the alpha cells of the islets of Langerhans; the beta cells make insulin. The alpha cells, we demonstrated, make glucagon, and we came to the conclusion that glucagon is probably another hormone made by the eyelet cells – the pancreatic eyelet cells – and that turned out to be true. So it was a somewhat important piece of work that we did together and I enjoyed working with Earl Sutherland tremendously; he was a very, very interesting personality. He was very different from me; he was a pragmatist essentially... I mean, he would never reason too much – he would just follow the trail, and this, in fact, is why he got a Nobel Prize in 1971, because at that time we were both interested in trying to understand the mechanism of action of glucagon also... is another piece of work that did. And I tried every possible explanation, and did experiments which were always negative, and Earl immediately hit on the right explanation; he measured phosphorylase. He measured phosphorylase and found that it increased with glucagon and epinephrine went down... the absence. And I had decided that it could not be phosphorylase because, at that time, phosphorylase was believed to be the enzyme involved both in the synthesis of glycogen and in the breakdown of glycogen, and I had learnt with my chemistry courses that a catalyst does not change the equilibrium of a reaction and therefore increasing the catalyst was not going to change the equilibrium of the reaction. Of course, that's where Earl... he was not embarrassed with such considerations, and so he found the right explanation. And the explanation was right because it turns out that phosphorylase is not involved in the synthesis of glycogen, it is only involved in breakdown, and as Luis Leloir discovered... another Cori pupil, discovered... Nobel Prize for that also; Luis Leloir discovered it's a special glycogen synthesise that is involved... using UDPG as donor of the glucose in groups, that are incorporated into... into glycogen.

12 years. 12 years from the moment I entered university in 1934 and the moment... Did I say 12 years? 14... 13 years... December 1947, when I came back... January 1948, actually – came back to Louvain where, in the meantime, I had been appointed a lecturer... Chargé de cours, as we call it, in biochemistry at the medical faculty. Now, strangely enough I had got the job even though I was not the nephew of a bishop or the son of a professor. But it turns out that the Professor of Biochemistry – a man called Malengreau who was an organic chemist, as I said – had had... had lost interest in biochemistry, or even in organic chemistry, because he'd become involved in medical education, in what was then the Belgian Congo, so he started... he was very much involved in that, and he had a young man who was supposed to... to succeed him, as a Professor of Biochemistry at the university, and this young man was a victim of the war, not... in fact, he died of tuberculosis during the war, and so, again, this rather sad accident opened the job, and so the Professor of Biochemistry called my physiology professor and said, 'I understand de Duve is training in biochemistry; the job is open for him.' And so I got appointed.

I had spent, I would say, 12 or 13 years preparing to actually do what I thought was going to be the major piece of research, the major discovery I was going to make: elucidate the mechanism of action of insulin. I started a very small group at the university. I was given a lab; I was given a budget that was the equivalent, at that time, of something like $200 a year, which wasn't much. So I had to go back again to St. Louis. When I was there, first of all, I was never able to have, with the Coris, the kind of conversation I wanted to have, so I never converted them to the right theory, although they eventually... of course, we all agreed, and they became great friends; there was no problem about that. But they were supported in their work by Lilly... Eli Lilly and Company, which were established not too far in Indianapolis, in Indiana, and had a big program of... of research support. They supported research on insulin in a number of labs and so, while I was in St. Louis, I... I went to visit the Lilly company, and I was a little embarrassed because, in fact, what I had demonstrated was that their insulin was no good. But, in fact, they took it very well. In fact, they were the first to actually crystallise glucagon and to establish its... its amino acid sequence, so... And what was more important, they actually gave me a grant. Which, for that time and for Belgium, was a huge amount of money: $5,000 a year.

And with that amount of money I was able to start my lab. But I had no equipment... I had no equipment, and when I went to see the rector of the university who was a bishop, I said I needed so much money for equipment: 'I need a cold room; I need a spectrophotometer; I need a few balances; I need a good centrifuge; glass wear...' It was nothing. So he said, 'But where do you think I am going to find the money?' All right, well, I had to go back to my trip in the United States again. When I applied for the job to go to Coris' lab, I had applied for a fellowship, and this was a Belgian fellowship from some organisation called the Belgian American Educational Foundation, and they refused to give me the fellowship so, again, I was devastated. And Theorell said, 'Never mind; there's a man called Gerry Pomerat who's coming to visit me next week. He's from the Rockefeller Foundation and he supports my lab.' And so I met Gerry Pomerat, and the outcome was that I got a fellowship from the Rockefeller Foundation. And so, before leaving the United States, I went to see this man in Europe, Pomerat, and I said, 'I need money for my lab, to equip it.' And he said, 'No way, we don't equip labs; we support research – it's up to the institution to provide the support.' I said, 'Would you put that in writing?' And so, when I had my discussion with the rector of the university, I took out this letter; I said, 'Listen, I can get all that money if you give me what I want.' Result of this blackmail was I got the basic equipment I needed – the cold room, the spectrophotometer, the centrifuge, etc. And so I was able to start a small lab, and with four young people – the young man Hers, Gerry Hers, who... with whom I had done this work on the glucagon, just after the war, and had come back to work with me, and two medical students – one called Jacques Berthet, and his future wife, Lucie Dupret – and together we started on our first piece of research.

And that piece of research, I had decided, was to characterise a phosphatase that the Coris had described. I don't have to tell you that when glycogen is broken down it is first broken down by phosphorylase into glucose 1-phosphate. Glucose 1-phosphate is converted by an enzyme called phosphoglucomutase into glucose 6-phosphate and then the glucose is released by splitting of glucose phosphate by this phosphatase. Well, the Coris didn't know whether the phosphatase acted on glucose 1 or on glucose 6, so I decided we would go after that, because this was a specific liver enzyme, and it was an enzyme that could possibly interfere with the action of insulin because insulin... I mean, glucose is converted to glucose 6-phosphate when... when it is taken up, and so the phosphatase could eventually antagonise this action of insulin. Well, we did discover that the enzyme was specific for glucose 6-phosphate – had no effect on glucose 1-phosphate – and that was our first little discovery; nothing really very earth shattering, just... it was just simple... simple enzymology, but simple enzymology in those days was a little different from what it was... what it is today. There was no Sigma companies; the Sigma Company, I have to explain, is one of the many companies today that make biological chemicals for use in the lab. Sigma Company, which was, in fact, started in St. Louis – I think in connection with the Cori lab – and so we had to make our reagents ourselves; so we needed glucose 1-phosphate and we needed glucose 6-phosphate. Well, to make glucose 1-phosphate we had to take a potato extract and add phosphate, and the phosphorylase in the potato extract would convert starch into glucose 1-phosphate. Then we had to purify and crystallise the glucose 1-phosphate, out of this mess, using the techniques that the Coris had worked out, because, as you know, glucose 1-phosphate was discovered by the Coris – it's known as the Cori-ester, or it was known as the Cori-ester. And then, to make glucose 6-phosphate, we had to take a couple of rabbits, remove their muscles, and purify from those muscles an enzyme which the Coris had also isolated, called phosphoglucosemutase. We had to make the crystal in its enzyme and then we would take part of our glucose 1-phosphate and this enzyme; the enzyme would convert 95% of the glucose 1 into glucose 6 and so we had to purify the glucose 6-phosphate, and, finally, having done all that, we could just find out whether our enzyme would act on the glucose 1 or glucose 6 or on both. Okay, so it was fun – I can tell you it was fun – but it took time.

Then we had to purify the enzyme. Well, in those days, there were not so many techniques for purifying protein enzymes and one of the simplest techniques was what is known as isoelectric precipitation, which takes advantage of the fact that proteins are least soluble when their electric charge is zero. And so you acidify the medium and you reach a pH where many proteins will precipitate because of this lack of electric charge. And so at pH five we got a big precipitate and our enzyme was there in the precipitate. So that was the first step: a very dirty precipitate, obviously. And so the next step was, of course... if this was isoelectric precipitation, was to re-dissolve the enzyme and try something else, like ammonium sulphate precipitation or alcohol precipitation which were the only techniques available at that time. Chromatography was not known yet, or at least not for proteins. And so we took our precipitate, changed the pH back to seven; enzyme would not re-dissolve. So this was not the reversible kind of reaction that you have with iso-electro precipitation; this was an irreversible agglutination, which implied that the enzyme was probably associated with some kind of cell structure. It so happens that on my return from the United States... some time before that, I had visited a few labs and I had visited the best: the discoverer of insulin in Toronto; I had visited a man called Levine in Chicago because he'd worked on insulin and liver; I'd visited Lipmann in Boston because he was one of my heroes – Lipmann the father of bioenergetics. I was so impressed with this work, and I found it so beautiful I went to see him. You know, amazingly, I wouldn't do this anymore... today; a young student would come to me and say, 'I want to see you because I admire you'; I would say, 'Well I have more interesting or important things to do.' No, he actually... he saw me, talked with me, even invited me and my wife to a Chinese restaurant. So I had a lovely time in Boston – finally ended up in New York where I went to the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research.

Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research was, of course, a sort of legendary institution: the most famous research institute in the field of biology and medicine in the world; even at that time it had already something like a dozen Nobel Prize winners on its staff, or having been on its staff. It was... it was the site where many important discoveries were made, and I just wanted to... it was known... it was known from the literature that... Martin Arrowsmith [sic], which was a very famous book by Sinclair Lewis – was all about the Rockefeller Institute. Microbe Hunters – another famous book at that time by a man, Paul de Kruif... named Paul de Kruif... also he was actually associated with an institute... anyway, it was a dream place, and so I had to go and visit it. And I had another reason to visit the Rockefeller: namely that I had a countryman who was working there and had been working there for 20 years. This countryman was Albert Claude. And Albert Claude... I could spend two hours speaking about Albert Claude – an extraordinary colourful personality. He... he was born in a small village in the Belgian Ardennes and left school at the age of ten, to work in a factory, because of family reasons. And during the First World War he became involved in... in war... work... that is, he worked for the British Intelligence Service, actually, in occupied Belgium and had several... several medals and decorations, so when the war finished, there was a law... was enacted in Belgium mostly for young people who had to interrupt their schooling because of the war – they would be allowed to enter university without a final high school diploma. And Albert Claude took advantage of that law to enter... to apply to the University of Liège, to enter medical school at the University of Liège, and in fact he hardly had got to primary school that time. He was very worried about that because he thought the courses were given in Latin at the university. Anyway, amazingly, he got his MD degree, got a fellowship or scholarship to go and work in Germany in a lab... I forget the name of the head of that lab, but the man who had found that cancer was due to some kind of microbe, to a bacteria. And he was the director of the lab and the first thing Albert Claude did when he went there was to prove his boss wrong, so that this bacterium was just due to contamination or whatever. So he was expelled from the lab and went to work with Albert Fisher who was expert – the man who just started cell culture. And so after that Claude came back to Belgium, and he was even more naive than I am. He wrote a letter to Flexner who was the director of the Rockefeller institute and said, 'I want to work on the virus discovered by... by Rous – the sarcoma, the first virus known to cause a tumour... Peyton Rous, at Rockefeller, and I want to purify that virus, and I have decided that the best place for me to do this work is the Rockefeller Institute, so I'm applying.' Just like that.

Well, amazingly, he was accepted and went to work with Murphy, and in the course of his attempts to purify the virus he discovered what he called microsomes – that is, one of the techniques that he used to purify the virus was centrifugation at high speed; the particles would come down, and so, being a good scientist, he had done some control experiments and used... this was chicken virus, so he used chicken tissues that had not been contaminated with the virus, subjected them to the same centrifugal procedure, and found exactly the same kind of chemical precipitates. So he found that cells did contain material that would come down the centrifuge, just like the virus did, and so he called those the microsomes. And one thing leading to another, he developed the technique of centrifugal fractionation. This was a technique whereby cells – mostly liver cells at that time – would be ground in a rather careful way so that the cells would be disrupted but the intercellular components would not be injured too much, and then, from this so-called... homogenous extract, as he called it... he would separate four fractions by centrifugation at increasing velocities and the heaviest fraction would contain most of the nuclei. Then would come the large granules which contained mostly mitochondria; then would come the small granules which were the microsomes that he'd called, leaving a final supernatant. That was a technique that he had developed at that time and he had begun with Roland Hotchkiss at the university... sorry, Rockefeller Institute, to analyse these fractions for enzymes.

He had done also something else; he'd tried to develop techniques so that he could look at cells with the electron microscope. So in addition to the centrifugation techniques, he developed techniques for thin slicing... for embedding thin slicing of material to look at with an electron microscope which, at that time of course, was already in use – not at the institute but by some company in New York, not at all for biological purposes but for looking at metals. And in this work Claude had become helped by a man called Keith Porter who has become... who became one of the most famous electron microscopists in the United States, and also by a young... young Romanian... man from Romania called George Palade. And so I went to visit Claude – he was another one of my heroes, of course, at that time – and he was very kind, told me about his work and showed me, and at some moment he said, 'There's a young man here that I would like you to meet', and this young man was George Palade, and later in the story, of course, I will mention how Claude, Palade and I ended up sharing the 1974 Nobel Prize in medicine. But, of course, at that time I didn't know that this was going to happen. Anyway, I knew about Claude's technique and so, coming back to my experience with glucose 6-phosphatase, I decided, from the work of Albert Claude, that this agglutination of the particles containing the enzyme meant, of course, that it... it was bound for some kind of particle, and so I decided, well, would it be worth our while to apply the Claude technique to find out where this enzyme is situated? And it was touch and go, because this was quite an investment of time and effort to develop the technique in the lab, and was it worth the investment, just to know something about where this enzyme is? And so I decided, well, if this enzyme interferes with the action of insulin maybe... maybe it would be important to know where, actually, it is in the cell, so let's do it. And fortunately I had an extremely able co-worker, Jacques Berthet, who has helped me in much of the work, and he was largely involved in reading the literature on this topic and developing the techniques in the lab so that eventually we could use them. And also Claude had returned to Belgium by that time so that I could ask him for advice. I was never a student or a pupil of Claude, but we did get advice from him.

On December 16 1949, we did our first fractionation experiment. And that experiment revealed that glucose 6-phosphatase, the enzyme we were interested in, was most probably situated... associated with the micro salts. I mean, a large fraction of the activity came down with the microsomal fraction and the rest could be explained by contamination. It was a very crude technique obviously. So we had... this in fact was not unimportant because microsomes were under discussion at that time; not everyone believed them to... to actually be a true cell... well, they were a true cell component, but an individual cell component – they thought it might be pieces of mitochondria. So that... this more or less established the microsomes as a bona fide cell component. Now, it turns out that in doing the biochemical work we had differentiated... distinguished glucose 6-phosphatase... the specific glucose 6-phosphatase from an unspecific enzyme that's also present in liver and has more acid pH optimum – glucose 6-phosphatase is an optimum pH six, and the one I'm talking about, acid phosphatase, has a optimum of pH five and is very unspecific ... acts on all sorts of components including glucose 1, glucose 6-phosphates, but also better glycerol phosphate, phenyl phosphate and others. We had no interest in acid phosphatase except showing that it was not glucose 6-phosphate. But having the techniques, we decided, well, why not analyse the fractions for acid phosphatase as well? Didn't cost much and here... here came, of course, the surprise. I still remember... I can see Jacques Berthet and his future wife, Lucie, coming to my office, ten o'clock at night, crestfallen. We blew it, was the message. We got some results and they make no sense. They made no sense in two ways. Basically, they had found only about one... 10% of the activity they expected to find. We had done this many times – we knew how much activity there was in a liver homogenate – and they had found about 10% of what they should have found. And when they added up the activities founded in the four fractions, they amounted to 200% – twice the amount – so the recovery was 200%. So it made no sense and they were very, very sorry. And I said, 'Never mind, it's too late... it's too late now to do anything about it; just put the fractions in the refrigerator. Next week we'll assay them again and we'll use fresh reagents just to make sure because, obviously, something has gone wrong.'

So the next week, a couple of days before Christmas actually, they assayed the fractions again; they assayed them with new reagents, fresh reagents, but also with the old reagents to find out what was wrong. Well, there was nothing wrong with the old reagents – they got exactly the same results with the two reagents – but now suddenly the enzyme was there; in the homogenate there was the amount they expected, the recovery was fairly satisfactory, and there was more enzyme in all the fractions but mostly in the mitochondrial fraction. There was a huge increase of activity in the mitochondrial fraction. And I guess this is where my training by the Jesuits helped. I had been taught to reason logically and so I looked at those results and I said to myself... we looked, because we were discussing, and I said, 'Well, what do we have here? We have an enzyme that is hidden and an enzyme that is mostly associated with sedimentable particles with mitochondrias, as we called them at that time. So maybe the two are related? Maybe latency being hidden is related to sedimentability? Let's find out.' So I said, 'Centrifuge that fraction... that end fraction in which you now found so much activity.' They centrifuged it and, yes, the enzyme was no longer sedimentable; it was in the supernated, inactive. So I said, 'Well, that's... that's too exciting; I have to understand what's happening. Let's put insulin on the back burner and let's concentrate on this little problem; we'll get the explanation very quickly' – at least I thought so. Indeed, very quickly we found the explanation, simply by taking isolated particles and subjecting them to various treatments that would injure them. There's very mechanical grinding in a waring blender, a kitchen blender, or osmotic, we put them in distilled water, we could freeze them and thaw them a number of times and so on. In each case the enzyme would become free... would be free and active. And the long and short of the story was that all this could be explained by assuming that the enzyme was inside a little bag, surrounded by a membrane, and that as long as the membrane was intact, the enzyme would remain inside the bag and the substrate, which we added beta glycerol phosphate to assay the enzyme, would remain outside. They would not be able to interact. If we tore the membrane, one way or another, enzyme would come out, substrate would get in, and we'd get the activity, and so that was the explanation. Having solved the problem I could have gone back to insulin which was on the black burner... on the back burner, sorry. But in the meantime I had attended a meeting in Paris, the 2nd Biochemistry Congress – 1951, I guess; yes, '51.

In 1951 I attended the 2nd International Biochemistry Congress in Paris and presented my results there, and, after the meeting, a young Englishman called PG Walker came and explained to me that he'd obtained very similar results with another enzyme called beta glucuronidase, and so we discussed and felt that perhaps it would be interesting to compare the two enzymes, and it was a question of whether it would be done... the work would be done in his lab or in my lab. Finally we ended up agreeing that the work would be done in Louvain and he would provide some technical advice as to how to assay beta glucuronidase – again this was pre-Sigma days. And by that time I... my lab had begun to be a little known and a young man had joined us from Montreal, Robert Gianetto, a French Canadian, and I never knew whether he wanted to work with me or whether he wanted to race pigeons, because Belgium was very well known as a pigeon racing centre and he was, well, an ardent enthusiastic pigeon racer. Anyway, he was put on the problem, and with the advice of PG Walker, he worked out the technique for assaying beta glucuronidase and, as I said, this was again pre-Sigma days, so actually the technique was to take rabbits and inject them with phenolphthalein. Phenolphthalein is a dye that becomes red in alkaline medium and is used for crude pH measurements; it's colourless at the neutral pH and becomes red in an alkaline medium.

And so we injected this dye to the rabbits. Now, it turns out that the liver in most animals, including ours, will convert many foreign substances that are injected in the bloodstream... will convert them... or even some normal substances to the glucuronides which is... which are compounds in which glucuronic acid, which is derived from glucose but is an acid, of course, is attached to the compound by glycosidic bond, so it's a glucuronyl... a better glucuronyl compound X. And these glucuronides are then excreted in the urine. That's the way we detoxicate a number of substances: to solurilise them we combine them to glucuronic acid and then the compound is eliminated in the urine. And so these rabbits would detoxicate the phenolphthalein with glucuronide, and... glucuronic acid, and they would excrete in their urines phenolphthalein glucuronide, the compound. I still see those... you know, urine has a tendency to become alkaline because of the production of ammonia, and so red... red... so their cages were covered with red urine. Anyway, we collected the urine and from the urine isolated the glucuronide and the glucuronide was used as substrate to assay the enzymes. Again, it was quite a job and that's very easy. Once you have the glucuronide, all you have to do is to... to incubate with the enzyme; then you add some alkaline, and then you measure the red colour, because a free phenolphthalein reacts with alkaline – becomes red – but the glucuronide remains colourless, so it is very easy. Nowadays this is done not with phenolphthalein but with methyl-umbelliferone derivative which can be assayed by its ultra violet absorption. Anyway, that's... Gianetto did that, and we compared acid phosphatase with beta glucuronidase, and indeed it behaved, essentially, in the same way. Not exactly... there was a problem... there was more enzyme in the microsomal fraction, but that's a different story. But basically what came down with the mitochondria would come out together with acid phosphatase... it was latent; would come out together with acid phosphatase. When we released one, we released the other.

We had begun to be really quite fascinated – at least I – with this problem, and so another young man came to join us; he's a man called Berton Pressman. He was an American and he came from a famous lab in Madison, Wisconsin, directed by Henry Lardy – still alive, I think, a very good biochemist – and Berton Pressman had... he was rather a brash young man with not the best of manners, I might say. And so he came to the lab; the first thing he said was: ‘You do this wrong, you do that wrong.’ And he started to change the way we prepared distilled water, the way we measure pH, and so on. But he was a good biochemist and so he measured another enzyme that, this time, I had found in the literature could possibly also behave in the same manner as I mentioned. And that enzyme was cathepsin D, a proteolytic enzyme. And, again, it showed the same properties of latency as the other, so we had three enzymes. Now, I have to go back to the actual fractionation, and maybe this is a good point... a good time to mention something that I forgot to mention when I discussed the techniques. That is: we did not exactly follow Claude's techniques because in the meantime his technique had been modified by a young American co-worker called Walter Schneider. Actually, Walter Schneider and another American biochemist, George Hogeboom, had worked with Claude – they were some of this first co-workers at the Rockefeller – and when they left Rockefeller they had been the main pioneers in the United States and, in fact, in the world of the application of centrifugal fractionation to the study of the localisation of enzymes, basically in liver at that time. George Hogeboom unfortunately died quite young, I think – in '56 or something like that – because he was an extremely gifted investigator and I'm sure he would have done wonders. But they were really the experts in the field and they had changed... Walter Schneider had actually changed Claude's technique; they had introduced isotonic sucrose as medium instead of the saline that was used by Claude, which was very useful because saline was... caused the agglutination of the particles much more than the sucrose and then they also introduced a more... a more gentle and more efficient grinding technique using the homogeniser... the cylindrical glass homogeniser that had been developed at Wisconsin by Potter... Potter and Elvehjem. So that's what the technique that we used at that time, and I'm mentioning this because Hogeboom and Schneider had started several years earlier, studying quite a number of enzymes, so by the time we were doing our work we already knew about some results of various enzymes, and you will see that this is important.

The technique that was developed by Hogeboom and Schneider was really the same as Claude's but adapted to the new medium, sucrose, but, essentially, it involved separation of four fractions: nuclear fraction; the mitochondrial fraction; the microsomal fraction; and the supernatant. And when we looked at the results of our own fractionation results, with acid phosphatase and later with beta glucuronidase, we were puzzled or embarrassed by the fact that only about two thirds of the activity of those enzymes was recovered with the mitochondria. And almost one third came down with the microsomes. Now that finding had three possible explanations. You see the Jesuit logic coming back; it's the only thing that helped me in research because I wasn't very good with my hands and I wasn't very good with instruments or techniques, and many of my co-workers were very helpful in this respect. I loved using my hands but I wasn't very skilled.

There were three possible explanations. The first one was that we were doing something wrong and that part of the mitochondria failed to come down with the mitochondrial fraction or that we removed them when we decanted and came down with the microsomes. Second possibility: it just happens to be so that there is some acid phosphatase in the mitochondria and some acid phosphatase in the microsomes; and many other investigators had just taken that as a reasonable explanation for other findings of the same kind. And being simple minded and single minded I thought, well, there could be a third explanation: namely that acid phosphatase is not present in the mitochondria, is not present in the lysosomes, but is present in another particle that happens to be such that two thirds of it comes down with the mitochondria and one third with the microsomes. And... so in order to distinguish between these three explanations, we started... well, first of all we compared the distribution of our enzymes with those of enzymes of known localisation and here's where we come back to Hogeboom and Schneider, in fact even to Claude, because that was already, to some extent, established by... by him earlier. The respiratory enzyme... the enzyme responsible for the uptake utilisation of oxygen in the liver and elsewhere was shown to be exclusively associated with the mitochondria; this had been... cytochrome oxidase as it is now known, the so-called 'atmungsenzyme' respiratory enzyme, as it was named by Otto Warburg, who came before in this story as the mentor of my mentor, Hugo Theorell.

So we had... we knew of an enzyme that was exclusively associated with mitochondria; from our own work we knew of an enzyme that was almost, certainly exclusively associated with microsomes – glucose 6-phosphatase. And so the idea came to me to use those enzymes as markers, and that really became a key... a key step or a key notion in our approach to these problems. The use of marker enzymes to tell us where the particle... the host particles of the enzymes were. So using cytochrome oxidase we knew about mitochondria; assaying glucose 6-phosphatase we would know about microsomes. And so we did experiments in which we used the standard four-fraction scheme and compared the distribution of cytochrome oxidase, acid phosphatase and glucose 6-phosphatase. There was nothing wrong with our technique. Cytochrome oxidase behaved exactly as we expected and so the extra amount of acid phosphatase in the microsomal fraction could not be ascribed to mitochondria that had somehow moved from one fraction to the other. So the technique was okay; so now we were left with two explanations. Dual localisation or single localisation? Now, I think already I had at that time... I had a sort of prejudice in favour of single localisation because we had two examples: cytochrome oxidase – single localisation in mitochondria; glucose 6-phosphatase – single localisation in microsomes. But nevertheless, of course, we were open minded, and what we did was to start varying techniques to find out whether we could, by changing the centrifugation protocol, establish more clearly... or distinguish more clearly between the two... the two explanations. But here again, you know, in this story... I forget to tell you, but serendipity, chance, comes in all the time. I mean, if I can have some credit it is for making use of it, but without serendipity we would not have made the discoveries we made. And one of the... one of the serendipitous happenings was the centrifuge breaking down, and there was a young medical student Françoise Appelmans, who was working with us at that time, and she was... her job was to prepare the mitochondrial fractions by centrifugation that were used for all these latency experiments... studying how enzymes would be released from the particles. And so she came back to... she was crestfallen and said, ‘Centrifuge has broken down; I can't do the work.’ And so I said, ‘Well, never mind, I think we can get enough material by using a lower power... lower power centrifuge; we won't get all but we'll get... we'll get enough to do the experiments. And, well, we didn't. We got a nice sediment but there was almost no acid phosphatase or glucuronidase in the sediment because the centrifuge that we had used wasn't powerful enough to bring down those smaller particles. So this was the first hint that the enzyme may be in a smaller particle, and then we changed the scheme, the centrifugation scheme, and eventually hit upon a five-fraction scheme. Almost the same as the four-fraction scheme except that between the main mitochondrial fraction and the main microsomal fraction, which contained the bulk of cytochrome oxidase on one hand, the bulk of glucose 6-phosphatase on the other... when I say bulk, I mean 80%. We isolated a small fraction in between – an intermediary fraction we called L at that time – for light mitochondria. Contained only about 5% of the total nitrogen, the total protein, but it contained 50% of acid phosphatase. So now we had three peaks: one for cytochrome oxidase; one for acid phosphatase; and one for glucose 6-phosphatase. So the evidence was clear, acid phosphatase belonged neither to the mitochondria nor to the microsomes but it belongs to some unknown particle that has centrifugation... sedimentation properties such that it sediments at somewhat higher speeds, mostly, than the mitochondria, but lower speeds than the microsomes.

Well... so we had arrived at a conclusion that acid phosphatase belonged to a different kind of particle – an unknown... a new kind of particle – and we had established a new five-fraction scheme whereby at least analytically... not preparatively, but analytically, such a localisation could be ascertained. And so we decided, well, let's go and look at all the enzymes that have been reported in the literature as coming down partly with the mitochondria and partly with the microsomes. And there were about 50 enzymes... had already been studied, largely by Hogeboom and Schneider whom I mentioned, and so we went and spotted about a dozen enzymes that seemed to be worthy of... of study. By that time I had been joined by... well, no, I mentioned Berton Pressman before. Berton Pressman helped us a great deal in measuring cytochrome oxidase, actually. Because here again you had to purify cytochrome C first from horse heart before you could measure the oxidase. Then a number of other enzymes were studied, involving so-called DPN and TPN, diphospho puridene nucleotide and triphospho puridene nucleotide, which are now known as ADP adenoside... no not ADP... NAD, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, and NADP, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, and so we studied enzymes that would reduce these compounds which are important coenzymes and, again, here we had to get some mutton liver, sheep liver, and extract those coenzymes before, so it's an awful smell. So extract those coenzymes from boiled liver tissue and so on, but eventually we ended up with having measured about 12 enzymes; of those 12 about half turned out to be uninteresting, from our point of view – mostly they seemed to be truly partly associated with mitochondria and partly with microsomes, so no single location there. But five enzymes... or six enzymes turned out to show a significant peak in this intermediary fraction. I've already... and they included, of course, acid phosphatase, on which we'd done our first work. They included beta glucuronidase, which my friend Gianetto had worked on; they included a cathepsin protease which Berton Pressman also had worked on; and they included two nucleases, ribonuclease and deoxyribonuclease. Both being enzymes acting on DNA and RNA but with an acid pH optimum, contrary to some of the other enzymes of that kind that are known. And so, in addition to the centrifugation experiments, we also did latency experiments and all those five enzymes turned out to behave in the same way. When we injured the membrane of the particles, if we got, let's say, 60% of the acid phosphatase out we would get between 55 and 65% of the other four enzymes out at the same time, so they centrifuged together, they came out together, they showed the same latency properties, so, presumably, they were all associated with the same kind of particle.

I mentioned a sixth enzyme. The sixth enzyme was not like the other five; a hydrolytic enzyme, it had not... no... no acid pH optimum and it wasn't latent. And this was what was called, at that time, uricase. Uricase is really... it's an oxidising enzyme... it's urate oxidase; it oxidises uric acid, producing hydrogen peroxide – it converts oxygen to hydrogen peroxide with hydrogen removed from... from urate – and this enzyme, also, turned out to have the same localisation in the centrifuge... the fractions... the centrifugal fractions. So urate oxidase was a question mark, but the other five seemed clearly to be together in the same kind of particle, and we are now in 1955. In addition to Pressman and Gianetto, two Belgian co-workers were associated with this work: this young lady, Françoise Appelmans, who I mentioned before, was a medical student; Robert Wattiaux, who was another medical student. And so, looking at those results, I said, 'Well, finding together in the same kind of membrane limited sac-like particle enzymes that hydrolyse RNA, DNA, proteins, phosphate esters and glycosidic compounds – such a mixture can have only one physiological function, which is digestion.' Because it acts on two different substrates or two many different substrates, only a digestive system would have to... just like our stomach or our intestine, has to handle all kinds of natural compounds at the same time. And so I came to the conclusion this new particle must have a digestive function; let us call it lysosome. Now this was a... this was a memory of my classical studies, learning Greek, and lys... lyso came from the Greek luien [sic], which means 'cut in pieces', and, of course, it's the same word in analysis, and so on. Soma is 'body', and so lysosome meant, in my mind, lytic digestive body. That was a tremendously unfortunate mistake, because by the time I invented that word, Alexander Fleming, the man who discovered penicillin... Alexander Fleming had, much earlier in the '20s, discovered a compound that would kill bacteria – it turned out to be an enzyme that acts on the bacterial cell wall – and Fleming had called this substance lysozyme, a lytic enzyme, and stupidly I decided, well, biochemists must be sufficiently educated to know the difference between soma – body – and zume – yeast – which is the Greek root of the word enzyme. I was sadly mistaken in doing that, and so even today I am still sometimes given credit due to Alexander Fleming as having discovered lysozyme. But too late to change and the word lysosome has found its way into textbooks... cell biology textbooks, and, of course, much is now known about them.

And so that was the discovery of lysosomes, which I have tried to explain, and the paper was published in August 1955 in the Biochemical Journal by de Duve, Pressman, Gianetto, Appelmans and Wattiaux. Now this is one of the only papers in which I put my name first. Because most of the papers published from my group, I always put my name at the end and gave first authorship to the students or the co-workers who'd done the most important work. But in this paper, I remember clearly discussing with my... with my colleagues, and I said, 'Well, I think I have to take responsibility because this is... this is putting ourselves on a limb, and I... I think I want to...' Frankly, I think I'm being honest in saying that. I wasn't trying to take the credit; I just wanted to say, 'Well, this is a risky thing... this is a thing that I'm responsible for', and so I put my name first. That was the lysosome. And just a word about the uricase. In the original paper we said either uricase is in the membrane of the lysosomes, which explains why it is not latent and does not have an acid pH optimum – because I forgot to mention this, of course: the digestive particles were supposed to act... to have an acid inside because all those enzymes required acid, so they were like the cell's stomach, they... they had an acid juice inside... a digestive juice inside. Well, anyway... so with either uricase belongs to the membrane or it belongs to yet another particle that... that has similar sedimentation properties, so it cannot be separated from the lysosomes by sedimentation. Well, I think I will come... come back to that later, because that was, of course, the major second discovery that we made, but in the meantime a little more should be said about the lysosomes.

Immediately, of course, the idea came to us that lysosomes were in fact the cell's stomach – that they were a digestive... a digestive organelle – and that substances were digested in the lysosomes. Where they came from is a different story, and I should say that, at the time we made that discovery, I was amazingly ignorant of cell biology. All I knew was a little biochemistry and the field that really interested me was bioenergetics. I've mentioned Lipmann as one of my heroes and the early work on mitochondria was absolutely fascinating to me, and to understand the mechanism of oxidative phosphorylation, forgetting about insulin for a moment, was to me extraordinarily exciting, and I knew all these people who had worked on this field – Britton Chance and Henry Lardy and Albert Lehninger and Lars Ernster in Sweden, Bill Slater from Australia but working in Holland... I mean, all the people working in this field I was really fascinated with, and in a way a frustration for me was that, whenever I was trying to work on mitochondria, I turned out to be working on something else – first the lysosomes and then the peroxisomes; that we will be talking about later. But, anyway, except for bioenergetics, which is really biochemistry, I was tremendously ignorant of... of cell biology, and so I was very poorly placed, at that time, to try and guess what the function of lysosomes could be. And I remember riding... well, driving my own car but carrying with me a Belgian biochemist from the University of Liège, Marcel Florkin, who was a great expert in the history of biochemistry and in comparative biochemistry, and so when I was driving I was telling him this story and he said, 'Well, maybe your lysosomes,' I'm not sure that I'd named them at that time, 'are vestigial remnants of the digestive vacuoles of protozoa.' And so it comes that I became interested in unicellular protozoa.

Well, I think we had arrived at the possible functions of lysosomes and I was telling you how abysmal my ignorance of cells was. And so I had to take... to start reading a little and found out, to my chagrin, that lysosomes had been known for almost a century, before I so-called discovered them. They had been known, of course, under different names; they were first known as food vacuoles, in protozoa. Protozoa feed with a rather complex mechanism sometimes and then they digest their food into pockets which the old morphologist described as food vacuoles, but really belonged to the lysosome family. And then a man called Ilya Mechnikov, who was a Russian zoologist who, for political reasons, eventually migrated to the Pasteur Institute in France... Mechnikov, who had witnessed the intracellular digestion by... by protozoa but also had seen cells in some small transparent animals that he watched in the microscope... seen cells that, sort of, were chasing after foreign objects, had come to the conclusion that those cells actually acted like the protozoa but they would eat invading bacteria, and that they would be involved in immunity, and he studied... those were mostly white blood cells, and he invented the word phagocytosis, which meant eating by cells. And he described how macrophages and white blood cells would eat bacteria and foreign objects and eventually break them down by what he called cytases. As you know, he got a Nobel Prize for that in 1915 [sic], which he shared with Ehrlich, and then another... other workers – I forget the name now – described a similar mechanism which was the taking up of droplets of fluid by cells, and they called it pinocytosis, which means drinking by cells. And then other workers had described granules of one sort or another, in various kinds of cells, and these granules would stock up with all kinds of different substances; they called them storage granules, and some of these granules... I mean, what was also observed that certain dyes would concentrate in these granules – nutro-red, for instance. Ehrlich had described this uptake of nutro-red which was concentrated in small, little granules in the cells. And so it turns out that all these observations came together under the same heading, uptake, which I called endocytosis eventually and digestion in lysosomes.

And I think the main new thing that came out of our work was that these digestive systems do not exist – only in eating cells, in cells that are professionally involved, like macrophages or white blood cells – in the uptake and destruction of foreign bacteria... foreign materials in general. But that every cell type, even nerve cells and muscle cells, have a digestive system, have lysosomes. And so this really led to the discovery that what in the original protozoa was essentially a function connected with feeding, and digesting of food had been converted into higher organisms into all kinds of different functions. This basic digestive function, the function of taking up, really had specialised functions in different cell types. In the kidney they would be involved in the uptake and digestion of proteins that have passed through the filter in the tubules of the kidney. And so on – in the liver it would be different, in the... in the thyroid lysosomes would be involved in the digestion of thyroxine, the thyroid hormone from the thyroid globulin, and so on and so on. And then the more general function was also discovered, which was important even for cells like muscle cells or nerve cells that hardly are involved in taking up foreign materials and this is a function which I didn't discover but I called it autophagy. I invented a few words in my life; that's probably, again, my classical education. And autophagy is a self-eating by cells – it's a mechanism whereby small bits of the cell are segregated... it's a complex mechanism... are segregated within a membrane and then conveyed to lysosomes for breakdown. So this is autophagy; self-eating is one of the mechanisms whereby cells degrade their own substance and replace it, so it's part of turnover. So autophagy is involved even in cells that do not... do not carry out any sort of endocytosis.

So I would say that, even though there was nothing very original in the discovery of lysosomes, it did lead to a large number of different studies dealing with all kinds of different specialised functions by specialised cells. And I would say this became evident very quickly, and so in 1963, which is only eight years after the word came out, there was a big meeting at Ciba Foundation in what was at the time... the Ciba Foundation in London where a number of experts got together, and I still... when I read that book I still see how quickly this field had developed in... in just a few years. Another aspect of lysosomes that engaged our attention very early was their involvement in pathology, in cell injury, and the first thing that came to my mind was that if in the cell the membrane that surrounds these little pockets would become injured, for one reason or another, then those highly caustic juices that are inside the lysosome, acid plus all those enzymes, would be discharged into the cell and cause tremendous damage, and so I even called them suicide bags, which was an unfortunate name, because some people decided that I believed that to be their function. No: function of lysosomes mostly is not to help the cells to commit suicide, but they could have become involved in injuries that were caused by... the injuries to the membranes inside the cells.

Another kind of a pathological implication would be if, by any chance, the cells would discharge the contents of their lysosomes outside, in the extra cellular fluid. Now cells don't do that normally. Protozoa do that – that is, single-celled organisms have a mechanism that was described, a century ago or more, as cellular defecation. That is, they digest food in their food vacuoles and then the residues of digestion are simply released into the medium by a mechanism that is also involved in secretion, called exocytosis, and that was originally described as cellular defecation. Now, as I sometimes say, our cells... they cannot defecate, they are chronically constipated, so whatever gets into the lysosomes can’t get out unless it is being broken down. We will see in a minute how important that is. And the reason why they are constipated, I think, is readily explained by natural selection. I have become very involved or very interested in evolution recently and this is a good example of natural selection. Cells that live singly in the ocean or in a pond can afford to discharge the contents of their own lysosomes outside, but cells that live in an organism can't do that, because what they discharge is going to injure collagen fibres and exocellular structures and so on. So that... that explains, at least to me, the state of constipation. But pathologically or sometimes physiologically this kind of mechanism may still be involved, and one of my co-workers here in Belgium, Gilbert Vaes, has spent much of his... well, a good part of his time studying the mechanism of bone remodelling, and bone remodelling involves the destruction of bone tissue by cells called osteoclasts, and the rebuilding of new bone tissue by cells called osteoblasts, and what he found is that osteoclasts actually do secrete the contents of their lysosomes outside. They are not chronically constipated and this acid juice – digestive juice – that they secrete will act to attack the... the structures of the bone tissue, the acid being very useful in dissolving the calcium phosphate, the appetite of the bone.

That kind of cellular discharge of lysosome contents could also be involved in pathological situations. And... now, there is another kind of pathology that is dependent on... due to lysosomes and in particular dependent on this state of chronic constipation that I mentioned. And now we come back to the early days of our lab – the time when I was interested in insulin and worked on glucose 6-phosphatase. One of my co-workers in that work and even in the early work on glucagon, I mentioned before, was Géry Hers – h-e-r-s. And when I started... when I left insulin, what I thought was the back burner but it's still there, as far as I'm concerned, he, Hers, was the only one of my co-workers at that time who didn't follow me in my adventure that led to the lysosomes. He remained faithful, if I may say so, to carbohydrate metabolism and made major contributions to carbohydrate metabolism – the first one being elucidating the metabolism of fructose, which he showed to be due, as the Coris found, formation of fructose 1-phosphate, but then contrary, again, to what the Coris believed, no conversion of fructose 1 to fructose 6-phosphate, but the splitting of fructose 1-phosphate by an aldolase type of enzyme type of enzyme which would give glyceraldehydes and phosphoglyceraldehyde. And so he went onto study glycogen metabolism and made major contributions to our understanding of the regulation of glycogen synthase, of phosphorylase. It's a very complex mechanism where you have phosphorylations and dephosphorylations of various enzymes involved. Cascades... I mean, a field in which he became an expert and a pioneer.

And then, going back to the Coris who, of course, were the first pioneers in the study of glycogen... after I had left their laboratory and for reasons that had nothing to do with my being there, but, anyway, the latest interest of Gerty Cori, the wife of Carl, who shared the Nobel Prize with him... her major interest became the study of congenital glycogen storage diseases. These are a group... a set of diseases which are all inborn, congenital, genetic diseases in which, for one reason or another, glycogen accumulates in abnormal quantities in various types of cells. Therefore they are called glycogen storage disease. And so she studied the biochemical mechanisms that were involved in these diseases. She found one that was due to the absence of glucose 6-phosphatase, for instance. Another one was due to the absence of debranching enzyme and so on – several types – and among those different types she had described one called glycogenosis type II where she didn't find any abnormality that she could detect. When she died... I think it was probably in 1957; she died early. Carl lived much longer. She died of... I think it was aplastic anaemia or some rare blood disease. My friend and colleague, Hers, took over this job of studying biopsies from patients with different diseases and trying to find out... specially carbohydrate diseases, to find out by enzyme assays, what enzymes might be deficient or missing in those tissues. And so he became an expert on glycogen storage diseases and ran into a few samples of this glycogen storage disease type II which is also called Pompe's disease – it's the name of a Dutch paediatrician who described the first case sometime in the '30s – and, like Gerty, Hers was not able to find any deficiency in an enzyme involved in the known metabolism of glycogen. In fact, those children had no excuse for being sick because they would respond normally if you gave them glucagon or epinephrine – they would release glucose in their blood stream like anybody else – so there was no explanation for the storage of the glycogen, and Hers thought, well, an enzyme has been, not described, but postulated by, I think, Bill Whelan, probably, and maybe I should try and look for this enzyme in their diseased tissues. This was an enzyme assumed to be a transglycosylase, an enzyme that would transfer glycoside residues from maltose to glycogen, or from glycogen to maltose... whatever. And so he devised an assay for this hypothetical enzyme, which doesn't exist, actually, but in which radioactive maltose was used as a substrate, and he was expecting to find radioactivity in glycogen; and, in fact, he did not find radioactivity in glycogen but what he found was that there was in liver an enzyme that would split maltose... he called it maltase. And, by accident, having extended this kind of assay to a sample of a liver from a child afflicted with this disease, glycogen storage disease type II, found that this particular activity was missing.

That was 1963; of course he tried to... to characterise the enzyme and found, very quickly, that this was a hydrolyse... gut glucositic bonds, an alpha-glucosidase, with an acid pH optimum. Now, I'm talking about 1963; at that time, of course, we knew all about... not all about, but we knew a lot about lysosomes in the lab. He'd never participated in this work at all, but of course he knew they existed, and, you know, acid hydrolyse rings a bell, or rang a bell in anybody's head in that laboratory at the time, and the bell rang: lysosome. And so my friend Géry went back, he did some fractionation work and quickly established that this alpha-glucosidase was a lysosomal enzyme. And so now he had to explain why, due to the lack of a lysosomal enzyme, glycogen would accumulate in the cells, and being a very logical man, he said, 'There is only one explanation. In normal cells this mechanism of self-eating, autophagy, must bring into the lysosomes glycogen molecules, just as it brings in any other components of the cytoplasm, and, normally, those glycogen molecules are hydrolysed... digested by the glucosidase as a result, small glucose molecules that are produced diffuse through the membrane and are taken up by metabolisms.' But, as he reasoned, in the livers of the children afflicted with the disease, those glycogen molecules that entered the lysosome would find no enzyme to break them down and they would slowly accumulate. Sounded like a logical interpretation and if it was true then the glycogen that is accumulated pathologically in the cells would have to be inside lysosomes.

And so, a year later, another patient with the disease was detected at the University of Brussels and Pierre Baudhuin in our laboratory did a microscopic... electron microscopic examination on the biopsy fragment of the liver of that child because, by that time, we had acquired an electron microscope and Baudhuin and Beaufay were the main experts and so they found that, indeed, the glycogen, or much of the glycogen in this pathological sample, was surrounded by a membrane, was confined within a sac-like particle which, presumably, was a lysosome, and this indeed turned out to be the case. And so, in this way, he discovered the first lysosomal storage disease which he then went on to generalise into a major concept, the concept of an inborn lysosomal disease being that in the cells all kinds of materials – lipids, polysaccharides, you name it, they are there – get into lysosomes, sometimes by endocytosis but most of the time by autophagy. Those materials are then digested in the lysosomes by... 50 or more enzymes are now known... broken down... the products of the breakdown... the breakdown products go through the membrane, are utilised by the cell, and this goes on and on and on. But if one of those enzymes happens to be missing or deficient then among all this material, those molecules that require the missing enzyme to be broken down, would accumulate. And so, depending on the nature of the missing enzyme, you would have a different kind of chemical material accumulating, always in the lysosomes. Now, that was a tremendously fruitful concept – it was a paper published in Gastroenterology in 1965 –and it has a major impact on the whole field because, for a number of... many years the whole category of diseases was known; they were called storage diseases, they were genetic diseases – in French they were called thesaurismoses... thesaurismosis, essentially due to their abnormal storage of materials within cells, and those could be mucopolysaccharides of one form or another... in Hurler or Hunter Disease, could be lipids of one form or another; or another, glucocerebrosides, glycolipids, in Gaucher's Disease, in Fabry's Disease; sphingomyelin in Niemann-Pick Disease. I mean, these diseases all have the names of the physicians who described them but there was a whole mysterious chapter of pathology and literally, from one day to the other, the whole thing was clarified. Of course it needed many investigations by a number of really very good biochemists, mostly in the United States, to actually identify the missing enzyme and... clarifying the whole field. So that was a major... a major contribution which interestingly was made through the lysosome field by the only one in my group who had actually decided he didn't want to have anything to do with them, but that's life.

Incidentally, all these diseases are the price we pay for having constipated cells; I mean, if the cells could discharge the contents of their lysosomes outside there would be no storage disease and so we see here... again, I'm talking about with my new incarnation of an evolutionist, we see here natural selection at work, choosing the least of two evils. All right, well, so much about lysosomes, I don’t... I could go on, you know, books and books have been written about them and many very interesting people have become involved. I might mention one person because I have a special affection for her – she has disappeared since then, she has left us – but that was Helen Fell... Honor Fell, sorry, Honor Fell... Honor B Fell, Dame Honor B Fell, one of the great British biologists who really was famous for developing organ culture, and she became interested in vitamin A. She had worked with Mellanby and she became interested in vitamin A and actually studied the effect of excess vitamin A on cultures of chicken cartilage, bone, explants. Vitamin A is one of the only really toxic vitamins if you give... you know, every year, even today, paediatricians get visits from mothers who come with their babies and a broken arm and a broken leg because they have given their babies too much vitamin A. And vitamin A, when it is given in excess causes the destruction of bone tissue. Well, that's what Honor Fell had studied in vitro... in organ cultures and she, really, just by adding vitamin A, saw the whole matrix of the bone disappear, being dissolved, leaving only the cells; the cells were intact. And so she heard about lysosomes – in fact, I remember she came to me, a very gentle lady... in fact, very forceful as I happened to know afterwards, but she came to me at some congress in Paris and talked to me about this and said, 'This may of interest to you.' And she had with her a young man called John Dingle, and John Dingle was a biochemist; she was not. And so he went back and found that under the influence of vitamin A these bone transplants would release the contents of their lysosomes outside and cause all this destruction. And so she, with John Dingle, started a series of books on lysosomes in physiology and pathology of which seven volumes were published between the years '69 and '74, or something like that, so that was an interesting experience. And I met a number of other very nice people doing this work, and we did, of course, a lot of work ourselves on various aspects of lysosome physiology and pathology.

I happen to be very much of a biochemist by training and I'm a very poor morphologist. I had considerable trouble when I was a medical student in remembering things like anatomy and microscopy, histology and pathology. I could not recognise anything in a cell, in a microscope; I could only see the red blood cells in my own retina. So I've never used my eyes very much for studying and so – I of course didn't mention this, I'm glad you asked – when we had characterised the lysosomes, eventually, as a good biochemist would do with a molecule, having characterised them, we devised techniques for purifying them and so, eventually, we... we were able to make highly purified preparations of lysosomes the way a biochemist would get a crystal in protein... the same kind of thing. And then, eventually, we went and looked at them in the electron microscope because, by then, I had amazingly been able to receive from the Belgian National Science Foundation what was about the first electron microscope that they had given, and all my morphological colleagues were livid with rage that the electron microscope should be given to a biochemist and not to a morphologist. Anyway, tout ça c'est de l'histoire ancienne. Anyway, we did finally look in the electron microscope, and we found that these little bodies that we had called lysosomes had been seen by electron microscopists who had called them pericanalicular dense bodies. Dense because they look dense, because they're filled with undigested residues – that's why they're dense, because, even in normal cells, sometimes you get residue that cannot be digested. And pericanalicular because they are around bile canaliculi in the cells, so we ended up doing a lot of morphological work and many of my co-workers did cytochemistry, immunochemistry, radiochemistry, you name it, they did it, but I was never much involved in that because the morphological techniques were not really my... my cup of tea.

Alex Novikoff was an American biologist whom I got to know at a very early stage. He had an interesting story; he was... he started as a biochemist at the University of Vermont where he did some of the early cell fractionations, including work in which he studied acid phosphatase and uricase, and... just the way we did, and other enzymes. And Alex Novikoff happened to be also a rather militant Communist, very leftist, and that was the McCarthy era in the United States, and he was accused... he was indicted because he wouldn't betray his Communist friends, and he was actually sacked from the University of Vermont. He was... and when I knew him he... I got to know him because he'd published his fractionation work in which he'd found results rather similar to... to mine, with acid phosphatase and uricase, and so we got together. I remember one day when we were sitting in Central Park in New York and were discussing these problems, and Alex, at that time, was living a very precarious... making a very precarious living in some small private research institute on Long Island. But, anyway, we had had at the beginning a disagreement on the interpretation, having obtained about similar results; with respect to the distribution of acid phosphatase as compared to mitochondrial enzymes, we had different views or different interpretations. I must say that Alex, although trained as a biochemist, was essentially a visual man. I mean, the microscope finished by... and the electron microscope, by being his instrument, whereas mine was test tubes and reagents. And so we used to joke because we said... he's... he's... believes in the saying that seeing is believing, and sometimes in his case, seeing was searching a long time until he found something that could... that would support his belief. He was a great man; very nice, but he was a rather opinionated morphologist. Whereas my motto was: there is more in nature than meets the eye. So we really were very, very different, but excellent friends and so he... when we had this discussion, he very generously said, 'Well, your interpretation is correct and I was wrong.' And then he went on to develop... or to use a cytochemical technique for acid phosphatase which was designed, devised by a man called Gomori and it is a test that can be used on microscopic slides of living tissue – not living tissue but at least not completely destroyed, fixated – and in which you can reveal the presence of a given enzyme by special techniques. We won't go into the details. And he used this test for acid phosphatase to study lysosomes morphologically. And so he made many, many contributions to the field – wrote the chapters on lysosomes; he was there, of course, in London when we had our meeting at the Ciba Foundation; he was very much involved in the whole field. And we sort of complimented each other because he did much of the morphological work whereas I did much of the biochemical work. And just to finish the story of Alex Novikoff, who died already a few years ago now, some time... oh, it must have been in the late '80s perhaps, the University of Vermont awarded him an honorary degree and officially apologised for the way they had treated him in the '50s for his leftist beliefs. So that was... I'm glad you asked this because I had not forgotten about him, but, in the course of the story, neglected to mention his contribution that was really quite important.

I want to go back to uricase. Urate oxidase, which... it's a long time since we mentioned it so let me remind you: urate oxidase was the sixth enzyme in 1955 that we had found to show the same distribution pattern as the other five. The other five were acid hydrolysis, typical lysosomal enzymes; uricase was an oxidising enzyme, is not a digestive enzyme, it was not latent, it had a ph optimum of seven – or more than seven, maybe nine, even, if I remember rightly – and so it was an odd enzyme to be in lysosomes. And so, as we continued this work and studied additional enzymes, we found two more enzymes that showed the same kind of distribution but were not typical acid hydrolyses... hydrolases. One was D-amino-acid oxidase, which again is an oxidising enzyme like urate oxidase but oxidises amino acids... D-amino acids, not the alkaline, the unnatural, so-called D-amino acids, and like urate oxidase converts oxygen to hydrogen peroxide in doing this. And the third enzyme we discovered having the same kind of distribution was a catalase, and catalase is an enzyme that can use hydrogen peroxide to oxidise... to peroxidase substances like ethanol or nitrate... nitrite, or it can use hydrogen peroxide to oxidise hydrogen peroxide, in which case it actually splits hydrogen peroxide in H2O, water and oxygen. So the three enzymes that we had have a connection by way of hydrogen peroxide to oxidases making hydrogen peroxide, catalase destroying it.

Well, continuing the analytical work by using different techniques, eventually we became able to show that those three enzymes belonged to a different kind of particle that could not be separated from lysosomes by sedimentation. They sediment about the same speed as lysosomes but they could be separated by differences in density. This is a different kind of technique in which you create a so-called gradient or density gradient in a test tube – that is... in a test tube or in whatever – but it's a system in which the density of the fluid increases from top to bottom. The machines can be used to do that and so you have a gradient – a density gradient. And if you layer some material on top of that gradient and you centrifuge for a long time, then what happens is that the particles that you've layered will sediment down up to the time they reach a layer of their own density. Then, of course, they will stop and so you can separate... by this way you can separate particles on the basis on their density. The lighter particles will stop earlier, the denser particles will be found later, but this is not sedimentation, it's equilibration, because you can go on, they won't move anymore; they will just stay where they are. And so we developed those techniques and found that in sucrose gradient lysosomes would be at lighter level than the particles containing catalase, uricase, D-amino acid oxidase, which we could separate from the lysosomes by this technique. So we finally got the proof that those enzymes and many others were added to the family, belong to particles that were, again, different from mitochondria and microsomes, but also from lysosomes and, because of the hydrogen peroxide connection, I called them peroxisomes, and that name appeared in print for the first time in 1965. And at first peroxisomes did not excite us very much. Oh yes, I will say that in the electron microscope purified preparations of these particles could be identified as bodies that microscopists had called microbodies, so again, we went from the chemical analysis to the final identification in the electron microscope. So the peroxisomes didn't attract much attention at that time because we were so involved with lysosomes but eventually we, in fact, went on to do a lot of work on peroxisomes. We studied the biosynthesis of the particles; we found more enzymes in the particles, and other people in our lab, and also in other labs, discovered similar particles in unicellular organs and protozoa, in plant cells – in leaves and so on. And it turns out that peroxisomes are also universally distributed in all eukaryotic cells they are constituents of the cells like... like lysosomes. And they had very interesting functions. They are very much involved in the fatty acid oxidisation; they are involved, especially in lower organisms, in the conversion, and in plants, in the conversion of fatty acids to carbohydrate and in a number of amino acid metabolism and in another... other metabolic processes. And peroxisomes also are involved in a number of genetic diseases. A number of diseases had been discovered... had been discovered in which some peroxisomal enzyme is missing or in which the assembly of peroxisomes is inhibited for some reason or another, and so here again, this discovery has provided a lot of valuable information to our understanding of the physiology of cells and also to pathology.

Well, I have now to sort of take a break in the story, and the break is 1962. By 1962 we had... we had characterised lysosomes and knew a fair amount about them – not yet everything that I mentioned, but a fair amount. We had, already, good evidence about the existence of peroxisomes even though we had not yet named them that way, and really not enough information concerning their functions, but at least we knew they existed. And just a little before 1962 – maybe the winter of 1961 – on one of my trips to the United States, I went to the Rockefeller Institute and visited George Palade, who had become a good friend of mine by that time. And I must confess... I must tell that at that time I had become very... very... how should I say? Weary with my lot in Belgium, because, it's true, I had succeeded in developing a very good group of investigators and a large group – I had more than 30 people, post docs came... I mean, it was... it was a well-known group in the world; it had a reputation and we did good work. But at a cost... at least to me a big cost because in the meantime I had to give... most of the teaching I had to do myself, which was biochemistry to medical students, which meant at least three or four hours of teaching a week, for the whole year round. I had to take all the examinations which meant... including the failures that had to be re-examined the second time... interrogating orally about 1,000 students a year, which meant practically devoting two whole months to examination. Then I was, of course, a member of the faculty so I had to serve on one committee or another, I was involved in refereeing of various things, and also I had to find money, and in those days money was very, very difficult to find and so, fortunately, I was able to get a fair amount of money from the United States – first from the Lilly Laboratories, then from the Rockefeller Foundation, and then from NIH [National Institutes of Health], and without that I couldn't have supported my lab. But all that meant an enormous burden and I had very little administrative help. I had one secretary to do all the work. And so it meant that I spent a lot of time buying equipment, buying chemicals, paying for them, writing cheques; I mean, it was... and I got very little support from my university. At that time the university was poor – they didn't have too much... too much interest in research; they thought research was a kind of luxury that you indulged in after you'd devoted your time toward your duties, if time was left you were allowed to, and if you found the money. And so all that was sort of weighing on me.

When I visited George Palade I told him... I said, 'I wish... I wish I could join the Rockefeller Institute', which is the Mecca of cell biology in those days. It had everything that an investigator could dream of – facilities, relatively easy money, and, especially, a... a collection of absolutely first-class scientists with whom you could communicate, with whom you could discuss things, a very small group of selected graduate students. I mean, to me it was the Mecca. And so I said this to George and he looked at me with a strange look in his face; he said, 'Do you mean that?' I said, 'Yes, I mean that.' A few months later, Det Bronk, who at that time was a very famous scientist – he was the president of what was still called the Rockefeller Institute, but he called it... changed it to Rockefeller University, taking graduate students which they didn't do before. Det Bronk who had been, before that, the president of the National Academy of Sciences – I mean, he was a really prominent man – actually took an aeroplane and came to Belgium and offered me a job, a lab at Rockefeller. I was overwhelmed, of course, and I went to see the rector of the Catholic University of Louvain where I worked, and then suddenly, as often happens, he discovered that, maybe, it was a pity to lose me – that I was something of an asset to his university – and so he started... he started insisting, 'Can't you possibly stay, at least part time? You won't have to teach, you won't have to take examinations, etc, etc.' And since my family was in Belgium and it was a little difficult to move them to the States at that time, I... I said, 'Well, let's find out.' And so he invited Det Bronk for dinner and he gave him the kind of dinner and wine that only a Catholic Bishop can... can muster and so, eventually, they agreed... they made a compromise... agreement that for five years I would share my time between New York and Louvain and that, after that, I would become permanently established in New York.

Well, this temporary arrangement turned out to be permanent and so, starting in 1962, I had two research groups, two research laboratories: one my old laboratory in Louvain and the other one, the new lab that turned out to be... ended up being quite large, a whole floor in a new building there, in New York, and how it worked out... Well, you better ask my wife and my children, but they certainly paid a price for this dual life of mine, because at the age of my children it was not possible for the whole family to accompany me; it would have been too expensive anyway. My wife did come with me from time to time but always for very relatively short stays so that we could leave the children with friends or leave them in the house with a person to take care of them, and so I was absent from home quite a lot and I'm sure the family paid a price for that. But they are not too unhappy today, so I'm trying not to feel too guilty about it. Scientifically I can only say it was a tremendous success because the lab in New York turned out to be extremely productive; I was able to recruit another group of people, graduate students, post docs, and we managed to keep the two labs... I managed to keep the two labs working and successfully working, thanks to the fact that I had such wonderful co-workers in Belgium, and I haven't said enough about them. I haven’t said enough... I have mentioned Géry Hers largely, but Géry Hers... he never came to New York – he was doing his own thing and he was being extremely successful in his work on carbohydrate metabolism, making important discoveries, even after he discovered lysosomal diseases, and so he had his own group, a big group, and... But besides Hers I had Jacques Berthet, who I mentioned in the beginning, Robert Wattiaux, Henri Beaufay, Pierre Baudhuin, Pierre Jacques, André Trouet, Gilbert Vaes – all Belgians, and most of them spent at least a year with me in New York. So every year I had one of my Belgium seniors to come over in New York and to take care of the New York lab while I was coming back to Belgium to do my teaching, because I did... still did a small amount of teaching, and to take care of the Belgian lab. And so together with these people I was able to run those two labs quite successfully. In fact, the two labs... let us say they collaborated very much on techniques but didn't compete on subjects; they worked on parallel subjects, mostly using the same techniques, the same approaches, and I think one very important achievement of those days was the development of new and better techniques and instruments for the fractionation of cells and tissues. We were... and in this I was very much helped by Berthet, Jacques Berthet, and especially Henri Beaufay.

Berthet was a unique man. He is still doing extraordinary things today: he's just written a dictionary of biology – a complete modern dictionary of biology. Anyway, he was an extremely bright man and he would be a sort of a... invaluable co-worker and colleague whenever I would... I would imagine some... some theory or formulate some theory or even some equation, I would always submit it to Berthet, and if there was a flaw in it, he would have found it. And so we really worked a lot together. Beaufay was also very good in theory but in addition, although trained as an MD, turned out to be an extraordinary self-taught engineer, and so he actually built a centrifuge rotor for density gradient centrifugation that was entirely automatic, that would fill and unload automatically while running... while running. I won't go into the details but this was a real feat of engineering; this rotor would run at 50,000 revolutions per minute, without exploding which was not... anyway, that rotor was in fact constructed partly in Belgium and partly in New York because the Rockefeller University was famous for its instrument shop which was run by a Swedish engineer, who was quite remarkable. And so these new machines were made partly in Belgium and partly in New York. So all that was... turned out to be extremely useful. I had some very nice co-workers in New York; also my graduate students were... Bill Bowers who did a lot of work on lysosomes in lymphoid tissues. I had another man called Brian Poole, who also was one of these extremely bright... I've been fortunate enough to have working with me two or three men – it happened to be men – who were superbly intelligent, much more intelligent that I can claim to be, and who really helped me tremendously in some of the more difficult formulations... theoretical formulations. Brian Poole was one of those... died stupidly of a diabetic coma in a Norwegian hotel, very young. So there was Paul Lazarow who did enormous work on the biosynthesis of peroxisomes. So, you see, both in New York and in Belgium we worked on all kinds of different aspects. There was another man in New York called Miklós Müller – he was a Hungarian morphologist who Novikoff had invited to attend the Ciba Foundation conference in 1963, a conference on lysosomes, and who had done some cytochemical work with this primitive techniques that he had in Budapest, and he eventually joined my lab and moved from Hungary... immigrated from Hungary to the United States; there's a period... a small period of thaw so that he could bring his wife over from Hungary. And he was a micro... a protozoologist and so he did a lot of work on lysosomes and peroxisomes in protozoa and ended up making a major discovery in some protozoa called trichomonas vaginalis, which is a parasite of the female digestive tract; he discovered new particles which actually make hydrogen, and he called them hydrogenosomes and... which quite recently, in the last few years, have been found to be relative of mitochondria, and this has become one of the major mysteries, this whole field or subjects of speculation and research: the relationship between mitochondria and hydrogenosomes which have very different enzyme equipments but seem to be genetically related – the evidence is... is very strong. So all those people... and many others that I haven't mentioned because I can't go on, but really helped very much in developing this whole field and I feel very much indebted to their help and their collaboration. And so, thanks to those two groups, I think we were able to make quite a lot of progress.

The end, I would say, of this episode came in 1974 when I was in New York on my own – my wife and family were in Belgium. Some day in October 1974 I was woken up early in the morning by a telephone call from some member of the administration, of the Rockefeller University... it was called University at that time. And I said, ‘What's the matter?’ And he said, ‘Congratulations, you've just won the Nobel Prize.’ And so that's how I learnt of it and... well, I learnt that this prize was shared with Albert Claude, which was wonderful because he, really, as I mentioned, was the father of it all, developing both electron microscopy and centrifugal fractionation. And shared with George Palade who did extremely important work, again, on the cell structure – he was good on electron microscopy, but on function because he had associated with good biochemists, in particular, Philip Siekevitz, who helped him developing techniques for demonstrating, for instance, that ribosomes make proteins. And so I was of course extremely happy and gratified. Such honours, of course, are a little disturbing, and perhaps the most disturbing aspect of that kind of thing is that there always is or are one or two who... scientists, friends, who are very much disappointed because they could have shared the prize – they deserved just as much – and, unfortunately, Alfred Nobel, in his will, has said that the prize could not be shared among more than three winners, so number four, number fives, never got them. This is happening almost every day now: whenever I read what has happened, I could mention to you... I don't want to mention it here, but several names of contemporary, absolutely outstanding scientist who should have shared the prize for discoveries that have been so distinguished and were neglected, for one reason or another. And some of them, as I know, feel extremely bitter and disappointed and, you know, when this happened to me also... I could also name a couple of names – people who feel that they could or should have shared the prize that I was lucky enough to... to obtain. And that... that was a... sort of a somewhat sad aspect of being distinguished that way; otherwise, of course, it's a highly gratifying experience and I feel very lucky. But sometimes people ask me, ‘How does it feel?’ I say, ‘Well, it's very much like winning a lottery.’ And they say, ‘Well, you're being much too modest.’ And I say, ‘No. Not being modest, it's a lottery; the only thing is the tickets are expensive.’

Well, there are many other aspects, of course, about Nobel Prize that... that are very gratifying, and I told you at the beginning... I told the story of the first Nobel ceremony we attended, my wife and I, and how I misguidedly told her that she would get a fur coat if and when I got a Nobel Prize. Well, she hadn't forgotten that, and so the first thing I had to do was to buy her the fur coat and, in fact, she had it when we went to Stockholm to attend the ceremony, and Theorell, my old boss and his wife very kindly came to the airport to meet us, and so on the way from the plane to the VIP room, where... we always get a very nice reception when you get there, the first thing that Margit Theorell noticed was the fur coat and she said to my wife, 'What a nice fur coat.’ And she told the story of, you know, the 1956... that was in fact only 18 years before... no, '46, 28 years before, and so she told the whole story, and the next morning there was a big headline. The first page of the Stockholm newspaper: ‘She had to wait 30 years for her fur coat!’ Because a journalist had heard – they were following us on the tarmac - and had heard the story and had immediately... so when we went into the... what you would call the lift and I've learnt to call the elevator in my American life, people would look at the fur coat and say, 'That's the fur coat, you know' –'De är pälset', that's in Swedish. Anyway, so that's one amusing aspect of the story and, of course, you get a little money and... in fact, a fair amount of money even when it's divided into three parts, and so I was able to indulge... a new piano. I hardly play the piano – as I say, I murder the piano more than I play – but in those days I used to play a lot and I enjoyed a good piano and also I was able to... we lived in the country in Belgium... to build a small swimming pool, which turned out to be an extremely useful as... as much as pleasant investment because my wife and I still swim every day in the summer nowadays, and I think it's about the only exercise that you can continue doing in a very old... at a very old age. I had to give up tennis, I had to give up skiing, to give up much of the sport... many of the sports I used to do, but swimming I can go on doing, and I think it's a very healthy exercise, so that again was a sort of fallout of the prize. The other fallouts are, in a way, pleasant and unpleasant: you get a little more attention... you get a little more attention from journalists, from media, which can be upsetting but is useful... I think it's about the only useful thing about the Nobel Prize because I mentioned this discrimination, which I think is... is sad, between people who had the same scientific distinction, of the same merits but, just for one reason or another, one gets the prize and the other one doesn't get the prize, but the prize has so much prestige that suddenly you create an enormous dissimilarity between people who really occupy the same level. And that... within the scientific community, I think that's a very... a very sad aspect of the whole thing. But the good aspect is that, because of this prestige, the Nobel Prize is about the only way in which scientists can really make themselves heard in the world of today. Somehow the public has little respect for science in general but, for some reason, Nobel means something to them, and that allows scientists – those who have been distinguished by the prize – to act as a spokesman for their... or spokeswoman, for their colleagues and to defend science in the world, to defend the scientific approach in the world, and this may be quite... quite important. So on the whole it's mixed feelings, but I would be dishonest if I did not admit that I was very pleased, and still am, to have been lucky enough to win this lottery ticket.

So much for the research, but now we have to go back again to 1968. 1968 is a sort of watershed in the history of academic life in the world. It started in Berkeley and it continued all over the world... Paris, there was a sort of a revolution by the students who claimed more... a greater say in academic matters, who revolted... rebelled against the sort of supercilious superiority of dons and other academic persons; the... they didn't accept the authority of the professors the way we used to in Germany – the Geheimrat, everybody bowed in front of them. Especially they... they clamoured for more meaningful, more socially-involved science. They wanted science to be more involved with the real problems of the world. And, at that time, I myself... before that time, I had been basically... basically is not the word to use... I had been a major proponent of basic research, strictly pure... so-called pure research. I had learned this from my chief, the physiology professor, Bouckaert: science... the purpose... and the only important purpose of science is to increase knowledge, is to promote our understanding of the world around us, and that's enough, and that is the main goal of science – it's part of culture, increasing our understanding of the world is the only valid purpose for research, and let the public pay for it. I was, at that time, really rather negatively disposed toward any sort of applied research, even medical research. I felt, well, it's my duty to make discoveries; they discover lysosomes and let the medical people worry about what are the possible medical applications. Let the pharmaceutical industry take care of the possible new drugs or therapeutic means that could possibly emerge from this new knowledge; my purpose is to just advance knowledge and let the others dirty their hands with doing something useful.

I was also against making money out of this research; I was very poorly paid, of course, as a professor like all professors, especially in the old days, but I would not have dreamed of making money. I remember when we had made some finding that could have been patented and I... I was indignant, I refused, I said, ‘I work for humanity; I don't want to make a... take a patent.’ So that was my attitude, but with the student revolt, if I may call it that, of 1968 I started becoming conscious of responsibility. I felt... well, I do still believe that it is the duty of society to support pure research the way I do it and I feel no compunction about getting money from society. But still, it seems to me, and that was a new realisation, that if I should run into something that could be developed into a useful... medically useful application which was my main purpose, of course, at that time, I should become involved. Even as a basic scientist I have a responsibility towards the society that supports me and I should help in the development of possible applications of this discovery. There were two other factors. Rockefeller, of course, had been founded... Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, had been founded in 1901 by John D Rockefeller Senior, and the purpose of the Rockefeller Institute is pro humani bono generis, which means for the good of mankind. And the tradition at Rockefeller had always been basic research but also with an eye on possible medical applications. So that was another influence. And finally my own... my own research had more or less forced me to think in terms of applications; I mentioned lysosomes and how, with the lysosome concept, we were able to explain not only physiological functions but also pathological alterations of cells, and so I felt more and more, having, in fact, been trained as a medical doctor to start with, that perhaps it was our duty as... as investigators to help.

Well, I decided, for all those reasons, that it was the duty of basic investigator devoting his life to fundamental research also to participate in applications. And I felt this was particularly important because the technologies, the instrumentations, had become so complicated that only those who were doing that kind of research were able... had the means to actually participate in development. I mean, you couldn't ask a clinical investigator to just take whatever we had in terms of lysosome functions, that we knew about, and he would just translate this knowledge into an application. Same thing with a pharmaceutical chemist. So, in fact, because we... we knew the techniques and we knew how to study these increasingly complicated objects and this, of course, with development of molecular biology became even more evident; unless the investigators working in the field participated there would never be useful applications. And so that was the sort of philosophical conviction that I reached in the late 1960s.
Now, in Belgium and in my... Louvain University in particular, 1968 is also a historical date because it's the date when the division of the Catholic University of Louvain into two separate independent universities was decided. For reasons peculiar to Belgian politics it was decided that teaching in French on Flemish soil – that is, the city of Louvain – was not to be allowed. I should mention that until then Louvain had been bilingual; it had started as a French-speaking... Latin to begin with, but Latin and then French, and by the time I was a student most of the courses were taught in the two languages, sometimes by the same professor. Bouckaert, for instance, taught his courses in French and Flemish. But, eventually, when I was a young professor, the teachings were more or less separated; there were professors for the two languages – different professors for the two languages – but we still had single faculties. The medical faculty included the French and the Flemish speaking professor, and so we also always spoke French at those meetings, because the Flemish understood French, but the French-speaking didn't understand Flemish. So, eventually, for very valid reasons, the Flemish said, ‘We want our own faculty’, so the faculties were separated, but the university remained unitary, and eventually the whole splitting of the university was decided – not only the splitting into two independent universities, but the departure of the French-speaking university from the city of Louvain because, as I mentioned before, teaching in French on Flemish soil was not to be tolerated. Strange vision, but anyway.

As a result of this splitting, a brand new university town was built very near the old city of Louvain but on French-speaking soil if I can use that expression, and that became Louvain-la-Neuve, New Louvain; this was actually a town and gown situation that was built simultaneously and remains a rather... it's not very... maybe not very pretty, but remains an interesting creation. It's a big city now. But the medical faculty... the medical school was not moved to Louvain-la-Neuve but was moved to the outskirts of Brussels – a borough called Woluwe-Saint-Lambert – and they built a brand new hospital and all the buildings of the medical school there because they needed... a big university hospital cannot work without a large supply of patients, so we need a large city to supply its patients to the hospital. Except for that it's rather sad that the medical school should be separate from the rest of the university because I feel very strongly that we should all be members of the same academic community, but it doesn't happen to be so. But this move of the medical school from the city of Louvain to Woluwe-Saint-Lambert allowed a project to be... to be formulated that would have been impossible before. The project was to bring together, inside a single building, laboratories that, in Louvain, were completely separated geographically from each other and had little contact with each other – put them together so that they could, together, provide a critical mass of competences, of expertise, of instrumentation, of techniques so that they could tackle, together, some of the major problems of medicine that could not be attacked singly by any one of them.

And so was born the project of an institute which originally was named the International Institute of Cellular and Molecular Pathology. It's a heavy... it's a heavy cumbersome name but it meant a number of things. International because I wanted this institute not be the parochial kind that we had in Louvain before. You know, Belgium is a terrible country with respect of parochialism of universities; the Free University of Brussels and the Catholic University of Louvain may be 20 miles apart but... but when I was a student and a young professor they were entirely separated to the extent that they didn't even talk to each other except when they were obliged to talk to each other at some academic meetings, the Natural Science Foundation and things of that kind. They were opposed – and I will come back to this - they were opposed by their philosophies. The Free University of Brussels is based on so-called free thinking and the Catholic University, of course, was founded by the Catholic Church, and that was a tremendous opposition and I will come back to this later. And same thing between other universities: Liège will not talk to Gent, will not talk to Louvain or to... Our universities are almost completely inbred, or at least they were; you became a professor in the university were you come... had been a student. And so international meant, of course, national as well: that we would take people from any background provided they were good – excellence, quality was the important thing, and not whether they went to church or not, or things of that kind, or what language they spoke, whether they spoke French or Flemish or German or Japanese. Institute of Cellular and Molecular Pathology: this meant that we would include cell biology and molecular biology – that is, the new biology – we'll put the tools together where they would... the name pathology was there not because it was the main goal, the main objective, but it meant that we were doing cellular and molecular biology with an eye on possible applications. And initially for this project I was able to enlist four groups... it's very insufficient to start with, but four groups that were of good enough quality and were willing to work together and had been completely separated, geographically, in the city of Louvain. That was first of all my own group of biochemistry, which included the group of Hers, and it was a large group – biochemistry and cell biology. There was a very good group of immunology headed by a man called Félix Heremans who had worked at Rockefeller with Henry Kunkel in the old days and where he had discovered IgA, for instance – a good investigator. There was a group headed by another friend of mine, Michel de Visscher – already died 20 years ago but had a very good group working in what was called, at that time, general pathology; was really sort of a mixture of a clinical and laboratory investigation with a main focus on the thyroid. He was an expert in thyroid function and in thyroid pathology. So we had endocrinology with him and, of course, with our own group where we worked on diabetes. And finally, there was a small group headed by a man called Carlo Cocito who was about the only group in the University of Louvain who was involved with molecular biology as applied to viruses and to bacteria. And so those four groups, sort of, decided together to form this new institute.

Those four groups were the first ones and I think it's rather interesting to point out that we really tried to put together, in this institute, cell biologists and molecular biologists, the idea being that these people should really talk to each other and collaborate – they have complimentary kind of expertises that could reinforce one another in the study of many problems. And I should perhaps tell you that, for quite a long time, I lived... at least cell biology and molecular biology really were separated by a sort of communication barrier; that is, molecular biologists were jealously protecting their own turf and they were exclusively interested in, let's say, phage and maybe sometimes bacteria, viruses they were interested in... they really were mostly interested in genes and DNA and eventually RNA and translation of the RNA into proteins, but they had very little interest for the things I did – biochemistry, cell biology, wasn't really very much interest to them, so we followed what they did, because obviously cell biologists had to know about DNA and RNA but they thought they were dealing with the basic fundamentals of life and they didn't need to go into all the details of the cells, animal cells, plant cells that we were working on, and so this, of course, was bound to change. I mean, it was obviously important that the molecular biologists should become interested in cell biology and vice versa. And this, of course, has happened today very much, but when we created this institute, this project, the idea of putting together cell biologists and molecular biologists was really somewhat new and extremely important because one of the basic principles of the new institute was multidisciplinary researches... collaboration between people, different disciplines. You have an immunologist collaborating with a biochemist, this didn't happen in many places and, obviously, they could both learn from each other and together do things that they could not do singly. The same thing for the cell biologists and the molecular biologists. And so all these techniques were supposed to be... expertises were supposed to join into common projects that would eventually lead to applying this whole gamut of techniques and knowledge to studies of problems of pathology such as cancer, endocrinological disorders, metabolic disorders, bone disorders, arthritis, etc., etc.

As I said, we had only four groups all coming from Louvain to start this but I felt we needed... we needed more; we needed more disciplines, we needed more people, we needed a less exclusively Louvain membership. And so I wanted it to be international, national, and so I made a deal with the university and said, 'Well, we want to be together on this new campus, this new medical campus, in the same building, but in addition we would like you to build a building that's twice the size that is needed, and if you just build... build the bricks and mortars of that building, we will find the money to finish off the labs, equip the labs, we will find the people to work in them on an international basis and with as main criteria excellence, quality... not necessarily field, but quality.' That's another point I learnt from Rockefeller. 'And we'll find the money.' And that was a very rash promise but I was very fortunate in fairly rapidly finding means so that the institute could be completed and laboratories occupied by new... by new teams. The institute was opened officially by Prince Albert – now King Albert II – I forget the exact date, but was in April 1975. But obviously it had been built before that, or at least part of it had been built and completed and some of the labs were already occupied; my own lab was already occupied at that time. Now, April 1975: that's five months after I went to Stockholm to collect my Nobel Prize, so this was really a very fortunate coincidence because a Nobel was obviously a good argument and a good excuse to try and get some money out of the Belgian government. It didn't last very long, but at least I was able to get enough to finish the... the institute and so that was extremely useful, and then another thing happened that was very fortunate. By some happy coincidence – maybe due to the Nobel Prize, I don't know – I was asked to act as an advisor to a newly created research organisation called the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research.

This was created by a man who, at that time, was the wealthiest man in the United States, Daniel Ludwig, and Daniel Ludwig had decided to use all his... well, most of his money to create a network of laboratories in which cancer would be studied. A network of laboratories because it's called the Ludwig Institute but the Ludwig Institute has no building; it has only an office in New York and it has a network of something like a dozen laboratories situated all over the world. There's one in London... well, two in London actually, there used to be one in Cambridge – was closed – there’s one... there used to be two in Switzerland – there's only one now – there's one... two now in the United States, there's one in Brazil, one or two in Australia; it's a worldwide network. And so becoming acquainted with this organisation I was able to propose the ICP [International Institute of Cellular and Molecular Pathology] as a site in which they would be able to... to create a unit, a research unit for the Ludwig Institute, and I was fortunate enough... this proposal was accepted. And so one third of this institute is occupied by the Brussels branch of the Ludwig Institute which is... occupies about 80... 80 investigators and is headed by a man called Thierry Boon who is a remarkable young man. Not so young anymore – he is the same age as my eldest son, 61 – but I'd known him from the day he was born. He was the son of one of my friends in Louvain and so I'd known him a long time so when he decided, rather to the disappointment of his father, to study medicine; the father was a very successful businessman involved with the local brewery which has become the second-largest brewery in the world. Sorry. Thierry Boon came automatically as a student, came to work as a student assistant, the way I did with Bouckaert in the old days, in my lab. And he worked mostly with Berthet, but by the time he'd finished his third year, premedical year, he had decided... the way I had decided – maybe he did it before – he didn't want to be a physician but he wanted to become an investigator, and so Berthet and I decided that, maybe, the best thing for him would be to do a PhD at the Rockefeller. And so we proposed Thierry Boon as a student – so this is another fall out of my American adventure – and he was accepted as a student at Rockefeller. Never worked in my lab; he didn't want to and I didn't want him to because there is no need to come to Rockefeller if he was going to work in an environment that was the same as he could find in Belgium. He worked with a man called Norton Zinder who was a leader in molecular biology, and so Thierry Boon did his PhD work at Rockefeller on a problem that was molecular biology. After that he went to work in Paris with François Jacob at the Pasteur Institute where he started doing some very interesting work. This time dealing not with molecular biology or phage, as he'd done in New York, or coli... he'd worked also on colisense, but he worked in Jacob's lab on tumour cells that were pluripotent. These were tumour cells that would differentiate into different kinds of cells and are responsible for tumours called teratomas. Very strange tumours; they will grow hair or teeth or all kinds of different tissues. And his idea, at that time, was to try and develop a cell line that would be programmed to become only a single one, so he wanted to study cell differentiation.

What he did discover was not what he was looking for, which is often the case; he discovered something more interesting. He discovered that cells... that animals that had been inoculated with these cells would, later, reject the cells – that is, they would become immunised against the cells, and so this was the start of a... a long, long investigation in which the immunological rejection of cancer cells was established and studied in great detail. Well, when the Ludwig Institute decided to create this lab here, Thierry was somewhat undecided; he was still in Paris, but I think he... he could be persuaded to move; and so I was able to lure him back to Belgium and to start a small lab at the ICP [International Institute of Cellular and Molecular Pathology], and this small lab, eventually, became part of the Ludwig organisation, and today he heads this very large part... this very large lab of 80 some investigators and he has not, yet, reached his goal, which is to vaccinate patients against their own tumour, but he is moving in that direction and a few patients have already been improved, but it's an extremely difficult and I could spend hours just telling stories about how difficult it is to move from the laboratory to the manufacturing industry. It’s very easy... and to the clinic. It's very easy to cure thousands of mice, but to cure your first patient, it may take 20 years of very hard work and an enormous investment of money and effort before it can be done. It can only be done with the help of very, very wealthy companies that can afford to invest the huge amounts of money that are involved. Fortunately he has... he has that kind of support. So he's moving slowly but in the right direction. Thierry Boon has been my successor, as the director of the ICP, and he has just resigned as a director, last year, to be replaced by a young man called Emile Van Schaftingen who was trained by Hers, my old co-worker – Géry Hers. Made some very important discoveries with Géry Hers, including a new phosphate, exos phosphate esters fructose-2, 6-bisphosphate, and is now heading the institute; he's a young man and working, interestingly, mostly on carbohydrate metabolism, diabetes and insulin, so the insulin that I put on the back burner 50 years ago is still alive and well, but not yet elucidated, thanks to Hers and his group and finally to Emile Van Schaftingen. So my function in the ICP in this institute to which they misguidedly have now given my name... my function has now become very... very insignificant; I don't have a research lab here, I'm very... I’m a little consulted by some of the workers who tell me about their work and sometimes ask my advice, but I'm more and more incompetent in the new fields, in the new areas, of cell biology, immunology, molecular biology, they've developed so much in the last few years that I haven't been able to follow. But I remain on the board of the ICP and so I keep involved in keeping the institute on, what I might say, the right track in trying to get support for this institute, which it obviously needs and is not easy to find – especially in small countries like Belgium – but, anyway, I remain... remain personally involved, I have an office in this institute, I have secretarial support, I still move on... move to New York a couple of times every year, I have an office at Rockefeller, secretarial help at Rockefeller, but, basically, I have stopped and I stopped maybe 20 years ago... or 15 to 20 years ago, I've stopped doing active research in my old fields of cellular biology and biochemistry; I've stopped following what was happening – it's too specialised for me to continue following but I have discovered a new interest.

Well, I was of course associated with the very beginnings of this institute and therefore I was very much involved in the early years when we had to complete the building: find the equipment for the building, find money for the building, and especially finding new co-workers – that is, filling... finding occupants for the research labs. And in that I was... I was partly successful: I was able to recruit several excellent people. It was a difficult job because the... it... it needs time for an institute to become known, to establish itself in the international community. And so the beginning, obviously... the word ICP [International Institute of Cellular and Molecular Pathology] didn't mean anything to anybody – it's not like Pasteur Institute or ICRF or Rockefeller – and so it took a little effort to try and find the best people, but eventually we did have very good people and I would say that the ICP has prospered very much in those early days and it continues. My successors have been, perhaps, even more successful than I was in recruiting really good people. Now, for instance, the institute has a first-class human geneticist coming from Finland, Vikkula, they have a few first-class molecular biologists coming from Romania, and so on; so the institute has certainly, I think, grown into a more mature and a better known organisation, and certainly I can't claim much credit for that. I mean, even at the beginning, maybe I had the idea but I was helped by a number of colleagues who participated – I've mentioned their names – in this venture, and it was a collective venture. And without being too boastful or too... too optimistic, I think the ICP has earned the title of maybe the best biomedical research centre in Belgium and one of the centres of excellence that are now known in... in Europe and recognised by the European community, so we do get more and more support from the European community. So it's a modest undertaking – about 250 people; it's... it’s not a big group... big institute. It's a modest undertaking but it’s... it has been built on what I think are sound principles – those principles I learnt, again, from Rockefeller.

Rockefeller has been the model for this institute and the principles are multidisciplinary collaboration and priority to excellence. Now that's a very important point about Rockefeller in comparison to other universities. At Rockefeller there are no departments; there are laboratories and the laboratories are directed by scientist who do what they want to do, what they are interested in, and they are appointed on the basis of excellence. And if you find an investigator, a first-class investigator, and his interest is neural biology, well, then, you have a lab of neural biology; and if you find an investigator who is interested in micro bacteria, leprosy or tuberculosis, then you happen to have a lab, but you don't fill in positions – you don't have departments that have to be filled in. Whereas in a university you have to teach everything and therefore you need an immunologist, you need a bacteriologist, you need... and that's a big difference. And we've applied the same principle here. We... we put the premium on excellence; and then, if we are lucky enough to find a really first-class investigator, we let him do what he wants and just tell him that he should, after a few years, try to find his own funding. That is, we provide... when we have a really good man, we have enough funds, a small endowment, so that we can offer a new investigator facilities and a budget to start something, but by three to five years we feel that he should be self-supporting and it works that way. I think Det Bronk, whom I mentioned as... as President of Rockefeller University when I joined and a very distinguished American scientist, put it in a... a nutshell: he said, 'As a principle,' he said, 'find the best people, and when you have them, keep out of their way.' So we don't believe in program research; we don't believe in a top administration that tells the people what to do, that creates programs and a lot of bureaucratic rules. No, it's a... it's a bottom-up kind of organisation; we get the scientists and they do what they want – under control of course. I mean, you can't just do what you want – you have to do good work and it has to fit within the general philosophy of the institute. If somebody came here and he said he wants to find the next... another extra solar planet, I would say, 'Sorry, but that doesn't work.'

You know, there's a lot of basic research going on in... in this institute, and applied research is... is not really a major... a major activity or major concern; it’s more something that people are asked to have at the back of their minds. If something can... if some application can be done, we work in collaboration with the hospital. So it... it works all right. When I said we let the people do what they want – as I said, that was the philosophy of Rockefeller, so that's where that philosophy came from, and if we do that... I did correct the statement to some extent by saying we allow that within the general framework or philosophy of the institute, so whatever they do, they can do freely, provided it falls within our general philosophy and within our general facilities. If somebody would come here and start something in a completely new field, maybe we would not accept that because we're too small. There's no neural biology, for instance, going on in the ICP [International Institute of Cellular and Molecular Pathology]  and we would, perhaps, hesitate to start a group in neurobiology because it's such a complex field that, unless you have a certain critical mass, they... they will not be very efficient.

Well, one thing I had to... to learn when the ICP [International Institute of Cellular and Molecular Pathology] was started – something I had little experience of before – was fundraising. Of course, I had to apply for money like anybody else, but I did this by way of grant applications and the usual... the usual system. This was different; this was finding money for the institute as such, and of course I had some experience of how this worked in the United States, where there's a tradition of philanthropy. And in doing this I discovered the enormous difference between the United States and Europe. As I said, in the United States there is this tradition of giving; I mean, when you've made your first $10 million or so, the first thing an American does is to look around for some organisation – research institute, an orchestra, museum or whatnot – they can support, usually in their own community. In Europe what they look around for is a tax shelter – some place where they can stash their money and not pay taxes, and this is very strange because there are very wealthy people in Europe and there are very powerful businesses in Europe, and I was a little naive when I... having witnessed what happened in United States, I decided I'd try the same thing in Europe; I was fortunate enough to find a few people who were... who were motivated, and together we created what we call the Development Council for the institute and this has been... I wouldn't say very successful, but somewhat successful, and it has given me an opportunity to mix a little with a crowd that I have never mixed before: the wealthy. And, well, I found out that they are just like other people – there are good ones and bad ones, but I've made a few friends among them and it was, on the whole, a nice experience, and we've found quite a number of truly motivated people who not only support us personally but work for us to find additional support.

One question that's sometimes asked in relation to the Nobel Prize is: is it hereditary? I don't mean genetically, although there are a couple of father-son combinations – the Braggs, for instance – but, I mean, does working with a Nobel Laureate increase your chances of getting one yourself? Well, the answer could be yes because if you go... for instance, you go to a German city called Giessen – there you can visit the laboratory of a very famous German chemist: Justus von Liebig. Justus von Liebig was best known by some meat extract that he made, but he was really one of the founders of organic and of biological chemistry. Well, in Giessen you can visit his laboratory, you can see it, and in that laboratory they have a chart which is a sort of genealogical tree of Nobel Prize winners, and they all go back quite a number... chemistry, medicine, all going back to Justus von Liebig who, of course, died too early to get a Prize himself. And this has continued: for instance, Theorell, who was a pupil of Otto Warburg, has had three Nobel Laureates among his own pupils – Bergström, Chris Anfinsen, and myself. Cori... Cori had six winners in his offspring, if I may say so... scientific offspring: there was Severo Ochoa, Luis Leloir, there was Arthur Kornberg, there was Earl Sutherland, there was, in chronological order, myself and finally Ed Krebs, and this goes on... I mean, my own mentors – I worked with Theorell, I worked with the Cori's, I worked with Earl Sutherland; that's four. My... my mentor Bouckaert worked with AV Hill in England and my other mentor, Maisin, worked with Fibiger in Denmark. So what does this mean? Does this mean that Nobel Laureates somehow have an inner entrance to the Nobel committee and then they can lobby for their friends and that they can influence the committee? Well, I'm sure this happens – I mean, the Nobel committees are made of human beings, Swedish scientists... they are very conscientious; they really do, I think, in most cases... I'm not talking about myself, of course, they seem to be doing a good job, but they make mistakes and certainly they have to get advice from the outside from time to time. They consult and I'm sure, from time to time, some people try to influence them. This may very well have happened and there may be a couple of instances where I suspect it did happen, but I don't think that is really the important thing. I think what is really important and, I think, interesting in this observation is that the art, and I use the word art intentionally... the art or the craft of scientific research is not learned in books; it is just like the crafts in the middle ages – it is learned from a master, and unless you have had the opportunity, the luck of working with a master, you may never really catch the art, learn the art, the craft. What exactly it consists of, I can't tell you – I mean, I don't know the recipe but I think that this is not just a coincidence, that so many Laureates have worked with previous Laureates and the conclusion of this is for the young people, not a recipe to get the Nobel Prize, but, in general, if you want to be successful in science, work with a master. Choose your mentors well.

I think my... my co-worker Géry Hers should... could very well have deserved a prize for all his work on glycogen metabolism, fructose-2, 6-bisphosphate, and especially the lysosomal diseases. And so if they had made their choices differently in Stockholm – say, Palade and Claude and somebody else had shared, and then later they had given the prize for the lysosomes – Hers should have shared it with me, so it could have happened. So it's the luck of draw. The Lottery, as I said.

Now, we have arrived to what I sometimes call the... my latest... probably my last incarnation, unless the Buddhists are right. Started like many things in my little life: more or less accidentally. In 1976 I was invited, at Rockefeller, to give what was called at that time, the Christmas lectures – now they're called the Alfred E Mirsky Lectures because he was the one who initiated them. But they were called the Christmas lectures because they were copied from something Faraday has started at Royal Society in London in the 19th Century and the Christmas lectures at Rockefeller were a series of four lectures that were given at Christmas time to a selected... a very selected audience of 550 – that's the number of seats in the auditorium, 550 high school students, selected in the whole New York area. Selected by their teachers so they were really a choice group – they were a very interesting audience. And so in 1976 I was invited to give this series of lectures, and since I was going to talk to youngsters I invented the title of A Guided Tour of the Living Cell and, in a way, it was fun. I told them, ‘Well, you have to blow up the cell to the dimensions of this auditorium or yourself, you have to... to decrease your size to the size of a bacterium, you do one or you do the other, but since we're going to visit a watery medium you better put some scuba gear and you're going to be cytonauts’, you know; it was all of a game – quite funny. But to prepare these lectures I had, of course, to... to go beyond mitochondria, lysosomes and peroxisomes, which were the only parts of the cell I had any personal acquaintance with. I knew something about the endoplasmic reticulum, about the Golgi because that was the area in which George Palade had been working, but I knew much less about the nucleus, chromosomes, mitoses; there was little I knew about that. Cytoskeleton I knew very little about, so I had to do a little reading, but of course, four one hour lectures don't need very detailed information. So, anyway, it was a lot of fun and I found youngsters extremely stimulating. They asked very intelligent questions.

Now, it so happens that those lectures were taped, and later I was approached by the people who run or ran the Rockefeller University Press; they said, 'Could we make a book out of this?' I said, 'No way, I'm much too busy doing research.' I was still very active in the lab at that time. 'No way I'm not going to spend my time writing a book', and so, okay, they let the matter rest until a few years later. A young man from Argentina came to visit the university and he had a sort of double job – he worked with a  well... well-known cell and molecular biologist in Argentina called De Robertis but at the same time he was something of a journalist; he wrote science articles for newspapers. And he heard about those tapes and said, 'Oh, could I edit them?' I said, 'Well, why not?' And so he started transcribing the tapes and rewriting some of the stuff and he sent it to me. And I can't say I was appalled but I didn't recognise my own writing or my own stuff and so I started... I started correcting and rewriting and after having done so for one or two chapters, I said to him, 'Listen, it's impossible – either I have to rewrite the whole thing or you drop it', so he dropped the project. But I sort of got caught in the act and started rewriting the whole thing. Now that took several years because I really had to start learning first. Because my field was biochemistry... I knew a little about biochemistry; cell biology, as I said before, I knew only those parts that I was personally working on but then I really had to start reading and studying, well, all the other parts of the cell. I had to start making illustrations – this book has about 200 illustrations, many of them actually drawn by myself and then redrawn by an artist. I had a very pleasant collaboration with an illustrator called Neil Hardy, and he actually came to Belgium and worked with me for several days. And it was rather amusing; it was an amusing experience because somehow those drawings that I made were very crude drawings, of course – I made them simply by imagining molecules, because these were really scale models of molecules. I imagined those things, or imagined chromosomes or things like that. But he had to build... he was an artist, a professional – he had to build a paper model of the molecule before he could start drawing... is a very interesting difference. Well, anyway, I had to find electron micrographs and photographs, I even included a few works of art, I had a Henry Moore to compare with the structure of mitochondria, a Hans Arp to compare with the structure of a protein, and so on. Anyway, it turned out to be a big undertaking, especially since I was still busy doing research at the same time, but I really enjoyed it and I... I enjoyed really beginning to learn something. It was sort of an experience, like what I had been doing all my life had been digging, and the deeper you dig, the narrower your scope and finally I was down there in that little tunnel and just looking at lysosomes and peroxisomes and so, slowly, I was moving up and looking around and saying, 'My God, but this is also interesting, this is fascinating and so on.' So it was... it was a tremendously gratifying experience and the end result was a book called A Guided Tour of a Living Cell – many illustrations; appeared I think in 1984. And it appeared as... as a second book in a new collection called The Scientific American Library, so I had a very good publisher for the book and in fact made good friends, thanks to this publisher, and I think the book was moderately successful because there was a subscription organised by The Scientific American for all the books of this library.

After that I began having a little more free time. I was very busy with the ICP of course, but I was less busy with... with the lab work. I had some very good co-workers – Paul Lazarow, Miklós Müller and a number of others in New York. Baudhuin, Beaufay and Berthet, were in Belgium. But they all had their own groups and I didn't really have to... much to do with them except discussing, so I did not have my own group any more. So I could spend a little more time. And so after writing that first book, I decided that I would now try to condense what is essential in a cell. That book was sort of a tour of everything that you can find in a living cell, and so I decided, now, let's find out what... what are the items, what are the properties, what are the characteristics that are essential? And so this was the second book, much thinner, called Blueprint for a Cell, which was in fact more technical, perhaps, than the first one but it had biochemical diagrams – very few pictures, but mostly biochemical diagrams. So I was back on my own turf: biochemistry. But when I got to the end of that book I said, ‘Well, maybe there should be a chapter about the origin of the cell’, and it's a topic that I had been interested in before – I had read books on the subject and I knew a little about what was going on in that field, and so, in preparing that last chapter, again I did a lot of reading and learning and studying and the chapter ended up being the second half of the book, and so it turned out to be more than just a brief description of what was going on but also a discussion of what may have gone on and even some personal proposals concerning some possible mechanisms, so I had become involved in the topic – not only as somebody from the outside who was describing what was going on, but also somebody in... in the inside trying to guess what may have happened. This, of course, put me in a situation that I myself would have disapproved of, very much earlier, because when you do research, laboratory research, you can become very irritated when people come and tell you this could be like that or this could like that. Good ideas are a dime a dozen – really, what is important and what takes time and energy and effort is doing the actual experiments to test your ideas in most cases ending up with the conclusion that your idea is wrong. And so coming up with fresh ideas is something that I always found irritating in others when I was doing active research and here I was, doing the same thing. Because there were a number of really good people – Stanley Miller, Leslie Orgel, Jerry Joyce, and quite a number of others – really working very hard in the lab to try and reproduce some of the chemical reactions whereby life may have started.

And so I... especially since I am not the most tactful person, my entrance in this field was not, I mean, met with... with universal... I don't want to say sympathy because... or approval – in fact, I found those people to be remarkably nice and they've all become friends and I've become a member of their society and so on. They invite me to their meetings and so we've... they have never manifested this irritation with me but I just suspect they must have been irritated because I know what my reactions would have been in the same circumstance. But, anyway, so this was my entrance in a new field, which has become my main research activity right now. Okay, it's no longer experimental research, it’s no longer lab research, no longer the kind of research that I used to do and had the most respect for, but it's armchair research. It's armchair research but, nevertheless, it keeps me busy, it keeps me occupied, it keeps me interested in things, and so I have been doing a lot of reading. I've been doing a lot of thinking, lecturing even, proposing a few new ideas – the importance of thioesters, for instance, which I had learnt from my early days in bioenergetics and so on. I think I may have brought in a little fresh air in that field because origin of life is a field that is... has become, since the historical experiments of Stanley Miller in 1953... has become a thriving area of research with really first class people working in it. But most of those people are organic chemists, strangely enough, and so their approach is the approach of the organic chemist. And in a way, I'm one of the first biochemists who happened to become interested. George Wald was another one and he wrote some interesting things in the old days. And we still have these discussions – I mean, my friends in the field and myself, as my approach as a biochemist is very different from them, because I'm saying our chemistry of today, our biochemistry, is rooted in the early chemistry of life and therefore we could use what we know of today's biochemistry to try and guess and maybe reproduce what happened, and they have a completely different attitude: they say the early chemistry was a completely different chemistry and biochemistry sort of grew out of this early chemistry, but was a completely different reaction. I mean, the reactions of biochemistry are reactions that could never occur spontaneously – they're all catalysed by enzymes and without the enzyme to do the job, nothing happens, and so the early chemistry, since there were no enzymes, must have been different, in which they are correct. But what I'm telling them is that there may have been... not enzymes, because there were no proteins, but there may have been peptides which are easily made under pre-biotic conditions and those peptides could have been the earliest enzymes, the crude rudimentary enzymes but enough to catalyse the kind of reactions that take place today. So we are having interesting arguments, and since I have more and more time, I can spend more time thinking, reading, arguing and writing.

And so, after Blueprint for a Cell, which came out, I think, in '91, I wrote a book that, in a way, I thought maybe my last one. I always say the last one is the last one. This I called Vital Dust. And Vital Dust is... is more addressed to the lay public. I mean, it's still rather... it's tough reading for the lay public, it's maybe a little too easy for the scientist, but, anyway ,Vital Dust went one step further. In Vital Dust I not only discussed the origin of life, but I discussed also evolution up to the onset of... of mankind. So to write that book I had, again, to do an enormous amount of reading and studying and learning. So, to me, writing these books has been particularly gratifying because it's been a learning experience all the time and I found that very enriching. Anyway, so I had to learn about evolution of life. I had to learn something about plants which I knew nothing about and... and so on, and also about the origin of man. And the subtitle of Vital Dust is Life As a Cosmic Imperative. So I'd begun to... to formalise my thinking on the subject and one of the conclusions which most... most experts agree on is that life, being a chemical process, was bound to... to start under the conditions under which it started. It's chemistry so it's deterministic; it's obligatory under the conditions. So life is a cosmic imperative to the extent that the conditions for... needed for life to arrive are obligatory and the odds are that they not only occurred on... on Earth but maybe in other planets in the universe and this has become, today, a question of major interest. Nobody knows the answer but many people are now looking for signs that there may be extraterrestrial life. So Vital Dust goes beyond even the advent of humankind. I'm not sure that I forget... I remember that the book was divided in... in seven ages – just like the stone age, the iron age. I think the first one was the age of information, then the age of chemistry... sorry, age of chemistry first, age of information, then the age of the cell, multicellular organisms, man – humans, I'd better say – and the seventh age was the age of the future. And so I was beginning to look into what are the prospects.

And I started very cautiously approaching the philosophical aspects. Maybe not really religious but philosophical aspects of this whole saga of life – 4 billion years almost of life on this planet starting with very simple forms of life and evolving slowly into the first eukaryotic cells and then quite late the first multicellular organism, the plants, and only 600 million years ago the animals, and only 6 million years ago the beginning of the last chapter leading to human kind... only 200,000 years ago. Very recent. And so I began to ask: what does this mean? Is this meaningless or does it have a meaning? That's a philosophical question, and there was... the meaninglessness of everything was very much a popular kind of thinking, some years ago. Jacques Monod wrote his famous book, Chance and Necessity, which appeared 35 years ago. And in the book – I know it almost by heart – he says, for instance, ‘The universe was not pregnant with life.’ Just different from what I said, a cosmic imperative. ‘The universe was not pregnant with life nor was the biosphere pregnant with man’, and then he ends the book with this beautiful sentence: ‘Man knows at last that he is alone in the unfeeling immensity of the universe.’ And Steven Weinberg, a very well known physicist in the United States, says the same thing. He's in an aeroplane... I forget exactly what he writes – he looks down and he thinks about the meaninglessness of it all. And this went together with, well, existentialist philosophy of the '60s – Sartre and Camus and so on: everything is absurd; there is no meaning. And I've never been – perhaps not intellectually, but sentimentally – very sympathetic to that kind of thinking and to me the existence of life and the existence of mind, obviously, are meaningful. I mean, there are properties that are so remarkable and so extraordinary that they do mean something about what the universe is all about. And so Vital Dust ends on that kind of note and also on a note of warning for the future because of this very recent event in the history of life, the last millennia, not many millennia, the advent of living beings that have developed a brain – a mind sufficiently advanced to be able to understand the nature of life, their own nature... not only to understand but to manipulate life at the present time which implies a tremendous responsibility, a cosmic responsibility, or at least planetary responsibility for all the future of life on Earth and the future of humankind. This may be another 5 billion years before the Earth becomes definitely uninhabitable because the Sun is going to explode and burn us all to a cinder, but 5 billion years is more than the whole history of life until now, so anything can happen in the... the future and the difference is that for 4 billion years, what happened was ruled by natural selection, and suddenly with the advent of... of man, it's not only natural selection alone – it's still active, but it is also what we as a species are going to do, and obviously what is happening right now doesn't inspire tremendous optimism in the future. We may... we may have all the intelligence that is needed to do all that we do but natural selection may have privileged intelligence for all kinds of reasons that we can think of, but it may... it may well not have privileged the wisdom needed to manage the fruits of the intelligence. So this has become for me a major thought and all this led to another book.

Vital Dust appeared... I forget now, '85... no '95... something like that, and then later in 2002 appeared the later book which was called Life Evolving – Molecules, Mind and Meaning as subtitle. And I don't like the title; it was more... sort of, more or less, imposed on me... not imposed, but suggested by others in publishing, but I prefer the title of the French translation... well, translation... I also wrote it because French is my mother language and the French book is called A L'écoute du Vivant – Listening to Life – and I thought that was a better title, because all... the book is really trying to learn from life what kind of message... what kind of lesson it has... it has to give us, and so the book is, again, addressed to a general public, and also to scientists – which was a mistake, to mix the two... the two readerships in a single book. Anyway, the book covers much of the same ground as... as Vital Dust but in a different vein and it goes further... it goes further into topics such as extraterrestrial life and intelligence, biotechnologies and so on, which are not discussed in Vital Dust, but basically the book does survey the origin and the evolution of life. As I said, it's addressed at the same time to scientists and to the general public; that is, to scientists because I used that book to introduce some of my... some of my ideas and I will come to one that I think is of some importance a little later, but... but at the same time was trying to explain to the general public what biology is all about. And so I think the book... the book wasn't successful, not in the United States; the French translation was... was moderately successful, in fact. But in the United States it was not successful, probably because I was mixing two audiences; the scientists found all the stuff addressed to the general public boring and the general public found all the stuff addressed to the scientists as much too complicated.

Back to what was really a new thing in... in the... Life Evolving, in the latest book, namely for the first time I moved from just philosophy, Vital Dust, to religion. The last chapter of Life Evolving is titled How about God in all that? Now, that was a topic that I had carefully avoided for most of my professional life. I talked about my childhood. I explained how I had been a pupil of the Jesuits and a devout Catholic at that time. And I had been trained, let's say, to think in terms of philosophy and theology. Socrates... Socrates and Thomas Aquinas. And then suddenly when I discovered science at university I discovered a new way of approaching reality and suddenly all these dogmas, these beliefs, appeared to me just completely irrational and there is no justification. And so, my faith, if I may say, was lost, very rapidly, and this raised a major problem for me when I was offered a chair at the Catholic University of Louvain. Because, in those days, the Catholic University of Louvain was very Catholic. It was... the chancellor was a bishop, the board of administrators was all the bishops of Belgium, and if you were appointed a professor you had... I wouldn't say swear allegiance, but at least you had to, sort of, make some kind of gesture with respect to the... to the church, and this attitude of the university is, of course, what caused the foundation in Belgium of the Free University of Brussels, which was in fact founded by Freemasons as a reaction against the dogmatic University of Louvain. I should say that even though Louvain has always been Catholic and rooted in the Catholic Church, it has always been at odds with the Vatican. It's been a haven for rebel theologians and they've had many fights with the Vatican, and the University has had a number of really first-class scientists. Georges Lemaître who discovered the Big Bang – a friend of Einstein and so on, and he discovered the Big Bang and called it l'atome primitif, the primitive atom. He was a priest and so we've had some very good mathematicians, some biologists. So the University did not put any constraint on the research. That is, they accepted the fact that science is a completely free tool to investigate matters; there was never any question of imposing, let's say, some kind of vitalism or finalism or intelligent design – all the biologists were quite free and happy to do biochemistry like everyone else. There was no Catholic biochemistry as opposed to freethinking biochemistry; there was only one biochemistry. So there was no problem there, but when it came to philosophy, theology, the humanities; there... of course, there was a manifest slant in favour of the prevalent dogma, if I may say.

To me, when I was offered the chair, this was a major... a major problem – should I accept and therefore, sort of, bow down to this authority in some ways, or should I go elsewhere and be free? And, well, family reasons intervened; by that time I had two children, a wife of course, and especially our families... especially my wife's family were very much attached to the children and so on. And so moving away would have been a very traumatic experience for the whole family and so, more or less reluctantly, very reluctantly, I decided that I would accept. Professionally I can't complain because, I mean, the work that has made me known in the field of science was done at the Catholic University of Louvain so, obviously, they did not interfere with my freedom as a scientist and I remain grateful to them; they supported me whenever it was possible. And so the problem, for me, was simply that being a member of the faculty at the Catholic University of Louvain, I felt that my loyalty to the institution demanded that I should not publicly speak on religious matters. And so I kept... I kept that attitude for almost the whole of my life until very recently. Although, of course, my friends knew. And probably many of the university knew that I wasn't a very strong believer, but I never made a gesture, if I may say so.

I'm getting very old; in fact I've reached an age where many people don't live any more, at which many people don't live anymore and so, approaching the end, I felt somehow that I could not die on a lie. I could not just let the little world around me think that I agreed with... with what, to me, was mostly nonsense. And so the last book, Life Evolving, I decided to come out of the closet and speak. And so the book is a... and that's probably a reason why it was not very successful in the United States – the book is really addressed to my friends, to my Louvain colleagues, and in fact the preface of the book is a reminder of my youth. I tell them about how when I was a boy scout and I was standing round the campfire at night and singing, I felt this religious fervour that animated me in those days, and then I tell them how I changed my mind later, and I apologise to them for coming out and saying so, and so, I explained, that's the preface, and the end, again, tells the same thing. So writing that last chapter was something that was very important for me, very difficult. I had to really find the wording and also I had to... to clarify... clarify my own thoughts, which were far from clear on the subject. I'm not sure that my thoughts are clear today but somehow I found a way that, probably, my desire to compromise and not to hurt people too much, I don't know. Maybe it's just because I was educated that way and all the traces left by this early childhood and education remain in my brain, in my mind. But I've found what, to me, looks like a rather satisfactory explanation although it is not really an explanation and the line of thought is the following. Religious... religion has always been a part of the human psyche; it's always been... I mean, you go back to the earliest civilisations and you always find belief in something – you find rites, you find ceremonies, sacrifices sometimes, and very often belief in an afterlife. I mean, Egyptian pharaohs did that and so on. That is understandable, but it's nonsense; it's just because the universe... the world is full of unanswered questions, and so not having the answer to those questions, we invent answers and we invent answers that will be a consolation to us. That will be... so we love life and so we like to think that there will be an afterlife and so on. We don't understand the world and therefore we don't understand life, so we attribute life to some kind of special force. We don't understand the universe so we think the universe was created by a god; so this is a very natural way of answering those questions that always were asked, I think, by human beings as soon as they had the brain to formulate the question. And so during the millennia that have passed, we have seen this evolution also of religious thought; there are very few people in the world that do not have some kind of religion. Even Freemasons have a religion – they even have rites, they have beliefs, they don't have dogmas.

As I said, when... and this is very recent, as science started to provide answers to the questions that were asked, obviously the questions... the answers that had been invented before fell down the wayside because they were not necessary any more. Science had provided an answer, so where does life come from? We don't know, but we have a reasonably good answer. How does life function? We do know and so we don't need the vital spirit to explain it. And evolution – how did it work out? Well, Darwin and others have given us satisfactory and intellectually satisfactory explanation which is based on a lot of evidence that confirms and conforms the explanation and so, yes, with the development of science the explanations invented to account for the things we don't understand could progressively be abandoned. And I think most scientists who are aware of these new answers have abandoned the religious explanations. There are a few exceptions, but not many. And it's just because most of the people are not aware of the scientific explanations, or not able to understand the scientific explanations, or, which is worse, refuse to listen to the scientific explanations because they believe they contradict what they believe in. Those people, of course, still go on and that is what is really supporting religion.

I don't know exactly how to... to explain this, but my own thinking was, of course, the one that I... that I have just summarised and explained but, contrary to what many of my colleagues, or contemporary colleagues, claim, I don't think this gives a final answer. In Britain, for instance, militant atheism is characteristic of quite a number of scientists – I mean, Richard Dawkins, Atkins and others actually go out preaching atheism, which is a sort of a religion too. And I don't think there is justification... there is justification for... for, sort of, removing from the physical or the chemical universe and the biological universe... removing intervention by some extra material force, but there remains... there remains even if everything that we... that we see and experience is natural, including life, including even the operation of our brain, there is... finally the unanswered question is: what is it – why is there something instead of nothing? Where does the something come from? So the... the basic mystery remains, and so I have sort of constructed for myself a kind of non-theistic mysticism which my friends tell me approaches the philosophy of the Spinoza, which is pantheism or panentheism, and what I do not accept is the existence of a god, the way... the way most people identify it – that is, a being that has all the qualities that we appreciate in a human being, but at the infinite power. That is, he's infinitely good, he's infinitely true, he's infinitely powerful, he's infinitely everything including infinitely existing. And that sort of anthropomorphic attitude, figure, representation, of a divine being, I think, is an invention; it's a human invention. When... when we read in the Bible that God created man in his own image, it's obviously the... the opposite that's true: man created God his own image. And... but, nevertheless, I see there is a mystery somewhere and I call it... because I don't like the word God, I call it Ultimate Reality. The Ultimate Reality is something... it is what exists – that’s why I call it reality; everything is part of you and me and the leaves and the trees and the worms and the ground and the rocks and whatever, the... the galaxies, the stars, all that is part of Ultimate Reality. And Ultimate Reality, what it actually is, we don't know, because all we see is manifestations of Ultimate Reality. Not creations; that's the difference. I don't see God as a creator of all this reality, because then I have to ask, who created God? And so this is an endless series – it's like a Russian doll kind of thing – and therefore, at some stage, you have to stop. And so why not stopping at just what is? And so Ultimate Reality is what just happens to be. Now, physicists... I have elaborated extremely complex theories on what is and, of course, I'm not competent to go into string theory or the theory of everything and so on, but to me this is just Ultimate Reality.

Ultimate Reality, the way I see it, has several facets. One facet is the intelligible facet; it's what we human beings can approach by means of our intellect, and that facet has been understood to a fairly large extent already by the physicists... come up with gravitation, with quantum mechanics or relativity and so on and so on. The biological aspect is very well understood today and so on. So that part that can be approached by the intellect – has become now explored to a fairly large extent – but there are other facets; there is, for instance, a facet that is approached with emotions, and that we approach by way of artistic manifestations. An artist who paints a painting, or sculpts a statue, and so on, or even a writer who writes a poem, a poet who writes a poem, or a musician who composes a concerto or a symphony or whatever, I mean, they... I think they are moved by a sort of personal contact that they are better achieved than others, a personal contact with that other facet, that emotion, I would say. Aesthetic facet... beauty, if you like, part of reality. Science approaches truth but the artist approaches beauty and he expresses... he or she expresses their... their reaction to this approach... to this contact with that facet of reality, through their works – the music or the paintings or the statues, the writings, the poems. And we... we are sort of induced to share something of that emotion. We are brought into contact with that facet of Ultimate Reality thanks to the work of the artists and the musicians and so on who had the ability to sort of express what it is ineffable, what is inexpressible, in words at least.

Now there is another aspect again – oh, it's the old trinity, the good and the true – I mean, the beautiful... beauty, truth and goodness. And here... here is where religion, as far as I'm concerned, is still needed and still has something to do. As human beings we need... we need guidance. I mean, society cannot work without laws – laws that are followed by the people – and among those laws, the moral laws are extremely... extremely important. We all have instinctively... instinctively, we make a distinction between what is good and what is bad. But exactly what is good and what is bad is not always easy to know, and it changes with times, with the people, generations and so on. Contraception was bad when I was young; now it's considered very good by most people except the Vatican. And so on, so distinction between goodness and badness is inherent – it's inborn. But to know what is good and what is bad, and how the laws should be shaped in terms of that distinction – that is something that society has to decide and that we decide all the time. And I think that, in this respect, we need guidance. Most of us don't have the time or the energy or the interest to start thinking and working on that. We're all busy doing our thing, and so we are not really free enough to start thinking about these very deep problems, and so I think it is useful to have... to have moral guides. And in this respect, for instance, I'm quite ready to describe myself as a Christian because I think Christianity, whatever the beliefs on which it rests and which I think is nonsense... but Christianity is a teaching. It includes the moral teaching by a historical person who happens to be Jesus and I think that moral teaching was something new for the times. You know, turn the other cheek and love thy neighbour – I don't know exactly the English words – like you love yourself. So... and I think that is useful and I think... I think churches... at least the old style churches, the cathedrals, are still... are still buildings that have a significance to me. I mean, when you are in a building like that you... you do feel that it brings you somehow in... in contact with another facet of what I call Ultimate Reality. So call me a mystic or a romantic; I'm an unbeliever but I still have this... this feeling of mystery that... that awes me and that inspires me.

There is one more point that I'd like to add to that. I mentioned before we have possibly 5... a life has possibly 5 more billion years to go – the whole history of life has taken less than 4 billion... a little less than 4 billion years, and if we look at the... at the advent of humankind in that, it's only about 6 million years ago that the line leading to humans has separated from the line leading to present day chimpanzees – 6 million years ago. 6 million in 4 billion; that's really a very short time. And that line has detached and has slowly risen. When I say risen... certainly in terms of the size and abilities of the brain, because in just a couple of million years the brain of... the pre-human brain has... has increased more than threefold to attain today a size that is more than... well, almost four times the size of the brain of the chimpanzee, which is the size of the brain of the ancestor we had in common. So in just a couple of million years, the brain which had taken 600 million years to reach a size of, let's say, 350 cubic centimetres, in a couple of million years has grown to the size of 1350, which is a most extraordinary event... the most extraordinary event in the whole of evolution. And with... well, many things have happened with this evolutionary development. But if you look into the future and you say that, well, at least 1500 million years are left – at least, that's what the cosmologists tell us – at most 5000 million years are left, it seems extremely unlikely that we, as human beings, are going just to persist for those very, very, very long times, more or less unchanged. That's impossible. So the question is: what is going to happen? And, well, we can disappear, we can evolve, which we will, and possibly, somehow in this evolutionary future, there may arise, either from the human line or maybe from some other animal line... there may arise beings with a bigger brain that the human brain – why should it stop? Why should this increase in the brain size, and I'm not just thinking of size, but a certain particular wiring that goes with the size, leads to increasing capabilities... why should it stop? Only human hubris can claim that we are the... the top, the final outcome of... of evolution. That obviously cannot be true. And so one may really ask the question: what would happen in the brain of, let's say, living beings, animals, who would have, say, twice the size of our own brain?

Well, think of Lucy. Lucy is, of course, now well-known because her skeleton was discovered some years ago in the Ethiopian desert. Lucy had a brain of about 400 cubic centimetres, so something a little better than a chimpanzee. What happened in her brain, of course, must have been extremely crude. She probably was thinking of finding food, of maybe taking care of her kids, finding a mate and maybe finding a stick and hitting the head of another female – things of that kind. That's probably the best that we can think of that could happen in her brain. She certainly could not have, let us say, imagined or formulated the theory of relativity. She could obviously not have formulated the theory of natural selection. She could not have composed the Ninth Symphony or whatever. I mean, she could not have done what the human brain has... has achieved with a brain size three times her brain size. She could not have imagined... the same way we cannot possibly, with our little brain we're so proud of... we could not possibly imagine what would happen in those hypothetical beings who would have twice the size of our brain. And so they... the only thing that I'm ready to predict is that they will have closer contact with Ultimate Reality. They will understand things about Ultimate Reality that we are unable to understand with our limited brain power. They will... they will have emotions that we cannot share with them because... and so on. So they will approach... this is in a way maybe something of a Teilhardian thought about moving towards the point Omega. I'm not a fan of Teilhard de Chardin, but I can see there is certainly this evolution in the direction of increasing complexity leading to, let us say, closer contact with what I call Ultimate Reality. So this... this finding or recognition, which, of course, I'm not... I'm not personally responsible, for many people have said this before me, but which I share with... it certainly should inspire in us a feeling of healthy humbleness – modesty. We're not the crowning event in evolution. We are not the final outcome. We are not the kings and queens of creation. We are just an intermediary form in a process that is far from finished and may quite possibly give rise to beings who will look upon us the way we look upon Lucy.

Nevertheless, the advent of the human species is a watershed in this... in this slow evolution, because for the first time in the history of life on earth, beings have appeared that are able to understand nature, understand the nature of life, the nature of the universe – maybe not completely, but at least to understand it well enough to be able to manipulate it. And not just to manipulate it instinctively or unconsciously the way even prehistoric man has done when they started breeding animals and cultivating plants – they didn't... they knew what they were doing, but they didn't really know what could be the consequences of what they were doing – whereas we now... we can manipulate life, and the... the... our planet, the nature of our planet, the properties of our planet, we can manipulate them knowing what we are doing, or at least suspecting what the possible consequences may be, and knowing what the possible consequences may be of what we don't do or what we won't do, and so suddenly life has given rise to people that have reached not only understanding, but responsibility. A responsibility that did not exist before. Lucy could not be responsible for what she did. We are responsible. And so in a way the future of life and the future of our planet is in our own hands, and our hands are governed by our own brains, and so it will depend on... very much on what we and our children, our grandchildren, and future generations are going to do with the power that our generation... my generation has given the power to manipulate life. It didn't exist when I was a student and suddenly it exists. So what will they do with this power is a... is a major problem and, as I said before, there is the danger that natural selection may have in fact privileged intelligence when it... it favoured the advent of human beings with their bigger and bigger brains; privileged intelligence to understand and manipulate, but not because it wasn't needed at that time. Not the wisdom necessary to manage the fruits, the products of the intelligence. That kind of wisdom was probably not needed by prehistoric man or by Lucy or by those intermediate forms. All... all that was useful for them and what was retained by natural selection was to be intelligent, to be bright, to be crafty.

So what will happen? Well, I don't know. Nobody knows. But either our children and our few coming generations will somehow, through their reason, acquire the necessary wisdom, in which case they may... they may prevent major disasters to occur... from occurring, or they won't because it's not in their genes, and they can't learn it rapidly enough. And then natural selection will take care of them; that is, the consequences of some of our misguided actions will be so dramatic that natural selection will intervene and save whatever has to be saved at that time. And I don't like to end on a pessimistic note, but as I am speaking right now, a major disaster is again menacing New Orleans and Houston, Texas. It's a week after... after Katrina. Now winter comes and it's going to... and maybe we don't know, but there is some evidence that all these increasingly devastating hurricanes maybe linked to some extent with the climate change, and a climate change that we may have been causing through our activities, our use of fossil fuels and so on and so on and so on. I don't know, but there is a possibility, a very distinct possibility, or even a probability, that if we continue acting the way we do, then increasingly devastating events are going to... to happen and that will certainly endanger the future of life on our planet, and it's a future for quite a long time. Well, we don't know, but I think those are possibilities that we have to keep in mind and we can only hope that those who are responsible for the leadership of the human species will have... exert... exert enough responsibility and enough wisdom to prevent those disasters from taking place.

Well, I don't want to end on... on such a pessimistic note, and so since I was given the opportunity, which I'm not sure whether it's really a... something that I should appreciate, but, anyway, since I've been given this opportunity to talk about myself and to go over what has been a fairly long life... I would say that when I look back... in terms of chance and necessity, which has become, as I said, my main interest... scientific interest – chance and necessity as far as life is concerned – and scientifically my conclusion has been more necessity, less chance than Jacques Monod, Weinberg and others maintain. As it... in terms of my own life, I would say more chance than necessity. Many, many, many of the turning points in this rather circuitous and indirect pathway that I have followed; many of those turning points have been due to chance events – chance events that I had no responsibility for and certainly can claim no credit for. And so I'm... I've been fortunate. Chance has helped me. If there has been necessity, as I look back, I think I can say, yes, there's been one sort of dominating feeling in my own mind and it's the kind of desire or need, ambition for... to excel. Now that's a very nasty thing, but that happens to be... I've always wanted to be first, and I... I have to acknowledge that. But not... not to become famous, not to become powerful, not to... to become wealthy. I've not become anything to those sorts of things. I think because I had this instinctive admiration for excellence, for doing the best possible thing whenever you were asked to do something, and in my little scientific life, that is essentially what I have tried to do – to cultivate excellence – and I think that probably has been the straight line throughout all these detours that chance has created on the pathway.

I wrote that book with considerable misgivings. I... I spent a lot of time writing and re-writing that last chapter. I didn't want to hurt feelings. I wanted... I didn't want to betray my own truth. And when the book came out, I... I was... I was terribly concerned. I was wondering what's going to happen. I mean, my friends are going to be very upset and many will be angry. Surprisingly, there has been mostly positive reaction... mostly positive reaction. The members of the Louvain University – they are intelligent people, they are honest people, and they recognise intelligence; they recognise honesty when they see it. And many of them probably have gone through more or less the same kind of mental evolution, and so many of them... some... well, some have said, 'You've said aloud, or you have written, what we have always thought.' And others have said, 'Well, I don't agree with you, but I respect your honesty.' And so, on the whole, it was probably a mistake on my part not to speak earlier. On the other hand, the University was much more dogmatic and authoritarian when I was a young professor than it is today. Today, it's a very liberal institution. So that... that went all right. But when I wrote Life Evolving because of this being really my... my testament... my... my intellectual testament, I thought, this is the last book I'm going to write. And then, as has happened before, I decided, no. I decided I made a mistake in writing this book at the same time for two separate readerships, for the scientists and for the general public at the same time, because the scientists would be sort of turned off by all the boring stuff that I am writing for the general public, and the general public will be turned off by the... the more scientific aspects. So I decided I'd have to split those two, and so I started by writing a new book addressed to the scientists. I decided, well, in all this thinking that I've made, some... modest, but some original theories or ideas have come up, and I would like to put those together in a way that my fellow scientists – not just biologists or biochemists, but also physicists and cosmologists, geologists... I mean, anybody who can understand the scientific language – can read, so that at least my contribution, if there is any contribution, to the topic of the origin of life, and of the evolution of life, could be made clear. Since I don't publish papers any more, the only way that I can... that I can publish those ideas is by way of my books.

I wrote a book, very thin, called Singularities. It will come out any day in the United States and it has already come out in French a few months ago. And Singularities deals with a number of events or properties that are single in the history of life – unique. And, for instance, there is a single common ancestor for all living beings. All living beings are made of cells; singularity. All cells are surrounded by membranes based on lipid bilayers; singularity. All cells use metabolic reactions that are catalysed by protein enzymes; singularity. All living cells use ATP as a major vehicle for energy; singularity. All cells use electron transfers and proton transfers in the mechanisms serve to generate ATP; singularity. All living cells use... living organisms use DNA as the repository... the replicable repository of information; singularity. DNA in all living organisms is transcribed into RNA which does a lot of things. Some of that... much of that RNA is messenger RNA – is translated into protein; all these are common to all living beings. That's what I call singularities, and so with this little book, I've in a way done what I did twenty years ago with Blueprint for a Cell, summarising what are the really key properties of life as I see them, and of the origin and evolution of life. And one... perhaps the most... slightly original part of the book is a sentence which reads: ‘Chance does not exclude inevitability.’ Now, it's a sort of dogma among biologists and the dogma has been supported by extremely... extremely competent and charismatic and convincing... convincing preachers. I'm thinking, for instance, of the late Steven Jay Gould, Lynn Margulis and a number of others, and the dogma says the history of life has been governed by chance. If it were to be started all over again, the outcome would be completely different and so even in this history, we human beings are just accidents that... produced merely by chance.

Now, there is an implicit reasoning behind that statement. Namely, the reasoning as I see it is the following. Natural selection has no foresight. Natural selection just screens passively what... the form that is best adapted to survive and produce progeny under the existing conditions. It does that among the... the variants that are offered to it. It cannot invent the forms, so there may be much better forms but if they're not offered through natural selection, they won't... they won't be selected. And implicit... well, in that... in that... well, no, it's not implicit... what is known about the mechanism whereby these different variants are offered to natural selection – what is known is that these are accidental events. I mean, mutations, genetic modifications, are not programmed. They're not intentional. They're not... they don't appear... they don't occur in view of a certain goal. They are not goal directed. They are accidents. They're not chance events in the way that you would call chance events because they are... but they are accidents. They have causes, and they can be induced in some ways, but they are accidents. And that is known, and that is a very strong teaching of molecular... modern molecular biology. Mutations are accidental. And so... but what is behind... what has, I think, sort of implicitly been derived from the accidental nature of the mutations is that historically, natural selection at each of these important steps was offered only by chance a very limited array of possibilities to choose from, so that if it were to be started all over again, the tape should re-run and allowed to run... re-wound and... well, anyway, and allowed to... to play again as Steve Gould says, and then the outcome would be completely different because a different collection of possibilities would be offered to natural selection by chance.

Now there is... there is a preconceived bias in... in accepting that idea: namely that indeed in the historical events, only a small array of possibilities was provided. But you can demonstrate... and I did demonstrate with a small mathematical... nothing very... very advanced, but anyway one can demonstrate that an event, any event, can be made to happen with a high probability provided you offer sufficiently... a sufficient number of opportunities for this event to happen. And you toss a coin; the chances that it falls on the head face is one in two, toss it ten times and the chances it will fall at least once on the head face is 99.9%. Play roulette, same thing. 250 times number 8 will come out with a 99.9% probability. Buy a lottery ticket, seven digits, your chance of winning is 1 in 10 million. You will win in 99.9% of the cases if there are 69 million drawings. So enough opportunities and the probability of winning increases. Well, obviously the lottery's not organised that way. There's only a single drawing. But the evolutionary lottery is something completely different. In the evolutionary lottery, it has been played on millions, billions, sometimes trillions of individuals, many generations over sometimes millions of years, and so one can... one can predict that in a number of cases, in fact, chance will have offered natural selection a more or less complete exhaustive array of possibilities so that the outcome is optimisation. And so selective optimisation is a new... is a new concept. I didn't invent... I didn't invent anything, but anyway I have come to that conclusion that selective optimisation may have been involved more often than is... than is generally believed... more often than is believed in the history of life, and therefore that a number of steps were more or less obligatory under the conditions under which they took place.

Interestingly, professional evolutionists, but independently of my little theory, are coming to the same conclusion, and you read the latest book by Simon Conway Morris, you read the latest book by Richard Dawkins, and you find a new... a new main theme, which is evolutionary convergence – that is, two lines evolving completely separately, one in Australia, the other one in South America, and coming to the same adaptations to the same environmental challenges. And there are hundreds of examples of this and both Dawkins and Conway Morris who have completely different philosophical attitudes... Dawkins is a militant atheist and Conway Morris is a practising Christian – I don't know what denomination – and so they both agree on this particular point. So I think the biologists of the future will see a different history of life. Instead of the mono Gould vision of everything is governed by chance, they will see a much more obligatory and deterministic pathway for the origin of life and for its evolution in the direction of increasing complexity. And so that, I think, is probably my... my main little contribution to this whole field, and so partly to... to make it clearer and put it into a scientific context, I have written this book, Singularities. And if I have time and incentive to do it, I may well write yet another book. I don't know about that, but maybe one that I would call in English, Listening to Life, which is a title I like for the French book, and in which I would just put the... the amount of information that is really of interest for the general public, because I think it's important for our scientists to... to try to inform and, if possible, educate the general public, because the only chance... the only opportunity that mankind has, or humankind has, to prevent some of the catastrophes that can be feared, if not predicted, in the future is to... to choose their leaders better than they have done today, because it's the leaders that are really responsible. And we, the general public... we choose our leaders by voting for them and to vote wisely, we have to be informed, we have to be educated, and I think this is really what is lacking in the world today, that not enough people are correctly informed and correctly educated. I think this is a major responsibility for us as scientists. We must get out of our labs and our institutes, and we must go into the public, write to the newspapers, and participate in this... in this activity of information and education of the general public.

The problem of the origin of life is in fact very easily defined, if not solved. Basically, the origin of life is to find the pathway between a beginning and an end, both of which are fairly well known today. And the beginning is something that even thirty years ago was not known. Thirty years ago, most scientists were interested in the kind of work that Stanley Miller was doing, and others... that is, reproducing in the laboratory the sum of the reactions that could have taken place on earth to make the first amino acids, for instance, which is what Miller is famous for... 1953, the same year as the double helix. What we now know is that we don't need Miller kind of chemistry, because that kind of chemistry is taking place everywhere spontaneously. The bricks of life – amino acids, sugars, fatty acids, nitrogen as the bases – are being made everywhere in our solar system, probably in other places in the galaxy, and in other places in other galaxies in the universe. What used to be called organic chemistry because it was believed to be a prerogative of living organisms, including in the last century organic chemists – organic chemistry turns out to be the most banal, the most abundant chemistry in the whole universe. And we know this because we look at... at space with a... with instruments that can analyse spectrally the radiation... very faint radiation, and there is evidence of organic molecules out there. We can... we have sent instruments on comets to analyse comets and found organic chemicals. We... specially, we've analysed meteorites that fell on earth and they contain amino acids. They contain all kinds – adenine, fine. So the bricks of life... almost certainly, those bricks were the beginning. Life started. It would be too much of a coincidence to think of the bricks being there and life starting with something else. The final outcome of the origin of life is so-called LUCA – the Last Universal Common Ancestor – which is the form of life from which all known living organisms are descended. So we have some idea of what the LUCA was because all we have to do is to look at all forms of life on earth, and what they have in common must have been present in the LUCA. I'm simplifying a little, but that basically is the same. So we have to find how it worked out. Now, from the bricks to LUCA there was a very long pathway which we know hardly anything of, except we have a fairly good idea of an intermediate in that pathway, and that's RNA. Because RNA almost certainly came before DNA for reasons that are well known now, and RNA certainly came before proteins because proteins are made by RNA. Even today, protein molecules are made with the help of RNA catalysts, transfer RNAs, messenger RNAs, and the ribosomen RNA that serves as a peptidual transfer agent.

So RNA is a watershed, because from the bricks of life to RNA, chemistry was solely in charge. Once RNA appeared, or whatever first molecule was capable of being replicated, once replication was introduced, you had automatically variation, competition and selection. So natural selection, with RNA selection, came in. From then on life was chemistry plus selection. Now, the chemistry is a very deterministic kind of... of phenomenon and process. Chemical processes are always the same if the conditions are the same. They are reproducible. They are deterministic, which means that life must have started the way it started, the conditions being what they were. And quite a number of investigators now believe that life probably arose in volcanic surroundings, maybe in the deep sea hydro thermal vents that have been discovered, also in the last thirty years. And I like that idea, because among the singularities that I find in the development of life, two I find that particularly impressive to me. One is the use of the pyrophosphate bond for energy transfer. ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP are involved in virtually all energy transactions in all living organisms, and remarkably, ATP, GTP, CTP and UTP are the molecules from which RNA are made... is made. It's quite remarkable. So that is really one of the key molecules in the origin of life, and what ATP, GTP, CTP and UTP have in common is pyrophosphate bonds. And there is evidence that in the history of life, those molecules may have been preceded by inorganic pyrophosphate. Inorganic pyrophosphate may have been the very first conveyor of energy in this process. Now you find pyrophosphates only in a volcanic environment. You need heat... very high heat to condense phosphate molecules into pyrophosphates or polyphosphates, metaphosphates... those are all products of heat. So the environment that would produce pyrophosphates needed for this is almost certainly volcanic.

Now, another group of compounds that I personally have attached considerable importance to, as a biochemist, influenced by my hero, Fritz Lipmann, by others, Ef Racker, Fitzi Lynen, and people who worked on these compounds and identified the first catalyst involved, the thioesters, compounds between acids and thiols – thiols being sulphur compounds analogous to alcohols. And the thioesters bond is one again of the key bonds in life today – that is, it is involved in some of the most central mechanisms of energy transfer again in the so-called substrate level of phosphor relations and the thioester bond is involved in a very large number of bio synthetic mechanisms and some of the coenzymes involved in those have relatively simple structures. Coenzyme A... coenzyme A is made up of two compounds, AMP or phosphor AMP, and... phosphopantetheine and phosphopantetheine is made of three very simple compounds that can all arise spontaneously and condense spontaneously to pantethine under conditions that... sorry about that... conditions that have been reproduced by Stanley Miller and his co-workers, and the other coenzyme involved in thioester based reactions is echoic acid – octanoic acid. Now, octanoic acid is an even simpler molecule. It's just an eight carbon acid with two thiols on two not adjacent, but almost adjacent, carbon atoms. So it's a very simple molecule. Could very well... nobody's made it in the lab, but it could very well arise spontaneously in a volcanic environment again, because thioesters and thiols are derivatives of hydrogen sulphide, and anybody who has visited a volcanic area – whether it's Mount Fuji in Japan or the Yellowstone Park or volcanoes in New Zealand, whatever – will remember the smell. Volcanic vapours smell like rotten eggs and the smell of rotten eggs is due to hydrogen sulphide. So hydrogen sulphide, sulphur compounds, again are most probably most abundant in a volcanic environment. So I see... I tend to see as a biochemist that pyrophosphates and thiols and thioesters, products of... possible products of a volcanic environment may have played a very... a key role in the origin of life similar to the role that they are playing today. And this is a little different from what chemists... or the more organically-minded would tend to believe. They say, 'Well, this is impossible because the reactions in which these compounds participate could not arise without... without enzymes. And enzymes came with proteins, therefore after RNA, so they couldn't have been enzymes there.' And that's my only little original suggestion here, in addition to insisting on the thioesters; my suggestion is that, yes, those reactions could not have taken place without... without a catalyst. Everybody realises that, and all the experts working in this field are looking for catalysts, but they're looking for mineral catalysts. A lot of work has been done with clay, molecules of clay, and metals. Metals are quite important. And so my suggestion has been that, yes, mineral catalysts, metals, have been very important, but perhaps more important were peptides.

Peptides... amino acids, of course, were present among the bricks of life, so there's no difficulty, and joining amino acids into peptides is a relatively simple... I wouldn't say it's simple, but it's something that could have occurred. A number of mechanisms can be proposed and, in fact, there is even evidence that the cosmic chemistry makes peptides. There is evidence that peptides... dipeptides, at least, are present on meteorites and there is evidence that peptides may form, under laboratory conditions, mimicking the conditions in outer space, very low temperature, very high vacuum and radiation. So if... peptides have been made by a Japanese group by using a system that is very much linked with the volcanic nature of the possible cradle of... or the possible volcanic nature of the cradle of life. They had developed a hot/cold reactor which is water that is heated to a high temperature – 100 degrees or 110 degrees under pressure – and then very quickly it's cooled, and they find that at high temperature a number of compounds are made and if you immediately cool very quickly, they are stabilised and they are not destroyed. And they make peptides that way. They've even made nucleotides that way. So it seems to me that if peptides arise, or did arise in those days, they could possibly have catalysed in a very crude fashion some of the reactions that are catalysed today by enzymes, protein enzymes. After all, protein enzymes are peptides and they almost certainly, for reasons that I don't want to discuss... they almost certainly arose from... the proteins of today arose from small peptides, maybe not more than... maybe ten... twenty amino acids long. So those peptides, at short, could have catalytic activities, and peptides are the most likely to reproduce some of the three dimensional configurations that are involved in enzyme catalysis... in protein enzyme catalysis. So for all those reasons, I think maybe early life was... the early reactions that led to life may have been catalysed by... by... partly by peptide catalysts together with minerals, metals, and so on. And, well, my friends tell me, 'Well, that cannot be the case because how are you going to reproduce those peptides? You can't reproduce unless you have replication, and replication came with RNA' – we were talking about before RNA. Well, I'm saying, well, that's a problem for anything that happened before RNA, the reproduction. If RNA was the first molecule to be replicated, by definition what preceded RNA must have been non-replicable. But in chemistry you have a law that, if the conditions are the same, the results will be the same. So all you need is an environment that was conducive to making the peptides and... and allowing the peptides to act. And second condition: this environment must have been stable enough for the process to proceed. And it's very easily conceived that if you're dealing with strictly chemical reactions, that would lead, let us say, from a mixture of bases and riboles and phosphates to the first nuclear... say, triphosphate molecules and from those molecules to RNA. It's easy to conceive that this must have been fast, because we're dealing with chemistry and if... therefore we are dealing with chemical kinetics, and you can't imagine a process with a number of steps in which these steps would be very slow. It would take millennia to... to reach a reasonable concentration, or millions of lives, as has sometimes been claimed. The intermediary would never reach a high enough concentration to participate in the next reaction, because they would go into all side... side directions. And so it must have been fast; and that is essentially the view, of course, expressed very simply that I have tried to advocate for the origin of life, and a view that would have inspired experimental work that I would have done if I were thirty years younger.

Three years ago, or two years ago, I was invited very nicely by my friends to give a... a final lecture at a congress of the society dealing with the origin of life. They had a congress every year – now every other year. And this congress was in Mexico. It was a nice place, Oaxaca, and I gave the title, Draft of a Graft... of a Grant Application for Research on the Origin of Life [sic], because then I explained in that lecture some of these hypotheses and what kind of experiments I would do if I had a lab, if I had a grant, if I had some graduate students, if I had the equipment, and especially if I was thirty years younger.
