colin.renfrew

Baron Renfrew of Kaimsthorn is a British archaeologist known for his work on the dispersal of the Proto-Indo-Europeans and the prehistory of PIE languages. He has been Disney Professor of Archaeology at Cambridge as well as Master of Jesus College and Director of the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.

						Well, to start at the beginning, I was born in 1937 and both my parents were Scottish. My mother was from Ardrossan and my father from Glasgow, from Giffnock, and he went to Glasgow University and did a degree in chemistry and then his first job and from then on he was with ICI Plastics, first of all as a chemist and then more and more into organisation and sales. So they moved south with ICI and so I was born in Stockton-upon-Tees, a place with which I've no other close connection, I may say, and then we lived at Barnard Castle for a few years, which I don't really remember and then we moved south when I was three or four to Welwyn Garden City, which is where I do remember, where I really spent my childhood and so I went to a private school there to start with, Sherrardswood School. And my mother felt that really it wasn't all that she thought it ought to be and so they put me in for a scholarship to St Albans School, which would be described strictly as a public school but it wasn't in the main a boarding school though there were a few boarders there. And so I went in by bus daily with my bus pass and so on, having passed the 11 Plus, which is really what we're talking about, to St Albans. And St Albans School is really an excellent school. It's one of the oldest schools in the country, it was founded in 948, or so it claims, and it occupies the Abbey Gateway, which was the gateway to St Albans Abbey when that was a large complex, and then it has a whole series of other buildings there. And it was run by a very enterprising headmaster who was very keen on the classics and I - one of my early recollections of the school is being taken to see the Greek play in Cambridge. He just asked who wanted to see it and, of course, the Greek play is done in Greek. I wasn't doing Greek at school nor were very many of the other people who went, but it was a good experience. It was “Agamemnon”, it was "The Agamemnon" by Aeschylus, and that was sort of my first experience of things Greek in a very profitable way.
					
						There were some really very good schoolmasters. I think, thinking about it, the man that taught us physics, this is from about the third or fourth form onwards, had got a very clear mind and he always wanted to prove everything, every principle, everything that needed to be proved or demonstrated, he just- he didn't just refer to the text but he would write it all out in longhand on the blackboard so one might studiously copy down but he was very willing to answer questions and argue it out. So if one thought a proof didn't make sense, one was encouraged to question it, and I think that's - that encouraged one to have a questioning frame of mind, as it were. So I think that was really very good education and at that time I was, well, as anybody is, interested in lots of things, interested in everything. The, the English classes were very good. Mr. McClellan got us all hugely enthusiastic, so doing for O level, doing Shakespeare's "Twelfth Night" was great fun. Of course we read it all in class, acted it all through and that was a very good experience. So, gradually, one was encouraged to get interested in a whole range of things and one of the things that interested me quite early on was archaeology. As, as quite a small boy, this was during the war years initially, my father used to take, take me on his bicycle, on the handlebars of his bicycle, just going visiting parish churches, just things to do nearby because there were no cars available in the war years. And I enjoyed that and we used to go and see a few parish churches, didn't make any very serious study of them but the atmosphere was agreeable. And I began to get rather interested in archaeology and so the Latin master was very positive about that and he knew the curator of the Verulamium Museum and she was able to fix up that I should go on some excavations in Canterbury, which I did, I suppose, from the age of 13 or so. And they were directed by Sheppard Frere who started off as a schoolmaster at Lancing College, but I remember Sir Mortimer Wheeler came to visit and obviously the excavations were very good and he was - got a job as a lecturer in London and then quite soon as Professor of Roman Archaeology in London. And so excavating in Canterbury was a good experience, it was the opportunity to go and visit the cathedral and all the buildings which one got to know very well. And it was a marvellous initiative of, or initiation, I should say, in excavating, to be trowelling away and really getting to know stratigraphy and it's often said that Roman British strata are among the, the best way to learn and that was, I think, the experience.
					
						I think it is very fascinating, the sensation that you're digging and so you're revealing information all the time and although I didn't know very much about what I was finding, one - if one's working on the sites a while, one knows one's looking for post holes or something, and of course on a Roman site then one's finding stuff all the time, it's not like some prehistoric sites where you find one flint a day or something, you're digging up pottery all the time, nice Samian ware and so on, and the occasional coin which is naturally a highlight if you're digging, and so I enjoyed that very much and certainly the sensation that you're trowelling and you're being asked by the supervisor to try and follow this layer and then you find there is a floor and you can, if you do it the right way, you can uncover the whole floor rather successfully, the actual materiality, the quality of the soil, I think, is, is something one gets to have a feel of. I don't think at that time I learned to be a very wonderful excavator but there is, in many ways in archaeology, I think the physicality of the subject is attractive, that you do things and you're digging and then you're - sometimes you're using a pickaxe and shovelling it away and so you're actually actively involved and so I enjoyed it very much but I don't think I was, particularly, I wasn't given any huge responsibility. I wasn't drawing many sections at that time or, I suppose I was keeping a notebook but I think there was another site supervisor but I was still quite young, sort of 13 or 14, 15. It wasn't until rather later that while I was up at Cambridge, I went down to Wroxeter, to the field school there, and that was much more systematic where one was keeping notebooks and writing them up in the evening and drawing sections, that's when I learned to draw section properly and so on. And I think it is helpful to have those basics because it's nice to know how the recording system works, but certainly being in the excavation trench seemed very natural after- I was at Canterbury for several years in succession, a couple of weeks at Easter and usually a couple of weeks in the summer. I think Sheppard Frere put up with me very well. I'm not sure I was a great deal of use but they were all very nice, and certainly one does do things. I remember finding individual grains of corn and thinking that's rather interesting, is that interesting? No, that's of no interest, throw it away at once, and in later years, of course, opinions change on these matters but it was - it was a very good experience.
					
						Another thing that I have a very good memory of in those years is our first trip to the continent and my father always enjoyed travelling in, in Europe. Before the war he'd travelled quite widely then obviously during the war it wasn't possible to go on holidays overseas. But quite soon afterwards, he bought a four- seater MG which was a very attractive car, and we set off. This was in 1949 when I was 12, and we set off to the Continent and I remember seeing the Bayeux Tapestry and lots of pleasant things in France. And then we went down to Italy and I remember we made a point of seeing lots of the works of Michelangelo. We saw Leonardo's "Last Supper" in Milan, and Pompeii was one of the high spots, Pompeii and Herculaneum which, of course, have this marvellous atmosphere. And the car broke down just north of Rome and we had to get some repairs done and we were told that Cerveteri was a good place to visit, which, of course, is the great Etruscan necropolis and that was a really interesting experience, to see all these open tombs. Of course there is a fenced off area, but to see all these open tombs, be able to crawl into these rock-cut chambers which were still full of fragments of pottery and so on, brought one very close to what seemed a remote and mysterious past, and, of course, the Etruscans were, and still are to some extent, mysterious, so I found that really a very interesting experience and began to take an interest in the Etruscans from then on.
					
						We had another trip to the Continent a few years later, in 1953, and my father was a great reader and I was very fascinated by the issue of the painted caves, which is your subject, Paul, and so we had the good experience of going to see Lascaux. And in those days if you went to see Lascaux you were shown round by one of the people who'd discovered it as a schoolboy only a few years before, early in the war years. And to see these extraordinary animals painted on the walls, it was romantic and mysterious, just as it still is rather romantic and mysterious. And then we went on to see some of the - the other painted caves, Font de Gaume, Les Combarelles, and then we went on down to Altamira, which I think my father must have known about, and heard again about the story of the discovery of Altamira. And so that was really an interesting experience and one which has always stayed with me. I haven't been back to Lascaux. I've seen, and, in fact, you've shown us painted caves and took us to Altamira not so very long ago again, but Lascaux made a huge impression.
					
						The school was very enterprising. I was in the Royal Air Force section of the school core and that was quite fun. I got a flying scholarship so I learned to fly a Tiger Moth and all that was very good fun, but also one was encouraged to put in for an annual trip which the combined Royal Air Force Cadet Corps of schools did to the United States or Canada, and we always had "Time" magazine at home. My father liked to keep up with the news, so I was quite an avid reader of "Time" magazine and knew quite a lot about American politics and so on and so when we went to interview, asked what one knew about it, and I was able to tell them what I thought about John Foster Dulles, they looked mildly surprised at that, so I did get selected and then the choice was we were going to go to Canada or to the United States and I thought perhaps from reading of "Time" magazine, the United States would be the more interesting place to go to. So I was very pleased to be chosen to go there. So we had two weeks. We started off in Washington, and went - shown the White House, taken round the White House, taken into the Senate Building and there was a debate going on and there was a rather unimpressive, slightly sort of grey looking man talking rather unimpressively to me about the policies of appeasement of John Foster Dulles and I realised this was Joe McCarthy, Senator McCarthy, who was inveighing against communism and so on, very interesting to see McCarthy. This, I suppose, was back in 1954 or something like that, and then we went to Flint, Michigan, and then finished up in New York and stayed in the Waldorf Astoria Hotel so they gave us a very good - and they gave us some free time. So I went to the Metropolitan Museum of Art and I remember the antiquity which impressed me most was a great terracotta warrior, about 10 feet tall terracotta warrior, which was on - in the rotunda on the left, which a few years later was shown to be a complete fake but it had certainly impressed me at the time, so I was able to find time to go to the theatre. We had some free time. I went to see "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" with a very good cast, Burl Ives and Barbara Bel Geddes, so that was a really good - and I think that definitely sort of stimulated my interest in things American which, which was a positive thing really.
					
						At school I was in the sixth form, I'd opted to go into the science sixth because I did find the physics and so on very interesting and if I wanted to understand the world somehow, understand the cosmos, physics was a way to do it and one seemed to be learning things all the time. It was a very progressive course. I didn't feel that quite so much on the arts side although I did enjoy the English very much and the history to some extent, and so it seemed clear that the sensible thing to do was to go into the science sixth and then get one's A levels and then apply to university and so I did apply to Cambridge. I suppose that must have been the headmaster's influence. He was a great Cambridge man, so that was the obvious place to apply being quite close to Welwyn Garden City, it was a natural thing to do and so I remember being put in for a scholarship. Of course, headmasters always love their pupils to win scholarships so that would have been in 1954, I suppose, and so I went to stay in Trinity College and it all seemed hugely grand as, indeed, it was, and I didn't get a scholarship then. I was offered a place, which seemed no bad thing, but the headmaster thought it would be better if I did the scholarship the following year, which would still be in reasonable time. So I went up to St John's the following year and was then offered an exhibition. But in those days one had national service and one could defer the national service, as many people did, but I thought it would probably be better to get it over with so I didn't go up to - to university at once.
					
						For some reason I didn't really find the history hugely interesting. We'd done the Tudors, I think, at my previous school and we seemed to keep on doing the Tudors, I never really got much out of it. I think we may have got as far as the Civil War, as a result of which I've always been totally ignorant about the development of the British political system, and although it was quite interesting to know about the wives of Henry VIII and what Queen Elizabeth did next, it - it never really seemed to add up to very much. The science was much more concrete. You really felt you were learning things that were demonstrable things and the experiments were well designed so that you could actually investigate the issues in question and so on. So I didn't really get much out of the history, and I didn't actually find the Latin classes very interesting. I enjoyed the French because there was a lot of conversation there and so that was - that was pleasant, but I found Latin difficult to get a grip on, I think perhaps because it was never taught as a spoken subject. I think there were some people that learn a language by reading it and others by speaking in it somewhat, so I didn't really find the history very rewarding. But the French was - was positive. My father was very interested in languages. He had a real interest in languages and spoke some Spanish and some German and some French and so on, and he felt very strongly that I ought to be learning a language properly. And when we were in France on that trip to Les Eyzies we met up with a French family, a very pleasant French family, so I went to stay with them for a few weeks while I was still at school, did an exchange, and then Pierre Magnol came over and stayed with us for a few weeks and that was pleasant and certainly good for the French because if you're staying in the family you really are talking in French. So, I think with my father, who must have inspired me that it would be a good idea before going up to do one's national service, because I'd done that scholarship examination in St John's College. That was December, I think, in 1955, so that it would probably be a few months before I'd expect to be called up for national service and so we arranged that I should go to Paris and stay with the family there and went to daily classes in an organisation called the Institut Britannique, which gave French classes, really very good French classes, for foreign students but because I was staying with a family, that was really very - the family was very nice. They were speaking French all the time and living in Paris and plenty of time to go and see the Louvre and go and see really all the museums of Paris, and I got to know Paris very well. I've been very fond of Paris ever since then and so that was a really interesting experience and I got to know the Louvre very well. I was very fascinated by the Louvre and of course the Louvre is wonderfully dramatic with the Venus de Milo here and the Winged Victory of Samothrace at the top of the stairways there and so on, and, of course, it has paintings as well as sculpture so got to know some of the, the Italian paintings well so it was a nice experience to be able to follow one's own inclination and go to the theatre quite a lot, Genet's "La Cantatrice Chauve"  and "The Bald Prima Donna" was on then. And I'd been going to the theatre quite a lot while I was at school and we had a schoolmaster who used to take us to concerts which was very positive. And so I'd seem Samuel Beckett's "Waiting for Godot" in the first English production but, in fact, it was a play that was originally produced in France in French and I was able to see the revival of "Waiting for Godot" in Paris and really began to feel quite at home in the French language which I found really a nice experience to be able to function without thinking back into English which was a very good thing. And so I'd seen quite a lot of archaeology one way and another, and found that particularly interesting.
					
						That was really a good experience. It's a bit of a shock to start with when you're doing your basic training but then I went to Royal Air Force, Jurby, in the Isle of Man, for officer training, and that's quite strenuous, lots of sort of romping around and drilling and nobody's terribly polite, you're just squaddies, but there was time to get to know the Isle of Man a little, which is a very interesting island, and then the sort of field exercises involved 24 exercises on Snaefell. And so that was strenuous but really quite fun and then I went to Royal Air Force, Debden, to do some signals to do some signals training, which was interesting. I didn't really - I was mainly doing radar there but then I got posted to Royal Air Force Wunstorf in Germany, near Hanover, which was in a radio servicing flight so, in fact, I knew nothing at all about the radios, I'd never seen or handled one of the radios whose repair and servicing I was supposed to be supervising, but that seemed to be no great setback. In fact, there were plenty of expert technicians and I had to deal with the paperwork and so on, but Wunstorf was an interesting place because it had been a German Luftwaffe Air Force station, and unlike in Britain at the time, if you were doing national service there, then you had a lot of people who'd been officers during the war and the officers' mess had a genuine Royal Air Force atmosphere, which I don't think it would have done if one had been in an air force base in Britain. So I really got to enjoy the life and really was enjoying it very well so that when my Flight Lieutenant said would I like to stay, to sort of take a permanent commission rather than leave at the end of two years, I still wanted to go on to university, the answer was no, but it didn't seem an odd question. It seemed like a nice alternative to have and so I was able to travel a good deal in Germany. I bought a car which gave me endless trouble, it was - I didn't buy it very well, I think I bought it from a fellow officer on the Air Force base. It proved to be a mistake, but drove down to - drove a good deal through Germany. And on another occasion we went down by train to Munich and enjoyed the beer halls in Munich and then on to, to Salzburg. And I just happened to be going through Salzburg at the, the time of the Salzburg Festival and in those days it wasn't so well attended as now. So I went and said, anything doing for this evening? and they had the Marriage of Figaro with Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau and Irmgard Seefried and Elisabeth Schwarzkopf, under the direction of von Karajan, so that was quite a good evening just to drop into, as it were, and then on to Vienna where I got to know the, the museum, that wonderful museum, the Kunsthistorisches Museum with the wonderful Bruegel paintings and so on. So I really had some good breaks in Germany and was learning a little bit of German also, so that was really two interesting years by way of a break and then when that finished, I went back to Paris for a couple of months and spent a little bit more time in Paris which I enjoyed and then went up to St John's College in Cambridge in - in 1958, and so that's obviously when one entered into a very different atmosphere, the atmosphere of Cambridge in the late 1950s.
					
						As you know, in Cambridge it's very easy to change subjects so at Cambridge I was doing natural sciences for part one, the tripos is divided into two, so doing natural sciences, one did two years for part one and one did a combination of subjects so I did, I think, whole subject physics and organic chemistry and mathematics and advanced mathematics and history and philosophy of science, and biochemistry also, and that's just a mixture that one does and I enjoyed it very much, I found it challenging. I found it quite hard work. I found the mathematics quite hard, I did all right but not brilliantly well, and I think probably the reason I came to make the change was at the end of two years, I did reasonably - got 2:1, which is perfectly respectable, but it was - it turned out to be the history and philosophy of science that I really enjoyed and got into and it began to be clear to me that I wasn't that interested in the physics given that I didn't think I was going to be a great physicist, as I say, my maths didn't really seem to be clicking that well, and I wasn't that fascinated by an individual chemical compound. If you're going to go on to do research and organic chemistry, it might be to look at the properties of this particular compound, but I didn't think I was really interested that much in the properties of any particular compound and I began to think perhaps it would be really rather interesting to do archaeology seriously as one's subject and in Cambridge it was possible to change quite easily so when I went to see my tutor in St John's and said I think I'd like to think of changing to archaeology, it was the easiest thing in the world for him to say, well, that's fine, I'll arrange an appointment with Dr Daniel, Glyn Daniel, whom I already knew in the college and was able to talk about changing and he was very encouraging, made it very easy, and the thinking was that having done two years in part one in natural sciences, which was the normal thing to do, and, indeed, sufficient qualification with the exam to get the BA degree, but in archaeology and anthropology it was usually a one year part one and therefore a two year part two so the suggestion was that if I was going to change it would be better not to do the part one again but to take two years doing the part two archaeology which means that one course overall would be four years rather than three years, but that was quite readily agreed and the scholarship which I had was - seemed to be quite easily adjusted in that direction so the transition was quite a smooth one.
					
						I'd conceived the desire to know more about the Etruscans. I already had an Etruscan coin collection, I didn't mention the coin collection which I'd started to form as a schoolboy. I just sort of collected things and collecting coins but collecting them increasingly seriously and after the visit to Etruria while I was just 12, I got interested in the Etruscans and started collecting Etruscan coins. I never really got to know all that much about them except from a collecting standpoint but I'd built up really quite a good collection and so I'd heard of this course for foreigners at the University of Perugia in Etruscology which is a course that's given in Italian so was clearly necessary to know some Italian so I thought it would be a good idea to go on a course in Italian for foreigners to start with which I did in the University of Siena and that was a wonderful experience, mainly because Sienna is such a beautiful city and one was having classes in the university - summer classes in the University of Siena and going to see Sienese painting and the great authority on Sienese painting, Enzo Carli, was talking about that subject and so had a wonderful two or three weeks in Siena in my first long vacation, and so it seemed very appropriate to go off to this Etruscan course in the second long vacation and by this time I was really getting quite interested in the Etruscans and we had very good classes, Massimo Pallottino, the great authority on the Etruscans was in charge of the course, and Louisa Banti, a great authority on art history, was teaching, so they really had very good people and so that was fun to do, very good for my Italian as well, and so somehow archaeology seemed to be getting more and more interesting and in Cambridge I was going to the evening lectures at the field club, the students' field club in archaeology, and then I also went on Martin Biddle's excavations at Nonesuch. Martin, of course, was himself an undergraduate at the time but very high powered and already directing these massive excavations at Henry VIII's completely ruined palace at Nonesuch and there again Martin, of course, was a very good digger and thinks about the stratigraphy very carefully, so debating stratigraphy with Martin the trench I was supervisor of was interesting and worthwhile. So, as you say, by that time, I was perhaps ready for a change to archaeology which I was taking more and more seriously and so that's really how that changeover occurred. So I think you're right that the - having done a lot of digging, although not really in a very high powered way from my point of view, having done a lot of digging in Canterbury, made it seem a natural and interesting thing, not a quirky thing, but a natural thing to do and then Cambridge, of course, was a wonderfully easy place to make that change. And then I did already know Glyn Daniel in - in St John's, my room was in third court on the same stairway as Dr Daniel, of course all the names are written there so as soon as I arrived and Dr Daniel was naturally a television figure at that time as the chairman of Animal, Vegetable, Mineral, so one knew Dr Daniel from television very thoroughly already, and as you know very well, Paul, he was such a delightful person that one very soon got - just was on the stairway that he was very-  I remember towards the end of my first year, very daring, I got together a party and invited a lot of people I by then knew from in the college or in the - the Union Society which I joined, and I invited Dr Daniel to join us and he attended the party and was very affable. So I already knew him slightly by the time the change came and so it was extremely easy to make that change and start off in my third year with classes in archaeology.
					
						Cambridge, of course, was a great place to be, no doubt it still is a great place to be, but in every direction there seemed to be interesting people. In the archaeology field, I mentioned Martin Biddle doing his excavations, also Barry Cunliffe whom I didn't get to know until I switched to archaeology but he was also at St John's and in the same year, and he was already doing his own excavations at Fishbourne, of course. But in all kinds of other directions, I was interested in art history, I was writing short art reviews for the student newspaper, "Varsity", and then the thing I think that attracted me most was the Union Society, the terrific atmosphere in some of those debates. The first debate of the year is the - the No Confidence in Her Majesty's Government, and so they always had a leading opposition politician and a government minister speaking, and in many ways the undergraduate speeches were the most impressive, I used to find, and so I started off greatly in awe of those speakers and then got more involved and in the end got very thoroughly involved in - in the debating and was president of the society in -  during my third year, and made a lot of friends then who went on into politics. A lot of them became Conservative cabinet ministers and so on, and Leon Brittan and Michael Howard, Kenneth Clarke, Normal Fowler, Norman Lamont, just a lot of people very soon went into politics seriously and so, in a way, one found oneself as a result of those Cambridge years in touch with a number of directions. The acting was wonderful. I remember seeing "Beyond the Fringe" with Peter Cook who was, of course, a Cambridge undergraduate at the time in Cambridge before it went up to the Edinburgh Festival, and the acting was, of course, superb. Ian McKellan, Derek Jacobi, were student actors then. I'd like to have got involved in the acting but I decided there really wasn't time if one's doing - going once or twice a week to debates, you haven't really time to get involved. I think if I hadn't been doing sciences in part one, I might well have got involved in the acting but the science practicals mean that you're not really free in the afternoons which - which I might have been if - if I hadn't been doing natural sciences part one. So there was a lot of - a lot of variety and that's the great thing about Cambridge, you have to find time to do a little bit of work in between but it was - it was a very good experience, and so by 1960 I suppose it was, I switched to part two archaeology, and that was really very interesting from the beginning. I'd found with the history and philosophy of science that if you've got an interesting topic, I remember writing quite a long paper on simplicity, which is something desirable in - in scientific theories, really got into that and found that interesting sort of - researching that up. Well, as soon as I'd changed to archaeology, I found the - the essays, the supervision essays one had to write every week, some of them really were very interesting and they touched on matters that were already controversial. Glyn Daniel, of course, was a great enthusiast - enthusiast for the Megalithic monuments so he loved to set essays, what were the origin of the Megaliths of Western Europe, or when did the Megalith builders reach Britain, and so on, and the more one looked into it, the more one saw that a lot of the things that were generally believed, really were not very believable and I soon began to realise that a lot of the things one was being taught, which admittedly, I mean they were admitted to be somewhat hypothetical, but a lot of the hypotheses didn't really seem very plausible to me and I think the background I'd had at St Albans when one was being encouraged to question what one was being taught and if the proof didn't seem to quite work in the physics, say, come on, this proof doesn't work, I think that scepticism was also readily applicable in the archaeology field and there were a lot of questions that really seemed very open questions, and so that was an interesting situation to be - to find oneself in really.
					
						One of the features of Cambridge, of course, is you're taught by people who are really high powered researchers. That was true already in the sciences where one got lectures from really distinguished biochemists and if one was interested one could go to seminars and so on. I was very impressed that in St John's we had Paul Dirac, one of the great figures in quantum mechanics, going back to, he was an old man then, but going back to earlier days won his Nobel Prize in the 1930s or something, and I went to one of his seminars and this is something I'd done in Paris already. I'd gone to quite a lot of science seminars in subjects that were really rather above my head, quantum physics and so on, I'd actually heard Louis de Broglie speaking in a seminar, or at least asking questions in a seminar in - in Paris, but I think it's very interesting to hear people talking seriously about a subject even though you don't understand every bit of it and certainly couldn't repeat it. And so, in fact, I remember going to call on Dirac which was rather a daring thing to do while I was president of the Union to ask him if he would speak in a Union debate and he was known to be a man of few words as I later on found, once I became a fellow of St John's, I'd occasionally be sitting next to him and you had to be rather skilful to get a word out of him at all. It wasn't that he was taciturn, he was just a man of few words and didn't really think it was necessary to speak unless there was some purpose, and I remember knocking on the door that said Lucasian Professor, which was professor of mathematics and science, and Newton had been Lucasian Professors -  professor 200 or whatever it was years before. So I knocked on the door and opened the door and there was a very long table and there was Professor Dirac sitting thoughtfully at the end. So I went in and said, good morning, Professor Dirac, I'm doing this and I'm going to have this debate on science and religion and I wonder if there's any possibility of your speaking in the debate. And he was a very polite man and there was nothing hostile in his response but he just raised his head from his hand and said, no. And so I then said, well, thank you very much, I'm sorry to have troubled you and in a slight fluster, left. So that was my brief contact with - with Dirac, but in the archaeology field, more productively perhaps, Glyn was, of course, a great raconteur and so in his lectures he'd always tell you the latest news since he was editor of "Antiquity" which was the best periodical for archaeological news, he'd always have a new radiocarbon date that he was about to publish or something of that kind, and, of course, he held good parties in his room and so sort of one term you'd be bumping into Sir Mortimer Wheeler, the next term you'd be meeting somebody was excavating in - in Africa. Grahame Clark was a very different character. He was less effusive in manner but deeply serious about his archaeology and if one went to call - in my second year of archaeology, my fourth year as a student, I did get to know him quite well and would call -  tap on the door to ask about something, and without really asking what you wanted to know, he would tell you about his latest fascination. At that time he was researching into bows, bows and arrows, and was doing interesting work carrying - studying the archaeological remains of bows back into early - back into the Neolithic period, so we would go in perhaps with some small point you want to ask. You'd have half an hour of Neolithic archery and then you'd feel you have to take your leave and not be much the wiser other than for the Neolithic archery. But the department was really one of factions at that time. There was Eric Higgs, great enthusiast for studying ecology, usually from animal bones, and so he was taking a very economic view of the prehistoric past, taking a leaf, really, from Grahame Clark's book, while Glyn Daniel was not interested in that at all, he was interested in Megaliths, interested in the history of archaeology, and in the personalities of archaeology, and then Charles McBurney was very preoccupied with the Palaeolithic period so that it was an interesting mix of people and the lecturer at that time, a relatively junior lecturer who really did a lot of the bread and butter work, was John Coles, later Professor John Coles, who gave really well organised series of lectures on the Bronze Age, so that one heard from a lot of different people in a lot of different styles. And I think probably it was very good for us that we could see that not all these lecturers got on with each other very well and they certainly didn't follow each other's lines of thinking, so that you could already see there were things that didn't fit together and potential conflicts and sort of minor controversies underlying the surface all the time. And I think because of Glyn's enthusiasm, I became very interested in the Megalithic monuments which, indeed, are hugely romantic. You have these great stone funerary structures dating obviously from before the Bronze Age, dating from thousands of years ago, about which relatively little was known and so my parents were always very willing to have a proposal for where one should go on holiday, so one summer we went to Spain and went and visited some of the Megalithic monuments in Spain that we'd been hearing about which were genuinely very impressive and one Christmas we went down to Malta and saw the so-called Temples of Malta which are enormously impressive stone structures about which, again, rather little was known and this was a very good way of knowing what one was talking about and it made the essays one was writing, if you were doing an essay on the temple cultures of Malta, if you'd actually seen the temples then you had something to say and so that was really profitable. So I think the questions, I was going to say examinations but if one's writing an essay question, they really became quite real questions. We were discussing the chronology of these monuments, they didn't seem dry questions when you'd seen the monuments and so it was quite easy to get enthused about that. And that was all, as it turned out, a very good training because later on as more radiocarbon dates became available, the problems became even more real and to become quite involved in them already was actually a very good start from a research point of view because I think it had become clear to me during my final year that I really would like to go on and do archaeological research and I could imagine whereas I wasn't going to spend my life analysing some organic compound, I could imagine spending a lot of time researching into some of those issues, and so it seemed natural to apply for research. And, of course, to do that it was necessary to get a good degree, get first class honours or something, but I was fortunate in being in a very good group. I mentioned Barry Cunliffe and the - the year that I did part two, there were, I think, four or five first class honours degrees, three or four of them were in St John's College so Glyn Daniel who was the director of studies in St John's, was - was very pleased and so that worked out quite well really.
					
						I had already begun to wonder what research topic I would choose. Clearly, it was a very big decision if you're going to spend three years - your first three years as an independent researcher, what you're going to spend your life on for three years researching into, and I wasn't very sure but one thing I'd noticed in - on my first visit to Greece, was how little was known about the archaeology of the Cycladic Islands, yet how they seemed to crop up with supposed links in all kinds of places. I'd gone on an excavation at an early Neolithic site of Nea Nikomedeia In 1961 while I was studying archaeology as an undergraduate and Graham Clarke was one of the organisers of that excavation. It was actually organised by a research student, Bob Rodden, but Graham Clarke had to be nominally in charge although it was really Bob's dig and so Graham Clarke had a party, a meeting at his house, and so all those who might be interested were invited and one was rather encouraged to go on this project which was a very nice thing to do so it was my first visit to Greece and went on the train through to Salonica and then Athens and then up to Nea Nikomedeia which is North Greece and we sort of half camped in the museum which was under construction - or part of the museum was under construction at that time, and that was perfectly comfortable in the - in the summer. It was a very enthusiastic group of people. Bob Rodden was a wonderfully encouraging site director and so everybody was having a great time. We had a lot of Greek workmen and he was terrific with the Greek workmen so we all got on well with them and it was a fascinating site. It was at the time about the earliest Neolithic, the earliest first farming site known in Europe. The radiocarbon dates didn't come through until a bit later but, indeed, that's what it was and it was very hot. The temperature got up into the 100s in Fahrenheit, but it was - it was an open site, very difficult to see the ground plans of the houses but Bob dug it very well really, I think, and so that was a very good start in Greek archaeology, and then I went in Athens in the National Museum where they have a large room filled with Socratic antiquities from the different islands which, some of which had been published in the 1920s by - by Gordon Childe, and so I could see that they kept on cropping up. There were supposed to be links with Iberia, links with the Balkans and so on, and it seemed a bit of a sitting duck really because very little work had been done in those islands in the past 30 or 40 years, so it seemed like a good research topic. So I asked the – he, he had suggested doing a topic on rock cut tombs but that didn't seem to well centred and so I wrote to one or two people and asked them their advice. A lot of them very politely replied, John Evans, the professor in London, whom I didn't know but I wrote to him and he wrote back encouragingly and said it would be a very good subject for research so that's what I did choose to do, and, indeed, it was an under- researched area and so - and also the links, the supposed links, one was led to call them into question, and so it was a rather good place to start off with, really.
					
						I think one thing about the Cyclades was that it was clearly a very important area. We all obviously read Gordon Childe's “The Dawn of European Civilisation”. There was a whole chapter about the Cyclades in that book and yet nothing new had been written in -  in recent years so that was one attractive element, I think. I think maybe also because I had been doing mainly the Neolithic and early Bronze Age and those places in Spain that we'd been visiting, supposed to have links with the Cyclades, and also I should mention one great journey which I and some friends made the year we graduated at Cambridge, which was 1962, we decided we'd like to go to Eastern Europe and we thought it would be great fun to go to Russia and we'd been lent a Volvo car, very suitable for the enterprise, and there were four or five of us doing this. One was Waby Armfelt, based in Denmark, she had been in Cambridge with Princess Margrethe as she then was, now Queen Margrethe of Denmark, and she and I and other of us had been supervised by Glyn Daniel looking at the radiocarbon laboratory and that sort of thing, and we conceived the idea of doing a tour in Russia looking at archaeological sites. So I got very excited about this and was learning about the Scythians and had that tour come off, I might well have got attracted to Scythian archaeology but we didn't get a visa to go into Russia. They were very suspicious of us travelling round in a - driving ourselves in a car, so instead we went through the rest of Eastern Europe other than Russia. We started off in - in Denmark, we sort of waved bye bye to Princess Margrethe who'd like to have come and almost did come but then it was clear that it really wasn't possible for her to travel in Eastern Europe at that time nor was it really very possible for her to go on a camping holiday with security and publicity and so on whereas we were completely incognito, obviously, so we started off in East Germany and then Poland and we saw a lot of wonderful archaeological sites, met a lot of interesting archaeologists and went down through Hungary into Romania and then Bulgaria and then back through Yugoslavia visiting famous archaeological sites like Vinca all the way. And I think the site that impressed me most was the Great Tell Mound of Karanovo in Bulgaria which has got a great section of about 15 metres and the Bulgarians had done a very vigorous excavation and sort of taken a whole slice out of this mound so you stood on top of this cliff 15 or 16 metres high or at the bottom you saw the horizontal surface and all this stratigraphy and they'd done some good work on the culture sequence. It was a very good stratigraphy but it didn't really seem to make very good sense in terms of the Aegean connections and I was very fascinated by that and there were supposed to be going to be Cycladic influences in the Bulgarian Copper Age in terms of the Karanovo sequence, Karanovo VI, and so all these links, I think, made the Cyclades rather an attractive subject. And one other attraction too was that among the most notable artefacts in the Cyclades are these very striking marble figurines which some were 30, 40 centimetres tall, some of them go up to a metre and a half, marble, wonderfully simple, really very beautiful objects and already in Paris, in the Louvre, I'd seen quite a lot of these including a truly beautiful head which is really a life- size head and these are objects of wonderful simplicity, very much appreciated perhaps unfortunately in the contemporary art market and they were a rather enigmatic and also very striking body of material. So it seemed that that would be a good place to start and I suppose also there's a great leg up if you want to study in Greece, just as if you want to study in Italy, that there's a British School of Archaeology at Athens just as there is a British School at Rome, and so it's quite easy to go and stay there and then work your way out, not quite such a brave jump as it would be in a country where you're on your own from the very beginning. So, I think those links and the circumstance that so little was known about this very important group of cultures of the early Bronze Age Cyclades, that's around 2500 BC, made it seem an attractive thing to do.
					
						I was already very interested in art and been admiring Michaelangelo and Leonardo De Vinci, not surprisingly, but I'd been getting increasingly interested in contemporary art and so in Paris I'd been going to the Museum of Modern Art and getting to know the early moderns like Picasso and Matisse rather well but also the more recent moderns, as it were. Perhaps one important piece of luck in that respect was that a very good friend of my parents in Welwyn Garden City was a man called Ted Power who’d made his money out of Murphy Radio and in - in the post-war years was beginning to collect contemporary painting in a significant way, which he had in his house, perfectly straightforward house in Welwyn Garden City, and so he did have one or two - he had a painting by Sisley I think but then he moved on to more recent painters, he had a wonderful Bonnard nude but then he got interested in contemporaries and he had some wonderful paintings by Nicolas de Staël and then he began to get interested in the American abstract expressionists so that was in his house was the first time I ever saw a painting by Jackson Pollock or by Kline or by Barnett Newman and so already in the late 40s, early 50s, he was collecting truly avant garde art of that kind and I had seen some of that already and already some of these painters were just beginning to be shown in - in Paris in the time I was in Paris, '56 and '58, and so, yes, I really had a good enthusiasm for contemporary art and I was writing art reviews for "Varsity" newspaper, and so that was something I was interested in and so the circumstance that there were these very beautiful objects, some of the marble vessels are also beautiful but the figurines were spectacular and so that, I think, was one of the things that did attract me to the Cyclades.
					
						I'd also had a very good experience after the Nea Nikomedeia excavation. There was one splendid man, RW Hutchinson, Squire Hutchinson, who had retired. He had been curator at Knossos in the post-war years and he'd worked in Macedonia with Heurtley in the pre-war years, I think I'm right in saying, and Bob Rodden had invited him to join the excavations as a senior figure who knew Greece and knew Greek, and he was a very nice, rather quiet man, but a very kindly man and he had said that he was going to go back to Crete immediately after the excavation and would I care to go with him, and I didn't realise what a good idea that was. I said that would be very nice, and so after the 1961 Nea Nikomedeia excavation, we took a flight to Athens. I still remember flying over the Cycladics - my first view of the Island of Melos from the - from the aircraft, and, as it turned out, perhaps not surprisingly, he knew just everybody in Cretan archaeology, in Minoan archaeology so we went to the museum, Dr Alexiou was the director of the museum and so Squire Hutchison if they make know that he was there, and Dr Alexiou at once came out to greet him. He hadn't seen him for - for many years, for 15 years or something, and then we went to the British School's place beside the villa, Ariadne, where Sir Arthur Evans had been excavating at the so-called Taverna and Sinclair Hood, the director of the British School, was conducting an excavation there and he at once made Squire Hutchinson welcome and since I was in tow I was welcome also so we automatically had dinner there. That was when I first met Peter Warren, very distinguished Minoan archaeologist now and whom I got to know very well, and then Squire said, oh, I think maybe I'll just telephone my old friend, Dr Giamalkis, and Dr Giamalkis, who was a retired doctor by then, had got the most important private collection of Minoan antiquities and I think a lot of people wanted to see inside his house but Dr Giamalkis said oh, do come round at once, bring your friends. So we all saw his collection and then the following day we went to - or a day or two afterwards, we went down to the Palace of Festos on the south side of the island which was being excavated by the Italian School of Archaeology, Doro Levi, so as soon as Doro Levi knew it was Squire, you must come, you must stay, and so we stayed the night and I remember very clearly a strange experience, the Italians - it was the time of the first satellite, and so the Italians had the habit after dinner of going out into the Great Court in Festos and lying on their backs and looking up at the sky waiting for the satellite to come over at 10.00pm or whatever and so the perivolos whatever it was called, came - came over at that time and so there we were lying in this Minoan Great Court from about 2500 BC, looking at the most sophisticated product of Russian technology. So that was a very good trip and that actually put me in touch a little bit with the Aegean archaeology particularly Cretan archaeology so that when the time came to go to Crete to study Cycladic links and Cycladic parallels, it was easy for me to write to Dr Alexiou who was, of course, very welcoming, so that perhaps made it a little more obvious as a place to go. You're right, I had to learn some - some Greek but already with the workmen one had been chattering away so it was a good beginning anyway. So that was - that was a nice introduction really to Greece so that it seemed quite natural to - to be getting organised to go out to the British School. This was in 1962 just after that trip to Eastern Europe.
					
						Drove out, to the British School in a rather old car that I'd bought, with Peter Warren whom by then I'd got to know better and we drove through Yugoslavia in rather difficult conditions. We were overtaken by a sledge at one point, a horse drawn sledge, in very slippery circumstances, and so got - got settled in Athens and then began serious Cycladic research. And that was fun because it obviously meant travelling in the islands which, in those days, were not very mechanised so a lot of the site visits, if they were any great distance, one did well to get a guide to take one to that part of the island and hire a donkey or hire two donkeys and so started off in February, I think, 1963, going to Sifnos and then down to the Island of Melos where there was a very important site that had been excavated 50 years earlier, called Phylakopi and so visited that site, which I later on excavated again. So those were exciting days to see all these sites one had read about in the literature. And then later that year, when I was visiting Naxos, the main Cycladic island, and then the smaller islands off Naxos, I went down to Keros where I've spent a lot of time since and was the first archaeologist to visit this very seriously looted site on the uninhabited island of Keros and see the enormous amount of destruction there had been and fragments of figurines and marble bowls and so on all over the surface. So in retrospect, one was seeing really very interesting things just about every day there, and so I made it my business to visit all the known sites and to go to the museums. Had very good support from the Greek authorities to get inside the museum cases and draw and photograph objects and so on, so that the - the study went quite well really, and when I came to write it up I by then knew - knew the Cycladic material quite well and it seemed to me that most of the links that had been proposed between the Cycladic islands, for instance, by Gordon Childe, between the Cycladic islands and Spain or the Cycladic islands and the Balkans, were completely illusory. They were built on rather superficial resemblances sort of superficial similarities in figurines and it was really because people in Iberia or, indeed, people in Bulgaria and Rumania were looking for links that they could link up with in the Mediterranean in order to - to establish a chronology and I came to the view that most of these links were not well founded and were rather illusory, and as it turned out, that - the new radiocarbon dates that were coming in harmonised with that so that led to some very interesting conclusions really.
					
						I never heard Gordon Childe lecture, sadly. He committed suicide, I think it was 1957 or '58, I think I may have caught sight of him once in the Institute of Archaeology in London when, as a schoolboy collecting coins, I used to go to the annual meeting of - of the British Numismatic Society. They used to hold a conference and that was an interesting experience and that happened to be held in the Institute of Archaeology in Gordon Square, but I never met Childe, but his book, "The Dawn of European Civilisation", was published in 1925 and really from then on became the basic text particularly for the Neolithic and early Bronze Age of - of Europe, and I became more and more uneasy with the general theme that the things that happened in Western and Northern Europe were in a way the result of what had been happening in - in the East Mediterranean and in the Aegean, and he had a position which could be called a diffusionist position, the diffusion of civilisation from civilised lands, Egypt and Suma, the sort of spread of civilisation to the Aegean and then outwards. He used to speak of the - the - the irradiation of European barbarism by Oriental civilization. And so that was his general position and he'd really written this book, "The Dawn of European Civilisation", with that as a central theme. The book had gone into a number of editions, which had had lots of updates, and the most recent was, I think, in 1956 or '57, but the general theme still underlaid the book and when I'd been in - in Spain, I'd come to doubt the megaliths of Western Europe were derived from the Aegean which was the generally held view, it was a view that - that Glyn Daniel had put forward in 1935.
					
						When I went down to Karanovo in Bulgaria, I'd seen this great succession and it wasn't at all clear to me that the things in Karanovo VI were really borrowings from Troy with the other - from the Cyclades, so I think I was already primed to look with suspicion on these things and when I got to know the Cycladic cultures well, I knew them by then as well as anybody by the time I'd finished my dissertation, so I felt able to say, look, these things in the Cyclades are not all that similar to the things in Spain or the things in Bulgaria and so they're not really a starting point. They don't really explain what was happening in Spain or Bulgaria and so the last chapter of my dissertation, which was done in 1965, was to explain that position and that was just the time that radiocarbon dates were coming through which very gradually made the original position untenable and I was, in a way, in a good position to recognise that because I'd already more or less come to that conclusion without radiocarbon dating so I was ready to receive those radiocarbon dates in quite – in quite a sympathetic way. And then, of course, that was when the calibration of radiocarbon dating began to get underway. The initial impact of radiocarbon had been in the 1950s. Willard Libby had got the method going, I think, in 1949, and so during the 1950s there'd been a lot of radiocarbon dates coming through and James Mellart, who'd been doing such good work in Turkey, had shown how the radiocarbon dates in the Balkans seemed to be rather earlier than expected. He'd written a very interesting article on that, and they were a few centuries earlier than expected but then I remember Glyn, in about 1967, putting in my hand an article which had been proposed for "Antiquity", I don't think it was ever published there, by an American physicist called Hans Suess and he had done a lot of work on radiocarbon dates and in California they had by then got a tree ring chronology that was really working, the bristlecone pine had a wonderful chronology going back to several thousand years so you could take radiocarbon samples from the wood of supposedly known age, known tree ring age, of, say, 3000 BC, from the Bristol Cone Pine and you could do the radiocarbon determination and then it emerged that the radiocarbon dates, the radiocarbon readings, as it were, gave a date five or 600 years more recent than the tree ring. So if you believed all that, and if you believed that the tree ring scale could be used to calibrate the radiocarbon dates, that meant that if you wanted to get a true date, you had to add, depending where you were on the calibration curve, 5 or 600 years to the radiocarbon date. So if you already had a radiocarbon date that was a bit too early, supposedly, you had a context maybe in Troy that you expected to be about 2500 BC, but the radiocarbon date gave you 2200 BC, in order to calibrate that you had to add several centuries and so the radiocarbon dates got pushed back earlier and I could quite quickly see that whereas in the Aegean that would make the radiocarbon dates once calibrated harmonise better with the - the links with the Near East which had been well established there, if you looked at Britain or you looked at Spain or you looked at the Balkans, the radiocarbon dates went much earlier than had been predicted once they were calibrated, and they were way out of kilter. They were just far too early and that meant, then, that the radio time - the radiocarbon timescale was suggesting a different chronology.
					
						The radiocarbon dates were really getting very interesting and I noticed that there were some radiocarbon dates becoming available in Britain or close to Britain that could be related to the Wessex culture which was the early Bronze Age, the beginning of the early Bronze Age in Southern Britain that were supposed to be associated with Stonehenge and the dates were pushing the Wessex culture and perhaps Stonehenge earlier than would make sense with existing ideas. Stuart Piggott had written a paper in which he was relating trying to date Stonehenge by comparison with things from Mycenae in Greece, the Greek late Bronze Age, around 1600 BC or later than that, and so he was dating the Wessex culture for the century or so later and Stonehenge with it, the main phase of Stonehenge, to around 1450 BC and the radiocarbon dates were already coming out a bit earlier than that and if you calibrated them they went very significantly earlier and I came to the view there really was a pattern here and I had already written, as a student, articles on the Wessex culture, or rather student papers, on the Wessex culture and on Stonehenge saying, look, these things are nothing to do with Mycenae and I don't believe the chronology. I didn't have any reason to say what the chronology would be but just they might be earlier and so I was able to write a paper called Wessex Without Mycenae which I proposed for "Antiquity" Sent it to Glyn Daniel and said would you like to publish this, he thought this all very doubtful and too speculative so by this time I was in Sheffield, got my first job in Sheffield, and the head of department in Sheffield was the editor of the Annual of the British School at Athens and so given that Mycenae came into the story or didn't come into the story, it seemed feasible to get it published there and he agreed to publish it there. And that was one of the first papers which was applying the logic of the radiocarbon dates when calibrated to European prehistory and it did suggest that you could look at Stonehenge and the Wessex culture entirely without Mycenae and they were earlier than the Mycenaean world, and then this began to apply elsewhere. I'd already written a paper about Spain called "Colonialism and Megalithismus" when I was rejecting the Cycladic links and suggesting that maybe the Megaliths must have started of their own accord, as it were, that something local in Iberia and Western Europe must have been at the root of these great buildings, these great monumental tombs, and there weren't calibrated dates available then but the calibration reinforced that and then in South East Europe also, sites like Karanovo, the dates were beginning to come through and in 1966, Jane and I went, my wife, Jane, and I, went on a tour of Bulgaria. We got British Council scholarships to go to Bulgaria and got to know the Bulgarian material very well, got to study that and, again, if you apply the radiocarbon dates it became clear that the Copper Age of Bulgaria, the whole Copper Age of South East Europe, was much earlier than Troy, too, and much earlier than the Cyclades and it began to be possible to think of independent origins even for copper metallurgy in the Balkans, so it's like Karanovo and Vinca in Yugoslavia and so this began to be a coherent picture and it began to be possible to see why that should be and it was simply that earlier prehistorians had made what now seemed like a very considerable mistake when they'd tried to build up these links between Iberia and the Balkans through the Cyclades down to the Near East and if you simply said, right, we see it now, these links are illusory. There was nothing illusory between the links between the Aegean and Egypt and so on, there was quite good archaeological evidence for that. There was a kind of fault line, as I called it, when you went outside the Aegean, once you went north to the Balkans or West to the West Mediterranean, across the fault line all the supposed links were completely disrupted and you had to push, it was like a geological fault, you had to push the prehistory of Northern and Western Central Europe almost 1,000 years earlier, and so that was really quite - quite a shock to the system and it proved quite controversial, not surprisingly. But it seemed to work out again and again. When radiocarbon dates became available for Malta, for the temples of Malta, which again had been dated originally by supposed links with Crete and so on, the radiocarbon dates when calibrated pushed Maltese prehistory earlier so those great stone monuments of Malta were clearly, well, older than the pyramids, and that was sort of the punch line really, if we were talking about the Megalithic Monuments of North Western Europe, great sites like Newgrange, for instance, or the French - the French sites with these wonderful corbelled-vaulted tombs and so on, they became older than the pyramids. And so I was asked to do a Radio Three broadcast on that which was then published in the - "The Listener", and was able to try and make a coherent case that really the whole chronology of North Western Europe was mistaken and, as I said, the textbooks would have to be rewritten, which is, indeed, what turned out to be the case finally. So, the Cyclades were quite a good strategic point because it was possible to say before radiocarbon the links didn't look very good and then when the radiocarbon calibration suggested those other areas, Western and Northern areas, should be earlier, then that, to me, seemed quite acceptable whereas it seemed shocking to a lot of people who'd always taken those links for granted.
					
						I think one was encouraged to ask questions. It wasn't thought scandalous that one should do so, and, indeed, it was, there were always puzzles. I mean even if one thought that the Megalithic Monuments of North Western Europe owed their origins to things happening in Crete, which - which had been argued, I think it was implied or perhaps stated in Gordon Childe's book in 1925, but Glyn Daniel, one of his first papers in 1935, was to set this out in a systematic way and he was choosing then the round tombs of early Minoan Crete, about 2500 BC, as the potential starting point and then there had been rather two respectful articles written. There was, published in "Antiquity", about 1965 or 1966, was an article by, a very well researched article, by a lady called Beatrice Blance, who thought that you would actually identify in Iberia the colonist sites, the sites where the people from the Cyclades had landed and there were arguments there. They had metal daggers looking like the daggers of the Cyclades, they had fortifications that could be compared in their plan with the Cycladic fortifications, and then there were things about figurines and so on came into the story, and the - the story was really quite a good one, and the Balkans also, in Karanovo VI, this Copper Age period, they had these copper objects and quite reasonable to think they'd learned metallurgy from the Cyclades, and they did have figurines, terracotta figurines, which could be compared with the Cycladic marble figurines and so it seemed possible they were related so people were quite reluctant to - to see the links broken but at the same time it was possible to question these things and, as I said, James Mellaart had been publishing radiocarbon dates in "Antiquity" and saying there's something not working very well here. So I think any discussion was encouraged in a very positive way. And so that, I think, was a positive effect of the atmosphere.
					
						I think probably the first paper I published on that sort of area was - arose from my work in Crete in the Cyclades, and when I went to look up Cycladic connections in Crete, when I went to the Heraklion Museum, I knocked on the door of Dr Alexiou whom I'd already met with Squire Hutchinson, and he gave me access to everything, I was able to look at all the supposedly Cycladic imports, some of which were Cycladic but others were not, and so I wrote an article called "Crete and the Cyclades Before Rhadamanthos", who was a great mythological figure, and Dr Alexiou invited me to publish that in his periodical, "Kretika Chronica" . So that was one of my first publications.
					
						The obsidian was really a very interesting piece of work for me. Because I was doing my doctoral research in the Cyclades, I wanted to understand what was going on in the Cyclades and therefore the obsidian question became a very important one, perhaps more important than it would otherwise have done, and so there were these obsidian sources, two main obsidian sources on Melos, which I'd been able to visit and then it was suggested that the obsidian used in Malta might have come from Melos whereas it was known that there was a source nearer to Malta at Lipari just off the North coast of Sicily, and so that was a problem that it looked as if it would be very interesting to solve and also there's a lot of obsidian being found in Turkey and in the Near East and the question was where as all this obsidian coming from and how could you work that out? And so I had the good fortune to discuss this in St John's College with an old friend of mine, Joe Cann, who had been in the same class as I was. We were both in the same class in St Alban's School and he'd gone and he hadn't done national service. He'd got deferment and then in the end he hadn't done national service and he'd become a geologist and petrologist so he agreed to look at the question, and my job was to get good samples of obsidian from wherever I could so I got plenty from - from Melos and then I wrote to David Trump who was working in Malta and he gave me samples of what was being found in Malta. Then with Joe we went through the collections of the department of mineralogy and petrology in Cambridge, and there they had abundant obsidian samples from the sources, like Lipari and so on, and so we looked at it first of all from the standpoint of refractive index which obviously would be an optical technique and we couldn't really see much - much difference there.  We looked at it systematically and there wasn't much to be done. On the terms of appearance there wasn't much systematic difference so Joe suggested that we should do trace element analysis by means of optical emission spectroscopy which was a fairly new technique then, a standard technique in mineralogy and petrology, and it involved getting quite small samples and grinding them up in a pestle and mortar and then he had access to a machine which was run by a technician when these were burnt in the machine, and then the spectrum produced was recorded on a photographic plate and then you could read the intensity of the spectral lines, the spectral lines being caused by the presence of trace elements of these various - so it was possible to get estimates, semi-quantitative estimates, for the quantities in parts per million of these various trace elements that were present in the obsidian. And so we looked systematically at the obsidian samples from Melos and those from Lipari and the other known sources that we could get our hands on, and there did, in the end, seem to be some systematic differences. If you plotted them on a graph of barium against zirconium in parts per million, you could separate the Melian sources from the Lipari sources and separate those from the Sardinian sources and those from the sources in - in Hungary, although from the - from the Pontine Islands, which are off the coast of Italy, they didn't differ very much from the Lipari ones until we looked, until Joe looked, at a new trace element we hadn't looked at before, which was caesium and he said - I was in - in Athens by then so he sent to me a message saying that caesium allowed one to distinguish between the two so I sent him a telegram saying, ‘Congratulations, caesium!’ and this really helped to sort of crack the problem and so it became possible having learned how to discriminate the materials from the sources, to characterise the verb we introduced, to characterise the materials from the sources, it became possible to look at the samples from Malta, from other archaeological sites, and do the trace elements analysis on them and see which they matched up with. And the Maltese specimens matched up with mainly with Lipari and the suggestion that there'd been contacts between the Cyclades and Malta as documented by the Melian obsidian, proved to be completely unwarranted. And then it got even more interesting really in the East Mediterranean where it was possible to show that obsidian at early sites down in the Levant like Jericho, pre-pottery Neolithic Jericho, the obsidian sources for these had to be in Central Anatolia and we knew some of the sources there and we took steps to try and work out the other sources and, in fact, my father went on holiday and was instructed to go and pick up obsidian where he could and did so, just by the roadside, and that identified the approximate position of one of the sources in Anatolia, so in this way it was possible using really very hard scientific methods to build up a picture of the trading networks that must have been operating, and so that was certainly the most important early paper, I think it was the first paper, it was published in the "Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society" for 1964, “The Characterisation of Obsidian and its Application to the Mediterranean Area". And, in some ways, it was just about one of the first really successful characterisation studies. There had been good work done earlier in England on stone axes using thin sections and the petrological microscope, and so the Neolithic axe trade had been investigated already in the 1950s by that means, but this was the first time that trace element analysis had been successful. The Germans had been doing it, Sangmeister, and his colleagues, on metal objects but they hadn't really been able to distinguish one source from another so it didn't really solve very many problems in any clear way, but in this case we were able to establish these things and then later on when it became clear that Melian obsidian was cropping up in Mesolithic deposits, really very early deposits, 8/9000 BC in the in the Peloponnese, at the time was the earliest hard evidence for seafaring, it Franchthi Cave had clearly been brought by sea, and so that meant that the Cycladic Islands or the Island of Melos was already being visited in the Mesolithic and then ultimately in the upper Paleolithic period. And in the Near East, it was very important because it made clear that all these different early farming villages were in some kind of contact and obsidian was being traded down the line through these various villages and so that was, I think it was an important paper, and, of course, it interested people quite widely. When I first went to America, I went and lectured on that because people like Robert Braidwood in Chicago who was excavating at Jarmo, he had by then sent us material for analysis and Jimmy Mellaart had sent material from Çatal Höyük and Kathleen Kenyon had sent material from Jericho, so it was possible to make very firm statements about these trading networks which had been suspected before but they'd never really been very well documented, so that was quite an exciting thing to be involved with. So Joe and I carried that forward and got more samples and did a further paper in the Proceedings in the Prehistoric Society, then when Jane - when Joe was busy with other things, we invited John Dixon who'd also been at St Alban's School but in a younger class, and had also been in St John's College, and he became a collaborator, so we did a whole series of papers which really, to a large extent, I think sort of sewed up the obsidian trade question. The work was gone into again by more sensitive analytic techniques, neutron activation analysis, and it still continues but I think the broad patterns that were established then remain valid. So that was an exciting thing to be involved in to the complete investigation of a trading system using specific scientific techniques that were capable of giving a very good answer.
					
						One other thing I think I probably ought to mention is my first excavation which was in the Cycladic Islands while I was doing my research there and I'd been visiting all these known sites and as many as I could come to hear of, and so I went down to Antiparos and I'd been told that some cores of obsidian, sort of roughly shaped, the raw material roughly shaped into blade cores, had been found on a very small island called Saliagos which you had to get somebody to take you in a small boat, in a caique, to visit. So I visited Saliagos in 1963 and started to find pottery of white painted pottery of unknown kind and also obsidian arrow heads, as they seemed to be, rather beautifully pressure flaked, and that clearly must be Neolithic now. Up to that time there were no Neolithic sites known in the Cyclades, only early Bronze Age and later, so that was really quite an interesting discovery. It wasn't clear what depth of soil there would be. This was just a very eroded little island. The island was only about 100 metres long but I thought it would be well worth excavating so I contacted people at the British School and their reaction was that you're- it would be nice to have an excavation there, but you're just a research student, you're not going to get a permit, an official permit, from the Greek Ministry to dig, so what you should do is get a more senior archaeologist and try and do it together. So I took that advice and I wrote to John Evans whom I knew only very slightly. He was then director of the Institute of Archaeology and I'd probably met him briefly perhaps through Glyn Daniel, but we'd already been in correspondence with the obsidian trade, he'd provided me with obsidian from Neolithic Knossos where he had excavated. So I wrote to him saying would he be interested in this project and he said, yes, he would. So we arranged to do it the following year, 1964, and that worked very well. He's a delightful man and we just took sort of equal responsibility for different aspects of the dig. We were both on site most of the time digging and he said he would like to study the pottery. He'd been doing very good pottery studies at Knossos, doing - one of the pioneers of the quantitative study of pottery weighing the amount of material, counting the shards, dividing them into categories and in this way getting an approximate quantitative description of the pottery assemblage and I made myself busy with the other materials, the obsidian and the other artefacts and so that was really a very interesting and successful excavation in 1964. And then we finished it off in 1965 and Jane, my wife, she came out on the 1964 excavations. I met her in - I  met her in the Haddon Library which is a very appropriate place to meet a distinguished archaeologist as she became, and so she went out to the Nea Nikomedia excavations, the second year in 1963 and I also, I was already researching by then, but I went and did a couple of weeks there and so we got to know each other better, and then she came down in 1963 to see this site, Saliagos, where I was hoping to dig, and so she came out in 1964, and we went to Apeiranthos on Naxos where I asked her to marry me, and so by 1965 we were - we were married. And so the first thing we had to do really as to write up the report which - which we - we started to do once we'd got our first job, or my first job, in Sheffield, which was after finishing the PhD in 1965, went up to the Department of Archaeology there, so we moved up there and then worked on the Saliagos report.  And so that was an interesting - it was nice to have one's own excavation in Greece, one's own, with John Evans, it was very happy, we're very happy working together, and we actually did get the publication out quite quickly within a couple of years and we had all kinds of experts helping us with different aspects so it's - it's an excavation report that I think we both still feel quite good about. And Jane not only did the report on the plant remains, because Jane went on to do her research on prehistoric food plant remains, so she did the expertise on that, but we also found a lot of fish bones and so we needed an expert for fish bones and she volunteered to study that and so we found a specialist, Dr Alwyne Wheeler, in the Natural History Museum, and Jane would go up for several days to the Natural History Museum with samples of these fish bones and was locked up in the vaults of the Natural History Museum with a decaying coelacanth which had been discovered in the depths of the ocean that year or something and so she and Alwyne Wheeler, between them, did a very good report on the fish bones which were important because the site may have been an important site for tunny fishing.
					
						Jane was interested in archaeology from a very early age. She'd her own excavation at the age of 12 or 13 and while an undergraduate she had published her first book. She'd been studying the - the papers of an antiquary who had done research in the 17th century, Machell, his name was, and she'd come upon his papers, his manuscript account, so she published a book "Antiquary on Horseback", and, of course, Glyn, who was always interested in people and their life stories both ancient and modern, he made a point of lecturing from this book during his lectures on the history of archaeology, which naturally pleased Jane very much. That's right, and so she went on to do research with Eric Higgs and then wrote her own dissertation on Neolithic plant food remains so that when we went to Eastern Europe to Bulgaria mainly in 1966, she was able to get lots of good samples which the Bulgarian archaeologists were very quick to give her, and then also in Greece, the Theochares who had been excavated in Thessaly, was very keen to have the grains that he'd been recovering properly described so she had a rich body of material from South East Europe which she turned into her own doctoral dissertation some years later.
					
						I was pretty much left to my own devices. The - the specialist in Aegean archaeology in Cambridge at that time was Frank Stubbings and he was a lecturer in the Department of Classical Archaeology, he was really a classicist, but he had written an important study of Mycenaean pottery in the East Mediterranean and so he was the specialist in Aegean studies so when Glyn, I suppose, and Professor Clarke were looking around for a supervisor for somebody wanting to work in the Aegean, he was the natural person to choose. I'd been to his lectures on Aegean archaeology and taken all that seriously and he was a really very kindly man and he, to a large extent, let me get on with what I was doing. He wrote one or two letters, he wrote a letter to the director of the Archaeological Service, or maybe it was the director of the British School wrote that letter, but he was a very positive man and received me and gave me permits for this and that, and then Frank Stubbings also put me in touch with Christos Doumas who was at that time a junior archaeologist working in the Greek Archaeological Service in the Cyclades, and he's a great Cycladic archaeologist and was very helpful and gave me access to his finds and we got to be very good friends. Later on he became godfather to one of our children, Magnus, and we've kept in touch with him and his wife very well, and he was doing excavations in the - in the Cyclades and finding early Bronze Age cemeteries and he very generously allowed me to study his finds before he'd fully written them up. So I was able to take them into account when I was putting together my - my analysis of the cultural succession in the Cyclades, I was able to divide the culture succession up quite effectively and it was a great blessing to have - to have his finds and the context in which he found them available. So Frank Stubbings was responsible for that and he was really an ideal supervisor. He could see that I was getting on quite well so he told me I should be sure to get my bibliography straight and he of course read what I - the drafts of the chapters that I showed him and was really extremely - extremely helpful, but also he didn't interfere too much really.
					
						Jane and I were in Paris on our honeymoon, we were married in 1965, and went to Paris on our honeymoon. Glyn, for our - for a wedding present gave us two things. One was some guide books to the best restaurants in Paris, some of which we visited, and another was an introduction to Dorothy Garrod who was the predecessor of Graham Clarke as Professor of Archaeology, Disney Professor of Archaeology in Cambridge, and she lived in France, so it was very nice that she invited us to lunch and we had a very pleasant lunch with her. She was obviously a great figure in the archaeology of earlier days, she'd excavated in Gibraltar, she’d excavated in the Near East and she was excavating in France in the Paleolithic at that time and so it was very pleasant to meet up with her. And then while we were in Paris we had a telegram from Glyn saying that I had been offered a research fellowship in St John's and obviously, as always when you finish your research, what next is always the big question, but I'd also applied for a job in Sheffield and that job came through so the question became what do you do when you have two job offers and it seemed wisest really to accept the Sheffield job because that what was what one might call a tenure track position, it wasn't going to end after three years necessarily whereas the research fellowship would, but then they were very nice in Cambridge and they suggested that I could perhaps keep the research fellowship. I wouldn't have two salaries, it would become non-stipendiary but if I wanted to go down to Cambridge once a week and supervise and Professor Hopper, my director of - my director, the head of department in Sheffield, agreed to that, so I was able to keep a toe in the Cambridge scene in that way, and if one has been an undergraduate it's obviously very nice to become a fellow of a college and see the Cambridge world from the other side of the fence. So that was a very pleasant thing to do.
					
						Well in 1965, we moved to Sheffield, to the University of Sheffield, which was a relatively new department. Professor Robert Hopper was a great empire builder. He was the professor of ancient history but then they moved ancient history and archaeology and so Warwick Bray, who was a specialist in Latin American archaeology as well European archaeology, had gone up there, and was the first lecturer there and they were expanding the department and so I applied and got the job. And so Warwick and I were then teaching the course which we built up into a complete degree course in - in prehistory and archaeology, and Robert Hopper was a wonderful empire builder. He sort of got students to apply and packed them in and used the student staff:staff student ratio to get more staff so gradually the department built up really very well. And so it has, over the years, turned into a major department and it's now, in terms of numbers, it must be second or third in the UK in terms of the number of students doing archaeology. And so it was great fun really, putting together a degree course having quite recently come from being at the receiving end and so Warwick and I both specialised originally in European prehistory so we built that up into shape in quite an effective way.
					
						While we were excavating at Saligos in the Cycladic Islands, which we did in 1964 and 1965, we had a visit from Marija Gimbutas who was a dynamic, by then, American archaeologist originally from Lithuania. And she had left Lithuania during the war and was a refugee in Germany and then moved as a refugee to the United States and first of all worked at Harvard. But then she got a much better job in Los Angeles at UCLA and was beginning to put together her ideas on the Indo-Europeans and the archaeology of the Indo-Europeans, which I never particularly warmed to her theories there, but she was a wonderfully outgoing lady and she visited our excavation in Saliagos and wanted to begin excavations in North Greece and in the Balkans. The Balkans was her special area. And so she invited me to go to UCLA for a semester which I did in 1967 in the January, February, March of 1967, and that turned out to be very good fun. I'd been to America only briefly before, to New York and Washington and so on. But she had a very nice house in Topanga Canyon, which is above Malibu and there wasn't so much traffic in LA in those days, so I rented a car from her and would drive into UCLA each day down from Topanga through Malibu and along the coast and then along Sunset Boulevard, not quite to Hollywood because Hollywood's a bit beyond. And, so that was a nice environment to be living in and there were a lot of interesting people in the department. It was a department of anthropology, as it usually is in the States, and Jim Sackett was a specialist in Paleolithic and Jim Hill, one of the specialists in - in North American archaeology, and Lewis Binford was also a professor there at the time. And my own teaching was mainly in European prehistory which my teaching didn't involve those very much. It overlapped with Marija and her students which were partly in the department of Indo-European studies but it was very good fun to get to know Lew Binford who already was known as one of the more dynamic, younger American archaeologists. But his book which really set the new archaeology going in a major way, wasn't published until the following year, 1968, although his interesting papers, archaeology and anthropology, and so on, had already been published some years before. And so he was a very robust critic of almost anything one cared to say, and I was interested in the chronology of the Cycladic cemeteries and was getting interested in a seriation technique. There was a research student there who was working with me on that, Eugene Sterud, and with the advice of the professor of chemistry who'd got some interesting ideas, really, thinking in terms of chemical bonds, that was his thinking. This, we called it in the end, close proximity analysis, and by trying to situate each element, in this case each Cycladic cemetery beside the one that would be nearest to it in terms of similarity, you could construct structures where the most similar was lined up with the most similar, which in some circumstances could give you chronological structures. And so we were following up on ideas that had been developed much earlier in archaeology by Flinders Petrie in the early years of the 20th century and so that was an interesting piece of work which we ultimately published, Gene and I, in American "Antiquity", but Lew Binford was very sceptical of the whole thing. He thought seriation for the purposes of chronology was a complete waste of time so we had some robust conversations but it was very good to get to know him and pleasant later on when he came to - to visit us in Southampton at a later stage. And then I'd been advised by one Americanist archaeologist, Bob Eric whom I'd met the previous year, that if I was going to America I ought to go on a tour of American universities, which seemed to be very grandiose, but he said you can just write to somebody at each department and offer to give them a lecture and say that they'd have to pay the flight, the internal flight. And so that worked very well and I lectured in Berkeley. Then I went up to Michigan. Jimmy Griffin invited me to speak there to Ann Arbor and to New York again and to somewhere in Texas and so that was - and by that time I had the obsidian work to lecture on so I went to stay with Bob Braidwood outside Chicago and went through some of his obsidian which he'd got samples of. And so that was academically a very profitable visit and it was also nice to just get the feeling a little for the sort of anthropological archaeology which was being developed in the United States by people like Lew Binford and Jim Hill and so on and some of the others, Ralph Solecki that I met and, indeed, the Americanists including Jimmy Griffin in - in Ann Arbor. And in retrospect that was a useful visit just to be in touch a little bit with Americanist archaeology. And perhaps arising, certainly arising from that was our excavation in Sitagroi because Marija had invited me to LA partly because she wanted to get an excavation going and so we agreed that we would try and mount a joint excavation at the site of Sitagroi in North Greece in the Plain of Drama, which I had already prospected. I'd already been doing some prospection in - in North Greece.
					
						For me the interest was relating to this chronological question. The calibration of radiocarbon dating was just coming into play. The visit was in 1967 and that was when I first caught sight of the Suess calibration curve in 1967 so the calibration hadn't really been applied yet significantly in European prehistory and so it was still partly a stratigraphic problem and the interesting thing about the site of Sitagroi was a low tell mound, a settlement mound, and it had a lot of material on the surface including graphite painted wares which were typical of the Gumelnita culture which was the same as Karanovo VI, but it also had Aegean early Bronze Age wares, rolled rim bowls and so on which would be related maybe to Troy II and that sort of thing, so there was a chance of sorting out stratigraphically these relationships that had been disputed previously or had come into doubt previously because, as I was saying, the Cycladic relationships and the relationships with Troy, with the Vinca culture and the Gumelnita culture at Karanovo were being called into question. And when Jane and I had gone to Bulgaria in 1966 we tried to sort some of that out so that really there was the question, is Troy, Troy II, for instance, contemporary with Karanovo VI and did the Copper Age of the Balkans learn its metallurgy from the Aegean early Bronze Age or is it possible that those things in the Balkans are really much earlier? Well, this hadn't been clarified yet and even though it was clarified later by calibrating the radiocarbon dates, it was very interesting to try and get it to come through stratigraphically. So that was my objective in choosing a site that had at one time Balkan materials like the graphite painted ware but at the same time Aegean early Bronze Age type materials so that by digging you'd hope really to find out which went with which. Marija's interest was mainly in figurines, terracotta figurines. She had her idea that the Indo-Europeans came in the early Bronze Age, rather dour civilisation with no figurines, but before that was what she called the Civilisation of Old Europe, which she believed to be pre Indo-European and lots of wonderful figurines and so on she hoped would be found. So we had to set that up and the deal really was that I would hope to get the permit through the British School, which is what happened, and then we would jointly try and raise money through the National Science Foundation which, of course, is American but she would be able to apply for that as an American citizen. So we were the joint excavators. She didn't really want to get involved very much in the day to day digging and, indeed, she wasn't on site the whole time at all but she wanted to study the materials and particularly the figurines. So that really worked out very well. We had to buy the land, under Greek law you have to buy the land and give it to the Greek State before you can excavate, but that was a few thousand dollars which the NSF came up with. And so in 1968, that was the year after I'd been to UCLA, we were all set up and we started digging there and we had a very good team.
					
						One thing we started doing was just a section, a 3 metre square telephone box trench, as they're sometimes called, and we had a very dynamic lady who had worked with us at Saliagos, Cressida Ridley, and she was supervising this trench. The actual digging was mainly done by Greek workmen, very good Greek workmen, and we went right down to the bottom during the season of five or six weeks. We went right down the 11 metres to the bottom of this trench and this gave us a wonderful sequence of materials including a lot of pottery and it was relatively little known at that time up there. So we did counts of the pottery using the sort of system that John Evans had been using at Saliagos and previously in his dig at Knossos, and so we got a really good sequence. We were able to divide the Sitagroi sequence into five or six phases and the stratigraphy was absolutely clear and then we got a very good sequence of radiocarbon dates. We were using sieving and then also water sieving so we got quite a few samples from every layer, and Jane was doing the expertise on the grain and quite often we got quantities of grain particularly from the - from the water sieving, from the flotation, and so we got good grain samples from every layer which Jane was able to do the species identifications and so on. And we sent these off and we decided to use two laboratories, which gives you a better statistical control and so we arranged to send some to the Berlin laboratory and some to the British Museum laboratory and we got a sequence of more than 20 dates which came out satisfyingly in the right order. In other words, the ones from phase one were earlier than the phase two, earlier than phase three, so you felt you were getting a good control there and if one date - one or two dates seemed to be off you could see that those were way off and so that really gave very clear documentation that Sitagroi I and II were sort of middle - Neolithic, Sitagroi III was Copper Age, like the Gumelnita culture of Bulgaria, like rather Karanovo VI with all the graphite painted ware. Then you had Sitagroi IV which was rather like the Baden culture, then Sitagroi V had resemblances with the Aegean early Bronze Age, so that gave us a very clear indication that stratigraphically we'd shown that the Copper Age of the Balkans was much earlier than Troy. And this was confirmed by the radiocarbon dates that were now coming through. Hans Zeus himself, the man with the calibration curve, visited us at Sitagroi so we had great discussions about the right way of calibrating the dates and so we got a good sequence of dates which, when calibrated, really confirmed this principle that the calibration really did show that there was something completely screwy about the chronological system that had previously been applied which, as we were saying, meant that the diffusionist assumption that everything came from the Near East through Troy and so on, was, in that particular case, mistaken. So that was really a very gratifying excavation, produced quite a lot of indications of early metallurgy, quite simple early metallurgy, but at that time it was the earliest metallurgy known in the Aegean and it confirmed the impression, which remains confirmed really, that copper metallurgy in the Balkans began earlier than the Aegean Bronze Age and actually was more dynamic even than such copper metallurgy as later on that turned out to be in the Aegean late Neolithic. So that was really an interesting and rewarding excavation.
					
						It began to be clear that this radiocarbon phenomenon was one that could be explained in this way in Europe with the fault lines that I mentioned earlier, and so I put together a table. I just used all the radiocarbon dates I could get from - from Neolithic and early Bronze Age Europe and put them in their correct stratigraphic positions on the table and then saw how that worked out. And it really did show that, for instance, the Megaliths of North Western Europe started at least 1,000 years before the pyramids of Egypt and before their supposed predecessors in the round tombs of Minoan Crete and it showed that metallurgy, copper metallurgy, got going far earlier in the Balkans than there was any trace of it at that time in the Aegean, and other things, like the Temples of Malta, found their place as also did the Wessex culture which wasn't as early as all that but it was going by 1800 BC and therefore well before Mycenae and Stonehenge certainly was clearly much earlier than Mycenae and nothing to do with the Mycenaeans. So that worked out quite well as a whole series of articles really and naturally caused controversy at the time. And then I wrote my book, "Before Civilization: The Radiocarbon Revolution and Prehistoric Europe", which was published in 1973, and that really tried to set out the whole thing systematically. But what became particularly interesting was not just the chronology which began to emerge and has been confirmed, but, okay, then if all these things are earlier than the pyramids or whatever, how did they do it? I mean that's why it was difficult to believe and, indeed, that's why people like Gordon Childe and predecessors of 100 years earlier, Oscar Montelius and so on, had said, well, we can't have these great chamber tombs being older than the pyramids. We assume that the pyramids are first and things diffused outwards including metallurgy and so on. And so if you say, no, the radiocarbon dates now show us that these phenomena, these tombs or this metal industry, is before the alleged predecessors in the East Mediterranean and the Aegean, then you have to sit down and say, well, okay, why and how - why were people building tombs - built tombs, in Ireland or in Brittany or in England or in Spain so much before anything like that was happening remotely comparable in Egypt or the Aegean? How come that people were producing copper objects in the Balkans and maybe in Spain before they were doing so in the Aegean? And so there were problems of culture process there really. I think the interest in my case then shifted from the chronology, which remained interesting but became established in outline and then became established in greater detail, the interest shifted to what one could call culture process and this harmonised very much with the interests in the United States where people like Lewis Binford were moving away from the culture sequence focus which people like Jimmy Griffin in Michigan had been emphasising and to start to look at the mechanisms of culture change. Why were these things happening earlier in one place than another? So that was, I think, where the interest was building up.
					
						I was lucky, I think, that one of the bits of work we'd been doing gave a few clues. That was the work on trade. The work on obsidian which, as we were saying, gave you very concrete evidence allowing you to reconstruct trading systems from quite hard data, so that's one thing but then if you're asking why would cultures change, why would they develop, then the links that were taking placed between cultures were important but then the idea that began to build up was that it wasn't that, for instance, if we're talking about trade in the Aegean, the metal trade in the Aegean in the early Bronze Age, to talk about the Cyclades again. It wasn't the contacts with the Near East that were significant even though there may have been some, it was the fact that a trading system was building up from which a certain dynamic took - took off, really. And so this made me realise a little that one had to look at the relationships between the different processes that were going on, if you like, systems terminology, the different sub-systems of the culture system, and so if the trade was building up and we'd seen that through the obsidian and then the metallurgy in the Cyclades, if the trade was building up, what was happening to the social organisation and then how did this turn - tie in with the agriculture? And in my work in the Cyclades I'd naturally been interested in that and I came to realise, this was really after my dissertation was finished, the dissertation had a lot of emphasis on culture sequence and chronology, but thinking about culture process, you could see that, and the work at Sitagroi helped with this when we got all this information from Jane's work on the cereal crops and so on, that probably viticulture began in the Aegean and olive cultivation began in the Aegean. They weren't very easy to date but probably they began in the early Bronze Age and so maybe what was happening in the early Bronze Age, so-called, which sort of starts in the third millennium, starts shortly after 3000 BC, maybe what was happening was that trading links were building up, metallurgical practice was building up with new forms of weapons and new forms of drinking cups and so on, and wealth, for the first time, cumulative wealth for the first time, and this was the time also that new things were happening in agriculture. The development of viticulture which was giving you, obviously, grapes to eat but more particularly wine to drink, and it was clear that there were new shapes of drinking vessels and the whole business of drinking wine was clearly more than just nourishment, it was also something agreeable and potentially important. These days in archaeology one talks a lot about feasting which is much the same idea but it wasn't quite so explicitly stated then. And then the olive cultivation was important because in the Cycladic Islands which are a little bit arid, it's barley rather than wheat is the main cereal crop but you don't have great plains for cereals as you do in Thessaly or in Macedonia, rather you have the possibility for vineyards and olive groves and so on. And so I realised that the Mediterranean triad as it's called, that's cereals and vines and olives, was very important but probably became important at that time just as the early Bronze Age was taking off in the Cyclades. So I began to have the feeling that all these things were working together.
					
						One very important aspect obviously is what you may call the social archaeology, the social subsystem, and it was clear that this was the time in the Aegean that you begin to see evidence for people of high status reflected partly in the burials where you get metal objects and sometimes silver objects, gold objects even in some of the graves. In Troy, Troy II, it's the same period, you get the great hoards that Schliemann found, or allegedly found, including golden and silver vessels and so on. And I began to see how you could tell the story of the rise of civilisation, the rise of complex society in the Aegean using the local evidence and not telling it as a story of how wisdom came from the Near East and there wasn't that much contact with the Near East at that time anyway, but how you could see it in terms of the inter-relations that developed within the Cyclades and between the Cyclades and Crete and mainland Greece and Troy, it was possible to speak of the international spirit of the early Bronze Age and all this was really building up around 2500 BC, and then you could see that different things continued to develop in the middle Bronze Age so that by, shortly after 2000 BC in Crete, you had the Minoan palaces, the first Minoan palaces, which you can claim to be the origins of complex society or maybe even state society in Crete. And then by 1600 BC on the mainland of Greece, Mycenae, you have broadly similar things but it takes a little later to get going on the mainland. And so it was possible to think of these things while not denying that there were some points of contact with the Near East and with Egypt to say that those weren't necessarily terribly significant and it was endogenous processes, it was local - local working of endogenous rather than coming from outside, exogenous processes, which were at work and, clearly, the metallurgy was important. And then after the social system I talked about the evidence for trade, the trading subsystem, and we had lots of evidence there. It was the obsidian in the early days, the metallurgy in the early Bronze Age, but also lots of pottery forms, ceramic forms, indications of trade and probably also metal vessels which are not much preserved but you could see from some of the pottery forms the most characteristic form in the early Helladic II period and also in the Cyclades, then, it's a so-called sauceboat which looks a bit like a sauceboat, that's why it's called that, it was probably a drinking cup, but it's very elegant and just one or two exist in gold and it looks something that was started off in metal and then was copied in - in pottery, and also the famous Trojan two handled drinking cup, the so called depas amphkypellon, that existed in silver and you can see that it must have been a metal form that was then imitated in - in pottery. So you've got the trading system, then the other system that, or subsystem, that I tried to think about was what I call the symbolic and projective subsystem, that's rather a mouthful, but the development of religious belief as a projection and the development of symbolism, including the Cycladic figurines and so on, developments on the intellectual side, or as we would call it today the cognitive side, that all seemed to be related together. And so in writing that book, "The Emergence of Civilisation", I drew on an idea from economics, the so-called multiplier effect, and what seemed to be happening was that as one subsystem grew, as metallurgy developed, it had impacts in other subsystems. For instance, the availability of metal meant that you now had weapons, you had daggers. They soon lengthened to be swords, so you had a huge impact on military technology. Then also metal seemed to be the first form of serious valuables in the Aegean, silver and gold as well as bronze, so you had value systems developing which had a huge impact in the social subsystem. Then the development of technology allowing better ships because there's evidence in the Cycladic early Bronze Age for longboats with a lot of rowers powering them before the sail came into general use. So these things were working together and it was from the interactions among the subsystems that you found really serious transformations taking place that led first of all in Crete and then elsewhere to the emergence of complex society, or state society, or what's sometimes called civilisation.
					
						That was, in a way, a response to the problem that, okay, if all this stuff is earlier and it's happening locally, how does it happen? And the same problem presented itself at an earlier date with these wonderful megalithic monuments because you have a tomb like Maeshowe in Ireland as a very good example, the passage grave with the long entrance passage and then a very beautiful built chamber. But in Brittany there were some that are, in fact, a good deal earlier than Maeshowe, but very similar in plan, some of them, with a long entrance passage, not all of them built of huge stones which is how the Megalith gets its name, but some of them built of dry stone walling and so how did these come about? And I developed a sort of theory to try and explain that, because interestingly you find these on the Atlantic coasts. You don't find them much inland in Southern Germany. You don't find them in the Baltic - in the Balkans. So as farming spread and it's still clear that farming did spread from - from Turkey probably into Europe, sites like Nea Nikomedia first and so on, as farming spread to the - to the North West, and we have plenty of evidence for houses and tell mounds, it seems that settlement became less well established, less permanent on the fringes on the Atlantic Seaboard and perhaps the monuments began to take on a larger significance in the houses, and the monuments began to have a major social role. So there's just a germ of an idea of how this monumentality is particularly appropriate in those areas, it's the social focus, and therefore this wasn't something that was learned from the South East but something for which there may have been processual reasons to develop in the - in Iberia and in France and in Ireland and in Scandinavia. And so I wrote one or two articles to - to that effect, and really, in a way, I was working, trying to work towards new kinds of explanation, social and economic explanations, and towards a kind of social archaeology because really there was a huge gap left, how do you explain these things happening earlier in Europe than in the heartlands of civilisation, which Gordon Childe had written about.
					
						So that was all really very interesting. The Sitagroi excavations, I think, worked out well because they first of all confirmed the new chronology and then, secondly, they gave us lots of evidence about early metallurgy which Elizabeth Slater, Professor Slater as she later became, did the specialist studies of. So that was an interesting excavation. And it was around that time in Sheffield that we organised a major conference, the 1971, I think, the "Explanation of Culture Change", and it was possible to invite quite a lot of the leading American archaeologists. Lew Binford came over, but some of those I've already mentioned came over and we had really a major international conference which was published a couple of years later. We were trying to apply these ideas, some of them current in the so-called new archaeology which had really got going by then, trying to apply them to European prehistory with varying degrees of success but there was definitely a thrust towards the social archaeology trying to think about monuments and mobilisation and so on and in social terms rather than always looking over our shoulders and saying where did it come from but rather how did it come about. And so that was, I think, quite an exciting time really.
					
						Arising from the radiocarbon work, came a nice invitation to get involved in a television programme. This was David Collison who later on became a very good friend, who was part of the Chronicle Unit which was operating in the BBC then. I think it had actually come about partly as a spin-off from Glyn Daniels's programme, "Animal, Vegetable or Mineral", and Paul Johnson had, I think, been the director of that programme for a long time. And then after a while that ended and so they wanted to know what to do next and Paul Johnson set up this Chronicle Unit and the Chronicle programmes were 50 minute programmes, each developed - devoted to one theme, one question in - in archaeology. And so David Collison rang up and said it had been suggested that it might be worth doing a programme on the radiocarbon calibration so we talked about that and we thought it was a good idea and then the question came, well, where would we go for a location? And I thought about it and it occurred to me that Malta would be a very good place. I'd been to Malta and it was clear there was some radiocarbon dates coming through, they weren't very many then, but they were coming through good and early and with calibration you could see the same thing was going to happen, that the Maltese temples were definitely going to be earlier than their supposed predecessors in the Aegean or in Egypt and so the same question was going to arise, how did these strange buildings come about unexpectedly in these little islands? So we agreed that would be a good location for the main bit of filming and so Magnus Magnusson was the presenter, and he right the way through took the role of the rather sceptical sort of traditionalist, you're not really saying, Dr Renfrew, that this is earlier than that? That sort of thing, and that was very good fun. I could see the very first day it was going to be fun. The first day I went to the Ggantija and we were filming the Ggantija and I was explaining why this had to be much earlier and he was saying but surely the evidence all show - all shows the converse and didn't Gordon Childe say this, and then I had to say, well, he may have done but he may not have been completely right in every detail. And so that was really very entertaining. It was a very good crew as well so we repaired to the appropriate hostelry in the evening and dined well and so it was really all together a very positive experience. Then they went over, rather to my vexation, without me to California to film the Bristol Cone Pine in situ but they'd got the - I mean the story was clear, they filmed Hans Zeus in his laboratory and Charles Wesley Ferginson who is a tree ring expert, and then they said, well, that's very good, now will we go to in Britain to bring this closer to home? How can we sort of make this relevant to British prehistory? Well, Stonehenge was one possibility but there weren't really any radiocarbon dates then and I realised that one very interesting place to go, which I'd never been was the Orkney Islands where  there is a huge abundance of very wonderfully built Neolithic tombs, chamber tombs, which had already been very well described by Audrey Henshall who'd done a great study of the chamber tombs of Scotland but there weren't many radiocarbon dates but there was one very famous one, Maeshowe, which had always traditionally been thought to be where the first colonist landed with this very sophisticated tomb. And then it all sent of went downhill and the other- the other ones would be later than Maeshowe but it was clear to me that Maeshowe must have been the culmination of a tradition that built up locally. So we went to Orkney and we filmed and discussed this. I don't think there were any radiocarbon dates available from Orkney then but it made a perfectly logical conclusion to the programme but it made me realise that some fieldwork in Orkney would be quite appropriate.
					
						I already read it up quite thoroughly, I knew all the tombs in Audrey Henshall's account, and there was one tomb that had been entered in the year 1805 and the scholar had done a very - who had gone to it, did a very good description of it but then it had been covered over and there was no record of its being investigated after that even though Audrey Henshall had been able to describe it using this earlier account. It was called Quanterness and the location was perfectly well understood so David Collison and I went to call on the farmer, Scottie Harcus, and I said to him, well, I think this could be a very interesting site to excavate and I'm thinking of doing an archaeological excavation, would that be possible? And he was a very nice man and he wasn't terribly keen, a lot of Orcadians have the feeling it's best not to disturb the dead too freely and really rather not get involved, but he agreed that we - that I - I could do so. So I laid plans and the following year, I think it was, went up to Orkney to dig at Quanterness and this was a marvellous site because it was a very prominent mound. It had a great flagpole, a modern flagpole, on the top of it and it wasn't known where the entrance was. It was clear there would be an entrance passage but it wasn't clear where the entrance passage was and there was a sort of crevice or crevasse, at the top where clearly it had been entered and then it got filled with rubbish and if you remove the corrugated iron and so on you could see people had gone in through the roof and it was, indeed, a chamber tomb but you couldn't see much of it. So we did begin to excavate there rather slowly and carefully. We did a section on the west side to show the - the structure of the cairn but we didn't find the entrance passage there. Then we began to find something that might be the entrance passage on the east side, but there were some complicated circular structure tangled up with that, then meanwhile we were going down through the roof where it had been entered, the roof had been damaged in that process, and we got down into the main chamber and it had, indeed, been entered for the first time in 1805 and it was a longish main chamber, I suppose 12-15 feet long, I suppose, rectangular and about 7 feet wide, and it had originally had, as we knew from the original drawings from 1805, it had six side chambers, and four or five of those, yes, four of those, were still standing, so you could crawl in and there were bits of human bone on the floor. And then you could go into this side chamber and you could stand upright and if you put your hand up then you could touch the top of the corbelling and this was a wonderfully constructed tomb although two side chambers had collapsed and the main chamber had collapsed during the entrance process but the side chambers were perfectly constructed and perfectly preserved. And we had a very good excavation architect who was, indeed, a member of the Department of Architecture in Sheffield, Alec Dakin, and he did beautiful drawings of the structure. And so this was really a fascinating monument and we got lots of material, lots of human bone, lots of material for radiocarbon dating. And we had a specialist who had been a mature student, he'd retired from being a surgeon and had taken up archaeo-zoology and so he did a study of the human bones so we had very good studies on those things. We had a very good zoologist. Audrey Henshall herself, the specialist in those things, reported on the - on the artefacts and so we - we had a really nice excavation going there. And we also did some studies at Maeshowe.  We were able to dig a section across the ditch at Maeshowe to get to some radiocarbon dates and also the wonderful circle of standing stones at the Ring of Brodgar, we were able to excavate the ditch there although the radiocarbon dates didn't work out. I think it wasn't waterlogged in Neolithic times and there were other studies going on in Orkney at the same time. David Clarke, based at the Scottish National Museum, the archaeological museum, was excavating at Skara Brae, the site that Gordon Childe had dug, and Graham and Anna Ritchie were digging at the Stones at Stenness and so between us we got a whole series of radiocarbon dates which fully confirmed the non-diffusionist hypothesis, fully confirmed that the - these buildings in Orkney were early. They weren't all of them earlier than the pyramids but they were much earlier than they could have been on any diffusionist strategy, as it were, and it looked also as if Maeshowe was not the earliest. Quanterness was earlier and there were still some other early sites and then looking at that and thinking about it, Judson Chesterman established that there were the remains of several hundred individuals at Quanterness, so that Quanterness, if you thought of the region around it before you get to the next chamber tomb down the road, as it were, got quite a limited territory, and so it must have had the burials of the entire community probably. And so we thought of it as an equal access tomb, young and old were buried there, and it wasn't just for the high status people. It was an equal access tomb so that allowed us to begin to think in social terms a little bit about what kind of society was using these monuments and certainly in Orkney, it would seem that the monuments represented the population of the entire community who were buried there although probably after a process of what's called excarnation, it looks as if they may have been exposed elsewhere because they weren't - there weren't many complete skeletons, the bodies were exposed and then gathered up and the remains brought into the tomb. So that was really a very pleasurable experience both because of the wonderful qualities of the Neolithic architecture, and I just marvel at how wonderfully built these sites are and there are many more; Midhowe is a famous tomb which Gordon Childe looked at. He excavated several of these tombs. He excavated Quoyness on Sanday, and they really are just amazingly sophisticated structures but there's no doubt that they're beginning around 3000 BC so they weren't being learned from anywhere else. They were probably in contact with people in Ireland and in Brittany, they weren't doing it all on their own in Orkney but it was a North West European phenomenon which we still don't understand very well but I think that is very clear so that was a very nice piece of work. Also, we had a great time in Orkney, met a lot of interesting people. Our son, Magnus, was born around that time. I already mentioned he has a Greek godfather, Christos Doumas, but he has two Orcadian godparents as well, and so we had a nice - a lot of good times in Orkney. Orkney is, of course, a marvellous area, partly because it's so remote, it has its own very strong cultural traditions, and it really was remote until the time of the Second World War. I mean there were - it was visited from the time of the First World War but before that it was really a rather isolated place. Orcadians went off as sailors, a lot of them took part in the exploration of Canada, the East India Company, and so on, but you really feel it's a place with a character of its own and the Orcadian poet, Edwin Muir, expresses that very well. And then while we were there George Mackay Brown who's dead now but was the leading poet of Orkney at that time and so it was a really very rewarding experience to be digging in Orkney, quite apart from the radiocarbon dates and the technical publications.
					
						A mathematician in Sheffield who was a research student, got interested in the problems of calibrating the radiocarbon curve, in the wiggles in the radiocarbon curve and got going on that. So we were also doing some more detailed studies on the calibration and the mathematics of the calibration which helped us; other people were doing, helped to clarify that. But it was around that time that Barry Cunliffe who was the first professor of archaeology in Southampton, moved to Oxford to succeed Professor Christopher Hawkes and so his chair was advertised, and I thought it might be a good idea to apply for that, and my book, "The Emergence of Civilisation", was just being published around that time, which did no harm, I think, so I got the job, so Jane and I moved down to Southampton, which meant she had to relinquish her position. At the time I'd gone off to America for that American visit to UCLA, Robert Hopper had given her the position that I was in, which I resumed when I returned, and then when he had a new lectureship he thought she would be a very suitable person to take it up, so she was, for a while, lecturing in Sheffield very successfully but obviously those are the sort of decisions you have to make, so one job was advertised in Southampton and we moved down to Southampton. But we had two children by then so it was quite a handful. I think Jane was quite happy to make that transition.
					
						It was while we were in Sheffield that I got caught up again with politics. In Cambridge, as well as being in the Union, I'd been in the Conservative Association and I'd taken the Conservative side in debates in the Union Society although actually there weren't that many strongly political debates I was involved in. I think one of the ones I remember mostly clearly must have been in 1960 when there was the presidential election underway in the United States and the motion, which I proposed was that this house hopes for a Democratic victory tonight. That was when JFK was first elected - was elected to the presidency, that must have been in November, I suppose, ‘64. Anyway, in Sheffield, November, 1960, that debate, in Sheffield, the very strongly Labour seat of Sheffield Brightside became available, the - the MP had died and so there was a by-election and they were just busy choosing a Conservative candidate which I hadn't particularly been involved in but I remember that I was having dinner in Jesus College in Cambridge because I was still a research fellow then though only going down there once a week, and it was a feast and I'd invited Leon Brittan who was a good friend of mine, down to the feast. He wasn't at that time - he didn't at that time, I think, have a seat himself though I think he had stood as the parliamentary candidate in some constituency which he didn't at that time win. And he said, well, you ought to stand for Sheffield Brightside and it never really occurred to me that I would - might be the Conservative candidate for such a seat but it seemed an interesting idea and a rather fun thing to do, so I wrote at once, found out who the chairman of the constituency association was, and wrote at once to him saying I'd be very interested to be the candidate in the Conservative interest. I had a telephone call the next day saying we're just doing the selection procedures, can you come and talk to the constituency association this evening along with the other potential candidates? And they'd got three or four people. It was a very safe Labour seat so it wasn't very likely that a Conservative would win it and perhaps for that reason one infers that they didn't have a very strong list or they wouldn't be contacting just the next day in the light of a letter received, but I sort of tried to prepared - probably all the better for not being over prepared which it certainly wasn't, and went down and made my speech and then it all seemed to go down rather well so I was selected as the Conservative candidate. I hadn't really known what I was letting myself in for because a by-election obviously involves a lot of work but it also involves a lot of publicity because in the general election all the journalists are all over the country so you wouldn't have many journalists in Sheffield Brightside in a safe seat at an election, but because it was the by-election was happening that month, no other elections that month, and because Labour wasn't doing too well at the time and Ted Heath, who was the leader of the opposition, was exciting quite a lot of interest, so all the newspaper columnists descended on Sheffield Brightside and I had to give a daily press conference. By the time the campaign began, which of course was some weeks after the - the selection procedure, I'd been doing a lot of reading and taken a lot of advice. I'd taken the trouble to read the Conservative Manifesto with greater care than hitherto and so I was fairly well informed but of course I wasn't very experienced, but they really weren't out to be difficult; they wanted something to quote in the papers and so it was a very active campaign and a lot of people came up from London, Sir Alec Douglas-Hume spoke at one of the evening sessions. We had several cabinet ministers and then friends like Leon Brittan and Ken Clarke, Michael Howard came up to campaign, and the - the majority, the Labour majority had been 19,000 and there was quite a big swing. We reduced that to a 5,000 majority but nonetheless it was a Labour victory and so that didn't lead any further where I was concerned. I did have a number of offers if I was interested in putting in for other seats as they came up and I think it would have been possible to get a seat, indeed, perhaps, a safer seat, but it had become clear to me that it was going to be a fairly full time job. It was certainly a full time job during the by-election campaign and so I thought I would sort of stay with the day job and not take on an additional political concern there. But that became relevant later on when I was nominated to the House of Lords and probably my being nominated to the House of Lords in 1991 probably wouldn't have happened unless I'd shown some political active interest earlier on in this case in 1968. But it was certainly an energetic three-week campaign.
					
						It was in 1972 that we moved down to Southampton which was another youngish university. Sheffield, of course, was so - called red brick university and had been founded in the 19th century but had expanded a great deal and has expanded since. Southampton was another originally red brick university and was expanding at that time, and Barry Cunliffe had got a very energetic department going and so it continued to grow in a very satisfactory way, I think. I very well remember my inaugural lecture there. As a professor one was expected to give an inaugural lecture and my theme, I chose to be social archaeology which I think was what archaeology was working towards at the time, but it was perhaps more memorable for the circumstance that the vice-chancellor, Professor Gower, knew well Sir Mortimer Wheeler because he had served in Sir Mortimer Wheeler's regiment while Wheeler was a colonel in North Africa during the war, and so Sir Mortimer Wheeler agreed to take the chair at the inaugural lecture. And so he was invited to make a few preliminary remarks, and Wheeler's remarks were very interesting but they extended from 5 minutes to 10 minutes to 20 minutes and an inaugural lecture is very carefully timed, it's supposed to be about 40 minutes, then you repair for drinks, and so the vice-chancellor evidently became slightly restive, as, indeed, did I, I was very nervous and I'd like to give me inaugural lecture. And so he sort of tried tactfully to interrupt Sir Mortimer in full flow and Sir Mortimer just got more firmly in his stride and recollected his military days with “Gunner Gower” as he referred to the vice-chancellor, in the North African campaign. But, anyway, Wheeler, finally sat down so I was able to give my inaugural lecture and so that was, as I say, on the theme of social archaeology.
					
						My thinking on that was actually carried further forward by the next television experience because the film about radiocarbon dating which had got the rather fancy but quite apposite title, "The Tree That Put The Clock Back". David Collison said to me, well, that was fine, that had been a successful film, what shall we do next? Shall we do a follow up? So I thought that would be a good idea and the first thing that came into my mind was the Aegean because I'd been doing - working on the origins of Aegean civilisation and would have something to say on that, but then I - I realised that to go to the Aegean wouldn't really be very interesting since I went there several times a year anyway, and I asked myself where would be more interesting to go and I thought, well, if we're talking about monument building, there are some very interesting monuments in the Pacific so I said - I think, David, I think we ought to go to Easter Island and he didn't bat an eyelid. I was slightly trying it on. Oh, that sounds very interesting, and so I already knew something about Easter Island and the obvious thing everybody knows is that there are these great monuments with statues and, indeed, they do pose the same very general problem, how on earth do you have these impressive monuments in a remote and rather small place like Easter Island, and it's the same question, in a way, or a similar question, how do you get monuments being created and that is of course why Easter Island has been the location for many so fantasies and legends, sort of Lost Atlantis, all that, the Lost Continent of Mu, all that sort of thing, just because it seems a little remarkable that people in these simple communities should be building great monuments. So it really is a problem in social archaeology, so there was a serious point behind the suggestion and then I suggested that what we ought to do was use Easter Island as the example of monument building but the Easter Island society, as you know as well or better than I do, Paul, collapsed so that today there isn't very much of original social structures to be seen on Easter Island whereas there are other Polynesian societies, particularly Tonga, where the previous chiefdom society still survives because the ruler of Tonga at the time of Captain Cook and subsequently, wasn't abolished or chased away or the society didn't collapse through disease as it did in Easter Island, and the King of Tonga at the time, a very prosperous man, King Taufa’ahau Tupou IV, he was a descendent of the rulers of Tonga before Captain Cook ever got there and so the kingdom of Tonga has institutions, many of which are handed down from the chiefdom society which Captain Cook actually observed and saw it working very well. So I did get to know Captain Cook's writings and of course there are some wonderful illustrations. You see the ceremony of the great inasi which was a great offering ceremony on Tonga. That's beautifully illustrated in - in Cook's account of his voyages, and there were other writings. There was a cabin boy called Mariner, William Mariner, who was shipwrecked on Tonga and wrote an account, he was the first white person to live on Tonga, he was, I think, the chief on the island he landed on had just lost his son and he was rather adopted as if he was the son of the chief and for that reason he survived. And he wrote an account which was published in the early 19th century, where he gave a lot of very interesting details about life in Tonga which were then pooh-poohed for many years as being sheer fantasy but when anthropologists actually got to work on Tonga, it turned out that just about everything he said seemed to make sense, and so there were very good accounts of the society of Tonga and it was a chiefdom society and it was a centralised society and you could see in that context how a chiefdom can happen in a society which is from a subsistence point of view rather simple without a great deal of trade and the power is concentrated in the hands of the chief and this is well known in anthropology, the Polynesian chiefdoms, that it was possible to think in similar terms, use that as an analogy, for the monuments of the British Isles of the Neolithic period. So that was the underlying idea so we started off filming in Tonga and we went off to the Island of Vava’u and the chief, or rather, the king, had given us an introduction to the chief, the Honourable Tui Afitu  there and had really arranged that we should visit there so we spent a week filming. We lived in the village of Makere which was his village, I stayed with him and his family and the rest of the crew and Magnus and David Collison were distributed around other houses, and we did a lot of filming of village life which illustrated one point very well, namely that archaeologically you find almost nothing because almost everything is perishable. The houses are beautifully built but they're built out of the local organic materials, there are very few stone artefacts in contemporary Tongan society, there are a few sort of metates and grinders and so on. The clothes they wear, or the traditional clothes they wore, were made from bark cloth so you have the wooden bark cloth beaters and they're beautifully decorated so we were able to film all of this very effectively and the chief is very much respected. There are occasional very formal ceremonies, the great kava ceremony, where you sit drinking kava but in a very strictly prescribed order. Well, this is very much what Captain Cook had described, saying that, Captain Cook was saying the formalities in Tongan society are just as high as the formalities in English royal society of his own day which was the time of King George III. So, we were able to film that really very effectively and I think it made the point very well. Then we went on to Easter Island for a week and looked at the Great Monuments there, the Image Ahu and were able to imagine how those were built by a society rather like the Tongan chiefly society, which I think is broadly correct and then for the end of the programme, we went back to the UK, we went to Wayland Smithy which is an English Megalith, and just speculated a little on whether such a society could be responsible for - for such monuments. I think since that time, a lot of British archaeologists said, no, no, we don't need chieftains, and rather pooh-poohed the concept of chiefdom and in some ways they're right, we don't know that British society, English society, at that time was organised in a such a way, although a monument like Stonehenge would have needed many millions of work hours to construct so there must have been some mechanism of mobilisation, some social centralisation so the idea wasn't a foolish one, but at its time, I think it was a valid one. If you were trying to say how did monuments like this come about, the answer was to appeal to social mechanisms that are not reliant on diffusion from some remote place, or anything very elaborate, they're just allowing for mobilisation procedures in agricultural societies with quite a high population density and so it made perfectly good sense, I think, and certainly it was fun to do the filming. It was "Islands Out of Time", you always get a rather attractive title for the programme so that became "Islands Out of Time", and it was a very interesting experience to think through the arguments and then see them exemplified in this way, and one did learn a lot. I mean the principles of hospitality, we had lunch in a different part of the village each day and the village was divided into segments and each part of the village competed with the other part to lay on this marvellous feast so there was roast sucking pig and wonderful fish and shellfish cooked in umu, earth ovens, and so on, and then the music was marvellous because there were great Polynesian traditions of song which the missionaries tried to suppress but which came back again, and the dancing was wonderful. Dancing generally in lines, not twos and twos, but rather ceremonial dancing in lines so all of that was a great experience and in the evening every day we would repair to the village centre, the village large hut, really, and then they would be singing at us and we therefore decided we had to do something back so we - Magnus is quite good so we'd be putting on Loch Lomond or something like that, and then we thought of rounds and I remember one evening we astonished them because they sing very well and they sing a lot of hymns so they're used to singing in harmony but they never had a round before and I remember we started off with "London's Burning" and so we started with that and they were listening politely and then when the next lot came in, there was a big of a hubbub because they thought they we were messing it up and I remember the wonderment that just gradually spread through the community of Vava’u when they realised that the round was deliberately constructed in that way and so that was another occasion when the camera crew and all concerned had some very convivial evenings. Magnus Magnusson, of course, was a very convivial person so that was a good field location but the underlying - the underlying story, I think, was a valid one and though of course it would have been a mistake, perhaps it was a mistake, to imply the notion of chiefdom too specifically, to infer the notion of Polynesian chiefdom,  there was at that time a necessity of saying, look, it really is possible to have great monuments in simple agricultural communities and here's one we can show you, and I think at that level it was a very successful film.
					
						The excavation in Orkney actually took place while we were in Southampton, the - the - the visit to Malta took place in the late, about 1969, or 1970, and then we made the film, "Islands Out of Time", around 1971, I think, and the Quanterness dig was in the 1970s in - while we were in Southampton, and then it seemed to be time to start doing some work in the Aegean and so I'd been very familiar with the site of Phylakopi in Melos which was the site excavated by the British School under the leadership mainly of Duncan McKenzie in 1896, they began their excavation, and they published it very promptly in 1904 and it was a very well conducted excavation, but at that time the ceramic sequence wasn't well understood. They established the ceramic sequence in the Cyclades and then it was only after that that Sir Arthur Evans began working at Knossos in Crete and began to establish what the pottery sequence, the whole chronology was, for Minoan Crete and Duncan McKenzie was working with his collaborator in that - in that effort. So it was time to go back to Phylakopi and try and get a better grip on the chronological sequence through a wonderful, deep stratigraphy and were able to work at that and in the first year we had a piece of luck really. We decided to excavate on a part of the site that hadn't been excavated before to try and get undisturbed levels from the last period of occupation, and we were just digging down in a small room and then we found some terracotta figurines. We started finding odd things. We found broken ostrich egg shell with a handle that suggested that the handle had been fitted onto it in some way. Then we found remains of a tortoise but there were borings in the shell of the tortoise, it wasn't just a dead tortoise been in there, and then we found a small head of beaten gold, and then war broke out. This was in 1974, I think, when war broke out in Cyprus and when the - when there was a coup and the Greeks took over Cyprus and then the Turks were going to get very tough and so all excavations in Greece were shut down at that time and so we had to suspend our activities then. But when we went back next year, it became clear that we were excavating in what one might call a shrine and this small room had got various figurines and so on and then adjacent to it was a much larger room with a whole series of terracotta sculptures of - of bovids, of oxen, I suppose, about this size, so that was really an interesting problem to be excavating what seemed to be probably a site of religious significance and that was interesting because it put one on the spot at what point, if you're an archaeologist, do you say, well, these aren't just toys or they're not just playthings, this is seriously the practice of cult, the practice of religion. And that's always been one of the problems in archaeology, the theory of archaeology is not really very well established. How do you find that you can pronounce that these are put there for a religious purpose rather than in some frivolous way or the way you decorate your house and so on? So we excavated there in ‘75 and then we had to have an extra year to finish in 1976.
					
						That turned out to be a very interesting site because it had different things. We had fortification walls that we had to date more securely. We had a deep sounding to get down to the early Bronze Age but the most interesting thing was this quite complicated shrine or sanctuary, which had quite a complicated stratigraphy. It had been damaged or destroyed and then it had been partly rebuilt and so we had to try and get the - the pottery sequence established and so on. And so that was a really profitable excavation that took a lot of thinking about in the writing up precisely because we'd done the excavation quite thoroughly, we'd got our stratigraphy straight, we'd drawn the sections, the finds were all properly recorded. A lot of them were very broken so we had to do a lot of mending of the pottery and of the figurines and the joins seemed to come from all over the place. The pot mender would suddenly find one figurine from here joining with one from there, but they were perfectly secure joins so we had to keep track of all those to find which joined with which, which helped us in some of the stratigraphic interpretation but it took a long time to - to get sorted, and so that gradually turned, the excavation report was being written, but in the end it turned into a book that was as much about methodology as it was just direct reporting, and so I edited the book. Of course, we had all kinds of specialists, Elizabeth French, the great authority on Mycenaean figurines, described the figurines. Penelope Ann Mountjoy did the specialism on the Mycenaean pottery which is a very abstruse field which had been well beyond my abilities, and so it ended up being called "The Archaeology of Cult", with the subtitle, "The Sanctuary at Phylakopi", and I began by trying to set out in a more coherent way, how one might hope to recognise a sanctuary or a cult building meaning a building that had been built for religious purposes and how would you hope to recognise such a thing? So I started off in a more deductive way talking about places which had been set apart for religious ritual and what sort of criteria would you have and one of the things is that you have visual ways of heightening awareness and using other senses so that you expect there to be prominent positions where things have iconographic significance will be placed, then maybe you have music, maybe you have special things to eat and drink in the course of these rituals. Maybe you have censers with things that you burn and so on. Clearly you have the possibility of a congregation but also you may have places that are rather apart as a sort of sacred place, or maybe you have great groups of people. So I tried to think all that through and I think was able to show that with these rather strange finds, it really had to be a cult place, and I remember when I gave my inaugural lecture in - in Cambridge, John Chadwick was - who was a great authority on things Mycenaean, was heard to observe, not by me but when he left, saying - oh, must have just been a toyshop, and that actually, if you're an archaeologist, presents quite a difficult problem. Are you really sure what these things mean and, indeed, play and toys do have a very special role in human existence; if one wants to be rather serious about it, there's a wonderful book called "Homo Ludens" that talks about the different ways in which humans play, and how play is so serious and, after all, you see that with, say, football matches, football matches in Turkey, people have lost their lives in the riots afterwards and so on just as in the chariot races in - in what is now Turkey, in - in Byzantium in Constantinople, there were sometimes riots leading to deaths after the royal chariot races. So there's a whole field there about the archaeology of religion which never had been very systematically developed, so this excavation report was the opportunity of doing that and that, I think, is quite an important point because one of the principles of the new archaeology, so-called new archaeology or processual archaeology, which had emerged in America in the 1960s, as I mentioned earlier, Lewis Binford was one of the key figures and his great book, "New Perspectives in Archaeology", an edited book was published in 1968, while in Cambridge, David Clarke who was a very bright archaeologist, teaching in Cambridge, he published his book, "Analytical Archaeology", in 1968, and both of these books had as one of their main points, the need for archaeology to make its reasoning processes more explicit to try and develop a framework by which you can make statements about the past that are in some ways warranted statements. Well, that work hadn't been done. It still hasn't been very effectively done in the area of prehistoric religion and prehistoric ritual, or, indeed, historic ritual and religion, but it becomes more extreme in the prehistoric period when you have no written evidence to confirm your observations so what you do have is the finds but you may also have the iconography, if you're very lucky you may have frescoes which depict religious scenes which help you with the interpretation. So, that was a good challenging experience really but the book didn't get written until about 1974, no, after that, 1984, I think, but it was - it was a good challenge to - to have to try and think that through and make sense of the excavation in that way, and so I got started on that during the excavation while they were based in - I got started in that while we were excavating, while I was based in Southampton, but it didn't get published until - until after we got to - to Cambridge, we moved to Cambridge in 1981, and so it took quite a while to get that publication complete.
					
						It was while we were in Southampton that a colleague of mine from Sheffield days, Andrew Fleming, and I, founded the Theoretical Archaeology Group and that, I think, partly came about through the experience of the Society for American Archaeology, the SAA meetings, in the United States, which in the '70s and '80s always seemed to be really very lively, I think because in those days they were talking about theoretical issues a great deal and debating issues that arose from the new archaeology, how you could give a better basis for the statements, how could you apply statistical techniques in your sampling. There were some really very good ideas going on which is less so in the United States today when the SAA meetings devote themselves mainly to what they call salvage archaeology what we call rescue archaeology, rather more practical issues whereas in Britain at that time, the archaeological lectures always seemed terribly sedate. The Society of Antiquaries who got some description of some detailed finds, very interesting, and even at the Prehistoric Society which is where you ought to have very lively debates about how to interpret things, it always seemed to be very descriptive and with few exceptions not really very challenging intellectually and so we were impressed by the - also by the circumstance that in the Society for American Archaeology meetings, you had quite a lot of graduate students speaking not just very wise and old heads, so Andrew and I decided that we would get something going and we started off with a meeting in Southampton where we invited all the research students and the staff from Sheffield, not a huge number, four or five staff, and seven or eight research students at that time, down to Southampton, and they were found accommodation and people in Southampton provided the meals and we had a two day meeting when many of the research students of both departments would give some account of their work and of the problems they were addressing and so did the staff of the departments, with a lot of time allowed for discussion. And we thought that was really interesting. We got really pleased about that so the following year we did the same thing in Sheffield, they were the hosts, and again there was room for accommodation and meals to be provided and this time we made - we did something which changed the course of the situation, we decided to invite one of the interesting theorists from the Institute of Archaeology in London, Mike Rowlands, to take part and he did take part and but became rather angry that we were having these meetings behind closed doors, one in Southampton and then one in Sheffield, and this was outrageous and why were we such a closed shop and we should be ashamed of ourselves, and so as a result of that, the next year we had a - the first meeting, national meeting, of the Theoretical Archaeology group which we proclaimed ourselves to be, so we invited all and sundry to enrol and to come but we retained some of the things,  most people stayed in university accommodation which they paid for but for impecunious research students, there was still accommodation on floors, bring a sleeping bag, sleep on somebody's floor, and we kept the subscription fee very low and it was possible to get food locally quite inexpensively, and we tried also to encourage graduate students to speak about their work and also to allow a lot of time for discussion and so I forget which year the first TAG was but it must have been in the late 1970s anyway, 1979-1980, something like that and it really took off and each year it goes to a different university department who are the hosts. We had one quite early on in Glasgow and later on one in Cambridge and then to quite smaller universities like Lampeter, it's been to Lampeter twice, and it's turned into something on the archaeological scene because it's a wonderful forum and one does deliberately hear quite extravagant ideas or interesting theoretical ideas. This was just the time that in England there was a reaction developing against the so-called new archaeology, against processual archaeology, which was felt to have too firm a basis in scientific approaches and too much fuss about ecology and subsistence, the food basis and so on, which, indeed, did characterise quite a lot of the new archaeology in the Americas at that time and so the emphasis of some of these people who called themselves post-processual archaeologists was to avoid scientific methodology, avoid trying to make generalisations like scientific laws, but emphasise the richness of different individual contexts and also try and look at the symbolic side much more to try and look at art or look at burials and what one might seek to infer about the practices which people were deliberately introducing into the burials and so to lay more emphasis on interpretation in that way. And so that controversy found itself fought out really in successive meetings of the theoretical archaeology group. Ian Hodder, who was by then in Cambridge, had a lot of graduate students who were very deliberately being non-new archaeology and non-processual and proclaimed themselves to be post-processual, and there were many of us who still admired, as I do, some of the achievements of the - the traditional processual archaeology and so the theoretical archaeology group meetings became a forum for that - that debate, which has been one of the interesting debates in archaeology, not only in Britain but more widely, I think. So sometimes volumes were published arising from these conferences and that was really quite an interesting - an interesting development in the archaeology of the time.
					
						The - there weren't many British people taking much interest in the Society for American Archaeology then, but I found it very attractive and started, when I started going to America after my first visit to UCLA, sometimes got invited to give a lecture or something, and would generally try to do that and I was also got interested, as a result of some conferences in Santa Barbara, in mathematical applications in archaeology and got to know very well a professor of mathematics, Kenneth Cooke, and we decided we would try and put together a book on mathematical applications in archaeology which was published under the title, "Transformations, Mathematical Approaches to Culture Change", and we tried to introduce non-linear mathematics including catastrophe theory and simulation studies and so we had really quite a lot of interesting ideas being put together there which - some of which were also presented at SAA meetings and I still think there were a lot of interesting ideas there. Some of them got criticised precisely by the - the so-called post-processual persuasion, or interpretive archaeologists as they sometimes call themselves, because they set their faces against law-like generalisations but although they had quite a number of interesting new points to contribute, the post-processual archaeologists, interpretative archaeologists, were very keen to develop gender archaeology which I think was useful. They were interested in the archaeology of identity and they developed some - a number of other interesting ideas. They had a new take on - on landscape archaeology or the archaeology of landscape and so on, but I think something was lost by the rejection of comparison and the rejection of - of quantitative approaches which had been one of the great things to emerge from the early processual archaeology. But later on, we organised some meetings at the SAA, where you have sessions, so if you want to organise a session, you work out who you'd like to invite to join you and you then write to the organisers. Each year there's a different organiser. I'd like to propose this session and with any luck you'll be accepted so we had one very good meeting which I think was in Philadelphia, and that was the first time that we had a lot of people going out from the UK. It was British - around 1980, I forget exactly what year but it was the year that the Brits came to the SAA meetings and Lewis Binford was invited to make some comments which were not terribly flattering but anyway he spoke with great vigour, as he usually does, and it was - it was a good meeting with some good papers which, again, all had a theoretical interest. You wouldn't go and talk about British archaeology or European archaeology, archaeology, at the Society for American Archaeology, unless you had something to say that was of more general interest and that is where, I think, the theoretical approach was really positive. That volume was finally published under the title, "Ranking Resource and Exchange", Steven Shennan and I co-organised the session and co-edited the volume. It also, we also entered into the party spirit. The SAA usually has some very good parties so we gave the British party at the SAA and we each of us had agreed to buy a bottle of malt whiskey on the flight at duty free prices so all the people coming to this party were given a shot of malt whiskey before the party really got underway and it did get underway well and it's still remembered in SAA circles. And so that was useful, I think, in developing some of the exchange between British and American archaeology, which has continued in many ways since then. In a way, the Sheffield meeting that I mentioned, the explanation of culture change meeting in 1971, perhaps began that but then it certainly got underway, as you say, with people going to the SAA meetings in quite a systematic way and sometimes people from America coming off to the theoretical archaeology group meetings in the UK.
					
						It was while we were at Southampton that we were able to invite Lewis Binford to come and do a sabbatical term, and he was a wonderfully energetic lecturer. He always speaks with passion but he'd prepared his things very well so he was talking about his approach to archaeology and I think everybody who attended those lectures really benefited from them. By then we had an MPhil in archaeological method so his lectures were taken by those but also by quite a lot of the undergraduates, and he also gave practical classes in butchery - we haven't spoken much about practical classes, but naturally we had practical classes, identification of bones and in pot drawing and in technology. David Peacock was one of the staff in Southampton. He was one of the pioneers in ceramic characterisation, thin sectioning of pottery, and he gave very good practicals in that direction, but Lewis Binford certainly surpassed him. He gave practicals in butchery, so some carcass would be found somewhere and the students would be invited to roll up their sleeves and undertake the butchery of this carcass, but his very hands-on approach was very well received and it was after his visit that the university agreed to award him an honorary degree and that was very appropriate because, as you know, he's often been seen as a controversial figure in the States and so wasn't really accorded the respect that was due to him in the States in earlier years. I think it's only very recently that he's been a member of- made a member of the National Academy of Sciences because of the opposition of some old guard people who didn't like his style. He, of course, has been enormously candid about his view of people so it's perhaps not surprising they remembered that but, anyway, he received his honorary degree and it was very nice that he received that - that recognition in the first place from the University of Southampton.
					
						We had a very good team of people. Arthur Simon was one of the old guard. I think he'd been originally appointed by Barry Cunliffe-Wright when the department opened and he is a very good pre-historian with a very thorough knowledge both of prehistoric Ireland and of the Wessex culture and so on and then Tim and Sara Champion became members of the - the team and David Hinton in medieval archaeology so it was a strong department and then later on Steven Shennan came to join us and also Clive Gamble, initially as a technician but then very soon became a lecturer, and all of these people have gone on, of course, and Clive Gamble is now a professor at Royal Holloway College and Steven Shennan is the director of the Institute of Archaeology in - in London. And it was there that we followed the tradition which had already been set up in Sheffield when we got to Sheffield of New Light lectures as they were called there, organised by the extramural department and this was a very good thing for the archaeology department. About once a fortnight, through the academic year, significant archaeologists from elsewhere would be invited and would speak to a very full auditorium because it wasn't just archaeology students, it was people from the town and this was a very good way to be in touch with a lot of people and was quite important in a small archaeology department which needed to build itself up which was true both in Sheffield and in Southampton. Another very agreeable experience in Southampton was the field trips. Sometimes we went on field trips and one year Glyn Daniel, who was then the professor of the Disney professor in Cambridge, suggested that we might do a joint field trip, Cambridge and Southampton, so he and the Cambridge students came down to Southampton for an evening lecture together and stayed in Southampton and then we all went across on the ferry and the field trip was to be in Brittany which was one of Glyn's great stamping grounds. He'd written that very entertaining book, "The Hungry Archaelologist in France", which centred on Lascaux and Carnac, so Lascaux was cave art and good food in the Périgord and Carnac was Megaliths and seafood and so I remember very well the first night we went across and we saw Giot who spoke to us and we had a really good dinner somewhere, and then the next day we got down on the south coast near Carnac to La Trinité sur Mer and a wonderful evening with degustation de crustaces and that was a very agreeable field trip both in social terms and in gastronomic terms and, indeed, in archaeological terms. I hadn't seen the great monuments of Brittany before so it was fun to do so with Glyn Daniel, for whom I think they were his first great archaeological experience as he says in his autobiography, "Some Small Harvest", when he remembers the moonlight on the Megaliths at Carnac and so on. They are very impressive and so it was nice to be able to share that also with the younger generation of archaeologists.
					
						I think making television programmes has really, for me, been a very broadening experience in the geographical sense, that was what took me to Orkney for the first time and led partly to that excavation in Orkney which was very rewarding, and then following that to the Pacific, to Easter Island and Tonga to make the programme, "Islands Out Of Time", which was a wonderful experience to see those things at first hand and then I went to - to China, partly with a television mission, it was partly at the behest of Thames and Hudson, I was editing a series, "New Aspects of Antiquity", and they were hoping for some Chinese publications which I'm sure ever ensued, but I went out and visited various places in China; Kunming in the South West and Xian and the Great Wall and so the people at Chronicle were making a programme on the great discoveries that Xian, the terracotta warriors, and they had brought in a whole lot of Chinese film, quite good quality Chinese film, showing the terracotta warriors, but they needed a presenter, somebody who could put the thing together but they'd already bought the film and I don't think they were allowed to film there but they thought it would be good if I would do most of the talking about the warriors in the studio with back projection of the - the terracotta warriors, but it would be nice if I could be established, as it were, in China, so they thought the right place would be the Great Wall of China. So when I got to Peking, I'd arranged, or they'd arranged, that I should go and call on the Chinese Television Corporation, and they said, yes, it would be possible to film the Great Wall of China, and they provided me with a cameraman and a sound recordist and would I kindly negotiate the price. So I was a little unexpected - it was a little unexpected, to have to sign these papers. I said, oh, surely we can use cheaper transport than this, and picked - chose one or two things, and then went to the Great Wall where I was introduced to Madam Woo the cameraman, and Madam Woo had a handheld camera, which wasn't surprising, but what was more surprising was that it was a camera that wound up manually and there seemed to be no connection between the camera and sound recording devices whereas usually with synchronisation you're familiar with some connection between the two. So I started my spiel, here we are on the Great Wall of China and there are the barriers, the Barbarians, I should say, on that side, and here is the safety induced by the rule of the Great Chinese Emperor. And then the camera stopped and it became clear that because it was a wind-up camera, you had about two minutes so you had to do your pieces to camera in two minute bursts which I therefore tried to adapt myself to. But when the film and the tape was sent back to the BBC, the first reaction of the technicians was unusable Mickey Mouse stuff, because the - there was no synch. And so it started off together and then progressively, over the two minutes, became completely displaced. But they did some very clever things technically, whether they made new frames or speeded up the sound machine, so this was actually used in the end for the programme on the Emperor's Immortal Army. But that gave me the experience of seeing these things and seeing more of earlier periods in Chinese archaeology.
					
						We were invited to make film at Hatra, the Iraq government was wanting to promote tourism. This was about 1979 or 1980, and there is a strange city of Hatra in the desert, in the Iraqi desert, which was organised, set up, in Parthian times of early 3rd and 4th centuries AD, but then continued to be used by Arabs and some of the earliest Arab inscriptions known are from the site. And so I read what was known about it, described in late classical authors and so on, and it was a wonderful visit. The filming was very successful. Again it had a striking title, "Lost Kings of the Desert", but it was very appropriate and so we filmed in the Baghdad Museum, wonderful sculptures of King Sanatruk, they were all called Sanatruk, it was a dynastic name, some of which had been very sadly damaged in the looting, more recent looting, in the Iraq Museum. And then everything seemed to go very well and the representative of the Iraqi government said would I care to go on a trip down to the south of Iraq which would be laid on. So we had a car and so I was able to go down and see Ur and Uruk and some of the great Sumerian sites as well as to visit Babylon, and that was all very educational. And then another programme was made by a very enterprising director, BBC director, Dominic Flessati, who was a very interesting man, and he wanted to work on the origins of the Bronze Age, the nature of the independent origins of the Bronze Age. And so we were able to go down to film in Bulgaria at the finds from the Varna Cemetery which are really very interesting. It's the oldest gold work known in the world and because of all this radiocarbon business I'd been one of the first to realise that with the calibration they had to be older, not only then Ur, but older that Troy, older than any other gold known, which is, I think, what they remain. And so again that poses problems about the origins of metallurgy and one has to relate in one's mind, I think, the early origins of metallurgy with the early origins of rich decoration. And the metal objects in question were prestige objects, the gold decorations, but also the copper axes were prestige objects before they ever became useful objects and they didn't really become all that useful until alloying with tin was developed quite a lot later and once they were tin bronze they could be tougher and were more useful artefacts. So, it was really the television filming there that opened the way to getting good photographs of the material and doing more work, which I subsequently did, on the - on the Varna finds. And I think the last of the programmes that I made before the chronicle days ended, was at the Indus Valley civilisation of Pakistan mainly and India. I think "City of the Dead" was the appropriate title there but we were able to film Mohenjo-daro and Harappa as well as visit a lot of places, visit a village where they still have traditional local potters using the potter's wheel and so on. And so out of that experience I was able to learn a certain amount firsthand about the Indus Valley civilisation and, in retrospect, I'm coming to feel more and more that comparative archaeology is very important. It's very difficult to be a specialist in more than area so, at any rate, to be able to see seriously at firsthand the products of these different civilisations is very important. It was on that 1967 visit to UCLA that I took the opportunity of making the first visit down to Mexico before leaving and that was a wonderful experience, to go to the great city of Teotihuacan for the first time, dating from about the seventh century AD, one of the most impressive archaeological sites I know and just get some glimpse of these astonishing civilisations there in Mexico. If one wants to have some insights into the - the human experience overall, just as to see the painted caves of France at a much earlier time, these are really very important experiences, I think. So I have to thank television for, at any rate, some of those.
					
						Before moving to Cambridge from Southampton, I'd got a little bit involved in the politics of archaeology as it were because I was made a member of the Ancient Monuments Board for England, which at that time advised the Ministry of Works - that was how it was organised in those days - and the Ministry of Works looked after the monuments in the care of the nation, like Stonehenge and Avebury and so on, the so-called guardianship monuments. Now, but it also advised on monuments that should not be destroyed but were not in care, the so-called scheduled monuments because they were on a schedule of the nation's important monuments and this was a time that rescue archaeology was getting underway. Peter Addyman and Martin Biddle and others had really made a great effort and it was recognised or became recognised largely through their efforts, that if motorways were going to be built and they were going to bulldoze through archaeological sites, there ought to be excavation in advance of that so that the information would be rescued. And that was developing but the Ministry of Works was rather slow to respond so it was an interesting experience to sit on the Ancient Monuments Board, which at that time was a very, very conventional body. It was chaired by a distinguished old gentleman, Sir Edward Muir, who had been the principal secretary or the chief civil servant in the Ministry of Works, and most of its consideration was whether we should schedule this monument or that monument and dusty files were produced and it was agreed probably we would schedule this one but the landowner wasn't too happy about that one and so on, and only very slowly did the realities of contemporary archaeology enter the Ancient Monuments Board. And I remember very clearly that probably in my first year on the Ancient Monuments Board, I think it was about 1974, we all solemnly went down to Stonehenge and we all agreed that it was a bad business that the road goes through Stonehenge, the A344, isn't it, the one that actually goes through the monument and how nice it would be if that could be closed and, and if a proper visitors' centre could be built because the existing one was getting rather tatty and the car park was too small and so on, and I remember the minister for culture, junior minister, Alma Birk, Lady Birk, this was a, the Labour government at the time, came down and we all met and we agreed that Stonehenge should be a first priority for national attention. And I mention that with emphasis because the story continues, and when the Conservative government had come in and Michael Heseltine was Secretary, Secretary of State for the Environment, and the Ancient Monuments Board met with him, he was much more dynamic and wanted to revise the system and it was no longer the Ministry of Works by then, it was part of the Department of the Environment, the archaeology section, and he agreed yes, Stonehenge should be a first priority for the nation and he was responsible for completely restructuring the way the heritage was dealt with in this country and passed the legislation setting up the Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England and Lord Montagu, Edward Montagu, was made the first chairman of the commission and I became one of the commissioners, one of the foundation commissioners. And so we had a lot of time discussing what the new organisation should be, should be called and we had consultants who finally came up with the theory that it should be called English Heritage, which we agreed after some discussion. Not everybody was happy with the word Heritage and a logo was established and so on, and so Edward Montagu proclaimed that the flagship operation for English Heritage would be Stonehenge and we all went down and had meetings with the villagers to explain that the A344 should be closed even though they argued it would take a fire engine three minutes longer to reach the village in the case of emergency, should this happen and so on. And so my experience of the politics of archaeology, which has been a continuing one has in that sense been a frustrating one because after Edward Montagu, it was Sir Jocelyn Stevens who was the chairman of English Heritage and he reasserted that this was the flagship monument of the commission and so on and there were grandiose schemes for dualling the A303, which is the main road which goes past Stonehenge and putting that under a tunnel, which would have been very satisfactory, and that project has just this month collapsed. The government has announced that it's too expensive. It's turned out to be more expensive than they imagined. It would cost £500 million and therefore they're literally going back to square one. And I find this one of the most astonishing things, as I say because I think 1974, that I was first introduced to the problem and so that's 33 years where successive British governments have succeeded in doing absolutely nothing about Stonehenge, which has got the same car park and the same visitors' centre as it had in 1974. But English Heritage did many good things. I mean that was one conspicuous failure, but it did many good things and so I was involved in an interesting way with those developments and also with the Royal Commission, which was again recording ancient monuments, which was later on amalgamated with English Heritage.
					
						In 1981 we moved from Southampton to Cambridge because Glyn Daniel had retired from the Disney Chair of Archaeology where he'd succeeded Grahame Clark and so I put in for that job and in the end I got it, so we had all the business of house hunting and so on, but we moved to Cambridge, which of course is a much larger department with many more research students. It has really quite a vigorous intellectual life, but at the same time the social life doesn't centre on the department as it rather had in Southampton where one of the big events of the year is the annual departmental ball and party, whereas in Cambridge the social life centres more on the colleges so it's a very different place. But anyway, we got well installed here and I suppose one of the first things I had to do was to think about my inaugural lecture. In Southampton that had been on the field of social archaeology where the preoccupation was really working out again what had made these prehistoric societies tick when one realised things happened much earlier in Europe than in the near East in some respects, talking about those monuments and so on, so that had been the challenge there. But that phase was really complete in a way. The early new archaeology, the early new processual archaeology, had run its course by then, and so I entitled my lecture, “Towards an Archaeology of Mind”. And the idea was to try and move on towards more symbolic things, towards trying to use the, the archaeological data to allow one to see how people were setting about thinking about things in the past and there had been the earlier theory, Christopher Hawkes had once suggested that it's easy to talk about technology and it's much more difficult to talk about social life and much more difficult again to talk about religion or other related topics, and I suppose I was pushed that way by that excavation I'd done in Melos at the site of Phylakopi where we found the shrine and where I was preparing at that time the book, "The Archaeology of Cult", which was the, the publication of that, or the first part of the publication of that excavation. And so I was thinking about the archaeology of religion, but also thinking how one could try and overcome the criticism, the scepticism there was in some quarters, that you could say anything about the ways people thought and yet it was pretty obvious that there were some things that weren't technological or just social. If you look at the pyramids of Egypt, they're symbolic even if you don't immediately know what they're symbolic of and they're the product of very coherent thought processes and intentionality, which is not explained away in subsistence terms and to know about the technology of the pyramids, how they were built doesn't really tell you all that much about them. And I hit on one thing, which I suppose had made an impression on me while I was in Pakistan, looking at the Indus Valley civilization and that was the system of weights of the Indus Valley civilization and these were rather neat little cubes, stone cubes, very carefully carved, very beautifully carved but when the original excavators, Sir John Marshall and others had published the sites, they had weighed those objects using just the modern scale pan and they'd found that they were in multiples of a unit and they had pointed out that this could only be so if they were being deliberately made to a particular mass or a particular weight and therefore they must have been used as a weighing system and scale pans were also found, not necessarily with them. So it was clear that these people were capable of weighing and it became very clear that by looking at these weights, you could definitely reconstruct their measurement system to some extent and could document that they were indeed weighing things and that led on to further ideas because if they were weighing things, unless they're weighing them against each other, playing with these little cubes, didn't seem very likely, they were presumably weighing one material against another, weighing gold against something else or weighing grain in great quantities against something else, perhaps for exchange purposes and so this was a development of a system of commodities where you would actually evaluate gold or grain or whatever by specific quantities in terms of units of measure. Not very surprising to us, but really one was in, in the path, going towards reconstructing one aspect of their thought system and that seemed to me, a very nice concrete example of how one could, by contemporary observations, make statements about the way these people were thinking. At the same time, Alexander Thom  in this country, was claiming they were units of length, which were used in laying out the megalithic monuments, the stone circles and so on. Well, that's still controversial but he was using very precise mathematical methods. He was measuring the diameters of the circles and so on and got a large number of circles and then trying to claim, using quite good statistical methods, that there was a significant unit of measure in amongst all of that, so that seemed to me, a nice way of getting, beginning to get a handle on the cognitive question, what one would today call cognitive archaeology. And you weren't aspiring to know exactly what people were thinking, you can't get into their shoes as it were as some people had claimed was a good strategy. You have to imagine what it was like to be them. Well, there's no harm in using imagination but you can't really put yourself in the shoes of somebody living somewhere else 4,000 years ago but what you perhaps can do, is actually study aspects of the way they were thinking, whether in the area of measurement or indeed in the area of religion where you can hope to claim that this must have been a religious site, particularly if you have some iconography like some frescoes or something and so you can do that without the use of writing. And so that seemed an, an interesting direction, direction to move in, and to try and get beyond some of the limitations of the rather functionless aspects of the early, new archaeology. And some of the so-called post-processual archaeologists I think had a similar aspiration. They were talking about symbolic and structural archaeology, but they were less concerned I think with the methodology, more with the end product, whereas I, myself felt that it was, there's always the risk of just taking a leap in the dark and ending up in the wrong place. I felt there needed to be some coherent structure of reasoning, so that really in my case, came partly out of the excavations in Melos where one was grappling with the archaeology of religion and other aspects of what I had seen as a separate subsystem in that book, "The Emergence of Civilization", that I'd published about the independent origins of Aegean Civilization in the early and then the later bronze age. I'd written about the symbolic and projective subsystem and it was the same idea but I was managing to get it a bit more concrete about that.
					
						Then there was another interesting issue that began to build up more in my mind at the same time and that was the question of archaeology and language. At a conference in Sheffield back in 1971 or thereabouts, which the professor of Greek there, Ronald Crossland  had organised about prehistoric migrations in the Aegean. Well, I didn't believe much in all these migrations and I'd put forward the idea that maybe Indo-European speech, the Greek language and perhaps before the Greek language, Indo-European speech, Greek is a language in the Indo-European language family, might have reached Greece, not as a result of great migrations but with the spread of farming to Greece from Anatolia and then might indeed have proceeded across Europe with the spread of farming across Europe, which Grahame Clark had by then documented rather well with a map of the spread of radiocarbon dates of the first, the first farmers and, and that had been an idea at the back of my mind for some time. But when I lectured, I think in Oxford on our excavations in Melos and I was talking about the shrine at Phylakopi, which nobody particularly questioned, but then I went on to suggest that there could be an evolution in religious thinking and in the Neolithic period you have the, those figurines, sometimes thought of as fertility figurines that Marija Gimbutas was so enthusiastic about. Then in the early Bronze Age you have those wonderful Cycladic sculptures and they descend from the Neolithic ones and then you get into the developed Bronze Age with the, the Minoan religion and then the Mycenaean religion, which were reflected at our shrine at Phylakopi and then although you have something of a collapse of civilization in Greece at the end of the Mycenaeans, it does resume with a great deal of continuity with the archaic Greek period, the Geometric and then the archaic Greek period and you do find quite a lot of things which demonstrate the continuity. We had found a couple of small, bronze figurines in our shrine of the so-called smiting god, presumably a deity wielding a, a thunderbolt or something like that, which is a, a theme, an iconographic theme that continues right into Geometric Greece with Zeus and Neptune with their thunderbolts. And so I'd given a lecture in Oxford, saying I thought there was a, a continuity in Greek religion, which you could observe in various ways, probably right back from Neolithic times, right through into the Bronze Age, very well documented at Phylakopi, which was why I was talking about it, but then going on into the Greek period proper of Archaic, Archaic Greece, and Professor Christopher Hawkes was, he'd retired some years before but he was a very erudite man and he said,”Well, Professor Renfrew must be entirely wrong. Is he not aware that the Greeks were Indo-Europeans and Zeus, Pitar, Jupiter …” and he went into a great spiel about these people were Indo-Europeans and they must have come with the first Greek speakers. The, that was the coming of the Greeks, which of course was a well established theme in Greek archaeology by then but one already beginning to be questioned somewhat and so he said this was complete nonsense and Professor Renfrew should go home and think again. Well, I was a little displeased at that and I thought well now, I really have to grapple with this Indo-European argument because I felt there was some validity in the continuity idea and I already had in mind that the coming of the Greeks in the, in the Bronze Age was a complete myth. Indeed the original idea had been the coming of the Greeks with Archaic Greece and it was the decipherment of linear B by Ventris and Chadwick in the '70s and '80s that had, had made clear that the Mycenaeans were certainly speaking Greek. That's as far back as 1300 BC, 1400 BC and so with the decipherment the idea had developed in some quarters that maybe the Greeks, the first Greek speakers had entered Greece at the beginning of the early Bronze Age and that would fit with the ideas of Marija Gimbutas very well but it didn't look that way to me. I didn't think there were any suggestions of significant migrations into Greece at the beginning of the Bronze Age and so my idea had been that the only obvious change, obvious input you see in Greece on any scale, is with the, the origin of the Neolithic way of life, the coming of the first farmers, the first use of pottery in Greece, the first use of wheat and barley and domestic sheep and goat and so on and then clearly the Neolithic way of life was transmitted across the rest of Europe. So if you were looking for a solution of when did Indo-European speech first come to Europe, it was long before the Celts or whatever and it really seemed to me that the best suggestion, since I wasn't impressed by any of the other indications of migrations, was the coming of farming. So I sat down to try and put this idea more coherently and I read up what was written about Indo-European questions and one very significant point was that the Hittites in Turkey spoke and wrote an Indo-European language, what we call the Hittite language. Well, they hadn't really been, they hadn't been discovered. The archaeology of the Hittites hadn't been discovered nor had their writings been discovered when the original Indo-European theory was developed in the 19th Century and it just gradually became clear to me that scholarship, because it had missed out on the Hittites and so on, had actually got the whole thing wrong and that the prevailing theory about the Indo-Europeans coming to Europe at the beginning of the Bronze Age as Marija Gimbutas had indeed been arguing, but she wasn't the first to do so. Gordon Childe himself had done so in his book, "The Aryans", nor was he the first. So I sat down to write "Archaeology and Language" and I really worked quite hard at that and that was published in 1987 and that created quite a furore. I think a number of archaeologists felt the case was a good one because they agreed there were no very conspicuous signs of immigration into Greece or into Europe during the Bronze Age or immediately prior to the Bronze Age but most linguists thought this was outrageous and the main reason it was outrageous, or one of the main reasons, was that if you were suggesting that the first Indo-European languages were in Europe 6,000 or 7,000 BC, whereas the beginning of the Bronze Age was around 3,000 BC, obviously there was a much greater time depth and they just said it's far too early. We have a feeling for how fast language changes and it changes much faster than that. You couldn't possibly have proto Indo-European in Europe around 7,000 BC so that was an, an argument, which was an interesting one and it's a theme which it's been possible to pursue ever since. When the McDonald Institute was established, then we had some useful conferences on that theme.
					
						We'd been back in Cambridge a few years and I'd become a fellow of St John's College again, a professorial fellow, which was very agreeable and then suddenly out of the blue we had a letter or I had a letter from the president of Jesus College saying that they were looking for a new Master. Sir Alan Cottrell would be retiring the next year, would be retiring in 1986, so this must have been in 1985 this letter came in, and would I be interested in being considered with a number of other people for the possibility of becoming Master of the college. Well, this is something that I hadn't really thought about at all and obviously would be rather a deflection from one's archaeological work to get involved so much in college affairs, but it sounded rather an attractive prospect and I didn't know Jesus College very well, but when I went there and met the fellows and so on, it really seemed a very interesting challenge. Jesus is one of the oldest colleges in Cambridge, was founded in 1496 but founded out of a nunnery which had stood there before and so the building, some of the buildings are very much older, going back to the 12th Century and so it seemed like an interesting challenge. So I discussed it very carefully with Jane because if, if one was going to become Master, if one was elected Master, then one would move in to the Master's lodge, which is a very handsome building, and would have all kinds of duties and it would be really rather time consuming but we thought it would be an interesting thing to do. It would be fun, so I agreed that I'd like to stand in the election, served at all kinds of meetings with fellows and so on and in the end I was indeed elected Master so we arranged to move into the Master's lodge in Jesus, which we did in 1986 and really got stuck into the work of the college, which made for a very different life because if you live in the Master's lodge, you're in the middle of things. You're living over the shop as it were, but it's enormously convenient. You can slip out to the college bar for a drink and you're expected of course to go to the evening service on a Sunday in chapel when there was a, an outside preacher but also it was hoped you would support the chapel in other ways and you were certainly expected to show some interest in student activities, sport and so on. So we got very interested in the, in the rowing, which is a very attractive feature of Cambridge and really enjoyed very much those years in Jesus College, but there was the risk I could see that one wouldn't have enough time to do, get on with one's academic work so very fortunately, I had the idea right at the beginning, that if I was going to become Master, would it be possible to have a research assistant who would help with the preparation of the publication of the second volume on our Melos excavations. The first volume had already been published by then or around that time but the second volume was going to take a lot of working up and very fortunately the college agreed with that, so we had a, a succession of research assistants who were extremely helpful, Christine Morris and then Chris Scarre and, and then Neil Brodie, and all that is relevant because from the point of view of archaeology in Cambridge, a significant event arose when I had a letter from a solicitor representing somebody who clearly might become a significant donor and could this donor who wasn't even named then, could he come and visit the department. So we organised sort of the laboratory such as they were functioning and so on and Dr McDonald, as it turned out to be, who was a, a rather brisk Scottish gentleman in his 80s came with his solicitor and his advisor and they went rather briskly round the department, took a great deal of interest. He was very well informed about archaeology. Then we gave him a good lunch in the college and that was relevant because if you have a, a Master's lodge, you can entertain rather well and so after lunch he discussed the Paleolithic with Paul Mellars. He discussed Mesopotamia with Nicholas Postgate and Joan Oates, the relevant specialist. He discussed Egypt with Barry Kemp who was the Cambridge Egyptologist and then said - oh yes, well, that's very interesting. Thank you very much and he took himself off and that was that really. So I thought, hmm, that didn't lead us very far but then about a month later I had a letter from the same advisor, could the two advisors come to call on me? So this time we didn't sort of go in for lunch. They were welcomed for a cup of coffee at 11 o'clock in the department, but they came and said Dr McDonald was very interested and he would like to do something for the department and he'd like to contribute £100,000 a year for field work for five years and would that be acceptable. So that question wasn't a difficult one to answer. That would be acceptable, yes, and then he, they said could you indicate how you would dispose of a larger sum, and that was a very interesting question because clearly the larger sum wasn't indicated and so that made me think. But I realised that what Cambridge very much needed was a new building for archaeology. We had very poor facilities and so I thought we should have new laboratories, and I could also see that there was no point in letting the university off the hook with its own responsibilities, which I didn't think it was meeting very well, which were mainly to undergraduates. That was where the university might have done something so I thought perhaps an institute for research, which would be useful for post-graduate and even post-doctoral work. So I said, well, I think it would be very useful to have an institute for archaeological research and it would need a building and it would need various facilities and so on and they said, well, could I think more about that and write to them about that. And that was very interesting and so I went to see the secretary general of the faculties, who was the chief administrator of the university, and he was very good. I think perhaps they'd lost a potential donation some time before by not following it up very vigorously so he lost no time and he suggested there was a piece of land in the middle of the quadrangle near the archaeology department on the Downing site and he would get an architect who would do an outline design of a building and so we invited Dr McDonald and his advisors in December of that year. I suppose that was, must have been 1988 by then and so they came and we gave them - we had a nice meeting in Jesus College, gave them a very good dinner. The choir, dressed in their robes, came to sing Christmas carols. We really sort of did our best as it were and then we had this project and the secretary general of the faculty said, pointed out that if you're going to build a building, which we reckon might cost about £5 million, then the university would have to have an endowment to run it, and so we calculated that might be another £5 million and so we said to Dr Mac, this is the project and it will cost about £10 million and he said, that's very interesting, and it really proceeded from there. And by that time the research assistant was Chris Scarre and so he and I spent a lot of time communicating with Dr McDonald and he spent several visits to Cambridge, and there were problems with planning permission, with the design and planning permission, but he took a keen hand in getting the right design and so he agreed it should go ahead and we organised the first McDonald lecture, and we have had annual McDonald lectures since then. And we took some temporary premises near the university and got some laboratories going. Very sadly, Dr McDonald then died but his affairs were in order and the matter was written into his will, so the institute got built so we got an institute for archaeological research, which gave us very good laboratories and it also gave an endowment to make possible not only field work but to appoint one or two research personnel, and so that was a very good thing for Cambridge archaeology. But it also made possible various other, various other developments and one of those was to host conferences and so on in the, in the new building.
					
						I was fortunate in getting a grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation to work on the prehistory of languages, and so we had a number of interesting conferences where we got leading linguists and archaeologists and others who were interested to discuss some of the problems in the prehistory of languages. Because early language is a peculiar subject, obviously you don't have evidence of language until you have writing, which is at the earliest around 3,000 BC, much later obviously in many parts of the world, but it's clear if you have different languages of the same family spread across Europe and you already have written indications of them around 1300 BC in Greece and around the same date in Turkey, that Proto-Indo-European must be much earlier so if you begin to reconstruct the ancestors of language families, to recreate the Proto-Indo-European language or Proto-Semitic language or Proto-Afro-Asiatic language, that's taking you quite deep into prehistory even if you're not quite sure how deep. And this was of interest to me because of that problem that Christopher Hawkes had raised. He was saying you can't have that theory of yours about the evolution of religion because you're forgetting about the Indo-Europeans and I didn't really think the Indo-Europeans were very relevant because as far as I was concerned, they had appeared on the scene much earlier and whether they were Indo-European or not didn't really affect the problem, whereas if you believed that the Indo-European languages had come much more recently, then you had to write the archaeology differently. You had to find the migration that brought in the Indo-Europeans that were responsible for these changes, so it, and it was a way, it was again somewhat this old endogenous, exogenous story, were the developments in Europe essentially European developments, although with an Indo-European component very early, or were they the product of more recent migrations or diffusionist processes or whatever? So it related to that earlier problem, but it meant that the language question was a real constraint because archaeologists were being told the way they should construct their narrative or their theories, you had to bring in the Indo-Europeans at the beginning of the Bronze Age and very much the same applied to the so-called Celts and there were very clear theories, which indeed Professor Hawkes had been associated with about the coming of the Celts to Britain in the Iron Age and the Celts were supposed to be people who spoke Celtic languages, which was a subgroup of Indo-European and supposed to have characteristic material culture with a La Tène  type decoration and so there was a very clear cut theory that the Celts came to Britain in the 1st century BC so the whole of Iron Age archaeology was being written in terms of the coming of these people in the 1st century BC who were bringing their Celtic speech and these other things with them. Well, this was already being questioned. Roy Hodson was one of the Iron Age specialists in Britain who was questioning these supposed successive migrations of the, of the Celts, but I very much followed his views and to me it was probable that the Celtic languages, which is a subgroup of Indo-European, developed in place really, in France and Ireland and in Britain after the first farmers speaking their Proto-Indo-European language had come so you didn't need any further invasions. You had the coming of Proto-Indo-European with the Neolithic, but after that you got elaboration and linguistic diversity divergence so that you've got the Celtic languages emerging in place so you didn't really need any invasions for the British Iron Age and that was an important point, to somehow get oneself free of the constraint of having to think when do we bring in these Celtic languages or Greek languages or Slavonic languages or whatever it might be, and so it did seem to matter archaeologically. And so we had one very interesting meeting, time-depth in historical linguistics, and it really became clear that there weren't any very good arguments to prevent your setting Proto-Indo-European much earlier than had originally been supposed and the arguments that there were, were often rather circular ones. You couldn't have Indo-European that early because it would be earlier than Proto-Afro-Asiatic so you say, well, how do you date Proto-Afro-Asiatic? Oh, well, it's around the same time as Proto-Indo-European and so you went round in these complete circles. So the conferences were very interesting and most of the linguists stuck to their guns, it has to be said, I think it has to be said that in linguistic studies, historical linguistic studies, the majority of linguists don't really think in these terms, but a lot more work has gone on. I could see that the same arguments would apply to the Bantu languages and that their farming language dispersal model, the notion that as farming spread, so did the language of the first farmers in different regions of the world. That could apply. And Peter Bellwood in Australia, working on the Pacific languages and the peopling of the Pacific, had come to very similar ideas for the Pacific and so together we've been developing these ideas. Interestingly enough, they don't always find favour with the Neolithic specialists in Britain because they, following Eric Higgs's thought had been suggesting that maybe the transition to the Neolithic way of life in Britain, hadn't really been due to much in the way of influences, certainly not people from South-East Europe, but was the result of local processes in the, arising from the Neolithic transition from the Mesolithic and I was quite attracted to that line of thinking but as far as I was concerned, it was clear that the wheat and the barley and the sheep and the goat really did originate in the near East and that is agreed and not significantly disputed, so those were something that made possible the Neolithic way of life in Britain. And so the question devolves on to what extent was there a great movement of people and that's then where you very soon begin to get interested in the molecular genetics.
					
						The great development in the methodology of archaeology in the past 15 or 20 years I think has been the application of DNA studies, and not so much ancient DNA, not so much taking DNA from human skeletons where it's quite difficult to get enough to give you a good signal, but by comparing the DNA from blood samples or saliva samples from living populations, you can compare the mitochondrial DNA which is what passes on in the female line or the Y chromosome DNA which is what passes in the male line and these change remarkably slowly by random mutations and it was realised by the molecular geneticists back in the '80s, that if you do this, you can see that our entire species, all living humans seem to be descended from an original population, and it became clear by looking at the distributions, that this population must have been in Africa. And this was initially controversial but I think has been very strongly confirmed subsequently and so that gives you the very strong conclusion that there must have been an out of Africa dispersal of human kind and it turns out that it was relatively recently, something like 60,000 years ago, and that has been, I think, enormously influential on archaeological thinking because until that time, it had been thought that the earlier fossil hominids, Homo erectus, Homo ergaster, who did leave Africa and had, one finds their archaeology, their hand axes in Britain or comparable things in, in Asia. The thinking was that maybe Homo sapiens, our own species might have evolved separately in different parts of the world with a sort of multi-lineal evolution, which was very strongly argued by some scholars in Australia and so on.  Well, it looks as if the DNA studies rather knocks that on the head and so it's clear that DNA studies using mainly samples from living populations can, in favourable circumstances, give you real insights into population histories. And the origin of our history of Homo sapiens is a very strong case, where I think that's very persuasive and has to a very considerable extent reshaped our thinking about the transition to our own species, Homo sapiens, and therefore reshaped our thinking about the upper Palaeolithic, the lower and middle Palaeolithic being associated with those earlier hominids mainly, and that's had a great impact on our thinking. But also it must be relevant to later periods. If there were great migrations of people, well, then that ought to leave some trace in the record of the molecular genetics and might also be something one could learn about by studies of living populations. So that was something I was already getting interested in early on, but with the establishment of the McDonald Institute, it seemed possible to try and do something in that direction so we decided to appoint a fellow in molecular genetics, and we were very fortunate that Peter Forster applied and got the job and so for some years in the McDonald Institute, we had a laboratory where such studies were being undertaken, but also the presence of Peter Forster put us very much in touch with the thinking that was going on in different places in this country and in the United States. And the history of molecular genetics has been very exciting. The great sort of father figure who was interested in applying the genetics even before DNA analysis was very practical, that's Luca Cavalli-Sforza, he had already been talking about population histories using traditional genetic markers, blood groups and so on before the different DNA haplotypes were available and then the Y chromosome haplotypes, so he's been involved with that work also, but he'd already established a framework and then he had suggested that the genetic evidence from blood groups mainly indicated there was a significant movement of population at the beginning of the Neolithic. But that became less and less clear-cut as the data were examined and as the DNA evidence came forward, it's clear there were indications of movement of people but on a small scale with the origins of farming and most of the populations of Europe or the greater part owed their ancestry to pre-existing Palaeolithic hunter gatherer populations, so the situation became quite a complicated one and it's still one that's quite difficult to interpret, but that has been a very interesting area of study in the past 10 or 15 years and continues to be so and the great thing is great quantities of new data are becoming available as the analyses continue on samples from living populations and then there has been success also with Neanderthal DNA, so that fossil DNA is beginning to be relevant to the issue as well. So those have been some of the changes and that all relates back to the language problem and we've tried in the McDonald Institute to bring that into focus. We had a conference, a large conference on archaeogenetics, which was published in a volume of that title and it became clear really that the molecular genetic story was much more complicated than had initially been thought and in my own view it still seems likely that the spread of the Indo-European languages took place with the coming of farming but it wasn't a transfer or a complete, complete transfer of population. It was a spread of language with the spread of some farmers in small groups probably, who then became to a large extent genetically assimilated in Europe although to a large measure, the languages they brought with them or the language they brought with them did prevail except in a few enclaves like the Basque country where the Basque language seems to be a, a relic of the, the upper Palaeolithic. And then recently there have been developments in historical linguistics, nothing to do with the genetics as such except they have used mathematical methods formerly used to analyse genetic data, which have now been applied directly to linguistic data, phylogenetics methods and some of the work there, Gray and  Atkinson in a paper in “Nature” a few years ago, using a linguistic evidence alone, came up with a conclusion that the Indo-European divergence from the original homeland must have taken place around 7,000 BC. So that is very strong support for the early theory, which would harmonise with the farming language dispersal model for Indo-European, but undoubtedly that's still a controversy that is raging. And it's one that's very difficult to settle, to reach a conclusion as to what language was being spoken in Europe some three or four thousand years before writing began anywhere, is obviously not easy and so I think the debate will continue for some time, but it certainly makes, throws open a number of possibilities and certainly one no longer has to write one's prehistory around some particular theory about the coming of the Celts or the coming of the Greeks so I think in some ways that is quite a step forward.
					
						Dr McDonald was a very remarkable man. He was brusque in manner but he certainly knew what he wanted and he'd made his money by, he was an engineer as well as a medical doctor, and he was making record changers back in the days still of 78 rpm records and of juke boxes and for a while he was the main world supplier of record changers, which made him a very wealthy man, and he was fascinated by early metrology, early measurement systems. I think in his earlier day he must have had an absolutely formidable capacity to deal with numbers in his mind. You know, to how many pounds make a kilo and how many kilos make whatever and Egyptian units of length, Egyptian yard against the Sumerian Cubit, this sort of thing. And I think he could probably do those calculations in his mind very readily and he became a real expert on early measurement systems, so he was interested in Egypt and the near East and so on and I think the reason he had his lawyer write to us in Cambridge, write to me in Cambridge originally was that he'd read my book, the - "Archaeology and Language" because he had very wide interests, which was published in 1987, and I think that was what led him to us. I learnt later that he had in fact looked at Edinburgh, which was closer to home for him. He was a Scotsman, but he hadn't found quite what he wanted in the Edinburgh department and he, as I say, had very wide-ranging interests. He was fascinated in the origins of humankind and human fossils and had very good discussions with Paul Mellars. Then he was very pleased to meet Joan Oates and David Oates and Barry Kemp and Nicholas Postgate, who were really at home in the ancient world, and Anthony Snodgrass, the professor of classical archaeology, and so I think he found what he was looking for in Cambridge because of the, the diversity and he really found people that did know about the Egyptian cubit or whatever, not specialist in that, so I think that's what brought him to us. He also had a very remarkable collection of paintings, and when Jane and I and Chris Scarre went to call on him, he had a great house in the Isle of Man, he had a lot of very fine paintings there and many of which he later on gave to the Fitzwilliam Museum. He had a wonderful Stubbs paining and quite a few others which ended up here in the Fitzwilliam Museum so he was a very generous benefactor, and it was sad that he died before the institute fully got underway and so he never got any recognition, a knighthood or something which he might have done for having given £11 million to a university department, but his widow did come. She was given an honorary MA in a ceremony in the Senate House, which the Duke Edinburgh as chancellor awarded her, so I think that was a nice occasion. Then Prince Charles came and opened the McDonald Institute, which was another nice occasion and as I was saying, I think a lot of good things happened because obviously if you have a fund for field work, which we do, that allows mainly Cambridge based field work - we've limited it to that - to go ahead very effectively and one other very important development was our illicit Antiquities Research Centre, which we established to go into the problem of the looting of antiquities and how one might put a stop to that.
					
						It was in 1991 that I received completely out of the blue, a letter from the Prime Minister, John Major, saying would I agree to become a working peer in the House of Lords. I didn't quite know what a working peer was supposed to be, but it's somebody supporting the government. He was obviously a Conservative Prime Minister. I was a Conservative, and it was expected that if I went into the House of Lords, I would be supporting the government actively so I thought that sounded a very great honour but I rather doubted if I would have time to do it because I was Master of Jesus College and the head of the Department of Archaeology and that seemed like quite a busy life already, so I consulted, I consulted the government Chief Whip, Richard Ryder, and I consulted Ken Clarke who was a friend from Cambridge days, who was by that time, Minister of Education and also Leon Brittan whom we'd kept in touch with, who was by that time I think already Home Secretary and so what did it mean to be a working peer? How much time did one have to put in, and initially the answer was we think you should have to come to the House of Lords and take part in debates two days a week. And I thought, well, really, I can't possibly do two days a week, so I actually wrote to John Major and said terribly sorry, very great honour but I don't really think I could do two days a week because there's just too much to do here in Cambridge. And then I had a phone call from Richard Ryder saying, well, maybe one day a week would be enough, and that was followed up by Ken Clarke so I was able to write another letter saying, well, then I'm advised that one day would be enough so I'd be delighted to accept this great honour. So in 1991 I went into the House of Lords and I've never been a hugely active person there because it is about one day a week that I go, but I did devote the best part of one sabbatical term that I was owing to me as it were and I spent a good deal of that time in the House of Lords, getting to see how things worked and there had been a number of quite important issues that have cropped up. At that time there was a move to have, to repeal the old treasure trove legislation, which had grown up over the years from the medieval period and it meant that any gold or silver that was found in, in England was automatically the property of the Crown and there had to be a coroner's inquest and if it had been delivered with the intention of recovering it, then that was a different legal situation than if it had been buried, deposited to be left there as an offering or whatever it might be and so one was having endless coroners' inquests, trying to work out the intentionality of people who'd lost or buried gold or silver 2,000 years ago and the whole thing was a colossal waste of time. And the Earl of Perth, Lord Perth in the House of Lords, had got interested in this problem and had got private members' legislation going through and most governments rather react against private members' legislation and the Conservative government wasn't very different, but Lady Trumpington, Baroness Trumpington was the government spokesman in the House of Lords and she became rather sympathetic towards it and then the legislation was revised somewhat and then finally the, the Ancient Monuments' Bill was passed, became the Ancient Monuments or rather Treasure Act. And that changed the legislation in an effective way and brought in much more sensible procedures and out of that, and out of further initiatives, rose the portable antiquities recording scheme. All of this was contemporary with the growth of metal detecting in Britain, which has in some ways presented quite a lot of problems because the much greater number of finds, of metal finds being made has put pressure on the system and the portable antiquities scheme encourages finders to report their discoveries and encourages if there's, if it's treasure, if it's gold, silver, indeed the scope of the Treasure Act has been increased somewhat, then it makes it much easier for them to report the discovery and if it's claimed by the state, if it's felt it should go to the British Museum or some local museum, they continue to get the full market value so that is a significant improvement I think. And I was much involved with that and then shortly after I went into the House of Lords, there was a Higher Education Bill, which Ken Clarke was trying to pilot through and it was felt by many of us, that although it had some merits, it really was reducing the freedom of action, the independence of the universities and so there were quite a lot of hard fought amendments in the House of Lords and I got very involved in that. And although I was a Conservative peer, I was anxious about the independence of the universities so I was quite willing to join in with the Labour opposition and the Liberal Democrats if something seemed unwise. There was one clause that was going to restrict the freedom of operation of student unions that the students got very anxious over and really wasn't very wise, but with a little discussion it was possible to see how the government could achieve their objectives, which were not unreasonable, without somehow putting a blanket on the freedom of action of the student unions so I got quite involved in those issues and so I was spending quite a lot of time in London then. That was the time that Norman Lamont was Chancellor of the Exchequer, so he and Rosemary said, well, do come and stay any time and since I was spending quite a lot in London, I'd just give them a ring and go into Downing Street and stay at number 11 Downing Street and so I was seeing quite a lot of government affairs at that time. And a lot of these people of course had been friends from Cambridge days. Leon Brittan spoke at our wedding and had been a close friend since then, and David Frost, he's not a political figure as such, he, he was someone who again I got to know well in Cambridge. We founded a, a dining club, the Cabal, and used to have very extravagant dinner with guests about once a term so we've always been invited to David Frost's very entertaining parties and so, quite a lot of the- the politicians in that context also.
					
						It was around that time that I'd been working on a book on Cycladic art, which was published under the title of "The Cycladic Spirit" and it was based to a large extent on a very important private collection, the Goulandris Collection of Cycladic antiquities. Mrs Goulandris lived and lives in Athens and way back in the 1960s she was travelling the Cyclades in her yacht and where possible, acquiring Cycladic antiquities. Well, that was a rather curious situation because under Greek law, all antiquities belong to the state and therefore it's a criminal offence to dig them up, but at the same time Greek law has encouraged rather than discouraged private collectors of Greek antiquities of whatever kind. And so she had a licence to collect antiquities, and she was actually at that time encouraged to do so by the Greek Archaeological Service because there was a lot of looting and a lot of antiquities were leaving the country, and I think they formed the view that it was better for antiquities to remain within Greece even though their precise circumstances of discovery were not recorded because of the loss of context due to looting. Well, I'd been studying Cycladic figurines obviously since I wrote my dissertation in 1965 and then in 1967 partly through studying her collection but mainly through studying the, the finds that were preserved in the National Museum in Athens and the other museums, I was able to see more clearly how the different kinds, the different forms of, the different types of Cycladic figuring fitted into which stage in the cultural succession which I'd been redefining and then to devise a new chronology and a new typology for the development of Cycladic sculpture, which was published in 1967, and studying her collection had been very useful and she'd been very generous in allowing me and also Jane to go and look at her collection, which at that time she had in her very large Athens apartment. She later went on to found the Goulandris Museum of Cycladic Art, named after her husband, the N.P. Goulandris Museum of Cycladic Art, which has got a - a very handsome building and very beautifully displayed collections. And all of this had been collected with the knowledge and as I say, the encouragement of the Greek Archaeological Service. All the things were registered, and although I'd been very concerned at the way most of the main Cycladic sculptures are in private museums all over the world, the Louvre Head and other impressive pieces and therefore very little known about their origins. I'd been able, using the pieces which had been described from proper excavations, which were mainly in the Athens National Museum, I'd been able to make some sense out of that, and she had asked me to go ahead to use this background to produce a, a book, which would be illustrated mainly by pieces from her collection. And so that was a very interesting book to, to write and she had a wonderful photographer whom I got to know very well, John Taylor, John Bigelow Taylor who took a beautiful series of photographs for this book. And the book also allowed me to speculate a little on why these things seem to us so beautiful. That's something that I had been interested in when I first saw them really, and they're very simple marble forms. The heads don't usually show the eyes or the mouth, just a very prominent nose, although it has become clear that very often the, the facial features were painted on them but have usually been sort of eroded away by the passage of time. So that was a very interesting book to produce, but when it was published there was quite a lot of criticism. There one very well written and very critical article by David Gill and Chris Chippindale, which was published maybe even before the book was published. It was around the same time. They were working independently and they documented very clearly, using the Cycladic cultures as a special case, how the illicit excavation of antiquities, looting of antiquities if you want to call it that, had produced such a dramatic loss of context, that we were losing an enormous amount of information about the prehistoric past and in particular, about the Cycladic past. And I, when I read that review, it got a few things wrong but basically I think it, it was making very sound points.
					
						When my book was published there was an American, Boston University archaeologist who was part of a campaign in the United States already, against the looting of antiquities which of course is a big problem in the Americas and he published a, a, a, the phrase – “collectors are the real looters”, which in a rather abrupt way summed up the responsibilities. And as I thought about it, I could see that was correct, and that the legal position in Greece was a rather anomalous one and that I'd perhaps been wrong, although I was completely working within the spirit as well as the letter of Greek law, in studying these things and in publishing them. Perhaps it would have been wiser if the Greeks had adopted a different strategy and had not encouraged Mrs Goulandris to make her collection. And so I came round to that point of view. I'd always been concerned about the looting, but I came round to the point of view that perhaps it is necessary to, to take a more purist position and be critical of collectors who form private collections even if sometimes with good intentions as I believe was the case of Mrs Goulandris. She wasn't planning to sell them on or anything. And so I began to see that as important and it began to be very much a matter of concern in Britain in the general case, not about Cycladic antiquities particularly, but there were very large auction sales taking place at Christies and Sotheby's with Greek vases and Italian vases, and it was clear there was a whole trade going on producing vast amounts of antiquities for public sale in auction and it really was clear that so much stuff was coming through that it must have been - and being sold, that the sales must have been encouraging the digging. In other words there was a complete cycle and if you bought from a sale, your money was going indirectly to fund the next phase of the looting. And so I became interested in that topic and wrote a short book on it, gave a lecture and then wrote a short book, and Neil Brodie at that time was my research assistant in Jesus College and when my tenure as Master came to an end in 1997, Neil then became a Fellow of the McDonald Institute. And that was really the beginning of the Illicit Antiquities Research Centre and we produced a magazine called "Culture Without Context" and very soon it grew and we were able to recruit a very dynamic lady, Jenny Doole who became the assistant editor, the production editor effectively of "Culture Without Context" and we began to try to record and publish those cases where looting was taking place and we developed this into a campaign, and there were lots of things to be worried about, certainly in the United States, but quite a few in this country. There was a very large private collection with a very high proportion of unprovenanced antiquities by a man called George Ortiz, very rich man called George Ortiz, and his exhibition was put on display at the Royal Academy of Arts. And when one says unprovenanced antiquities, that means you have no record of where it came from, which in many cases means it was an illicit antiquity that had appeared on the market without provenance because it was looted. But there is usually the catch 22 that if you are the archaeologist or if you're the policeman, if you're the critic, you have this antiquity, you don't know where it comes from and you ask a collector and you say I bought it from a very reputable dealer and it came from the attic of somebody or other's grandmother who'd had it for a hundred years and so on, very difficult to pin these things down because the catch 22 is that you don't know where the antiquity came from, therefore you can't show that it was looted. And it became clear to a number of us really the boot should be on the other foot, that a dealer should be able to show you where he or she acquired the antiquity and where it came from legally and if the dealer couldn't show you that, then the presumption was that it was an unprovenanced antiquity that should not be acquired by a museum. Well, I was by that time, a trustee of the British Museum. I'd become a trustee of the British Museum about 1994 or 5 I think and the British Museum was just discussing such questions, and so the trustees of the British Museum developed a resolution that they would not allow the museum to acquire unprovenanced antiquities and they'd take as a dividing line the year 1970, which was the year of the UNESCO convention on the illicit traffic of antiquities. And it's recognised that if something emerged from Italy a hundred years ago or something, that's rather water under the bridge and the aim was not restitution questions but was to stop the looting now. So 1970 was a good dividing line, so the trustees said that they wouldn't buy antiquities that had first appeared, become known after 1970 unless their origin could be documented and traced back before 1970 and that was the first time that there was a sufficiently strong rule, that it was up to the dealer or the vendor to show where the thing had come from and so that was quite a strong rule. And then there was a great scandal. Partly the European Union had been passing legislation to try and restrict the export of antiquities and required export licences from one part of the European Union to another or generally. It was countering the, the, the free traffic of national treasures and there was a great scandal at Sotheby’s. A very good investigative journalist called Peter Watson had documented how Sotheby's was selling antiquities and in one particular case, a painting from Italy, unprovenanced antiquities and paintings which under Italian law should not have left the country without a licence and was selling these, and in this particular case, knew the story and in that sense was conniving in the sale of illicit cultural goods. And he published his book "Inside Sotheby’s", which took the lid off this really, and so there was a select committee, parliamentary select committee, that was getting interested mainly I think originally in Holocaust art, a different story, art that had been misappropriated by the Nazis during those years. But that opened up the whole question of the misappropriation of cultural property and this whole business of unprovenanced antiquities. So I and one or two of us from the Society of Antiquaries, Peter Addyman was one, appeared before this committee and said what a disgrace this was and something should be done about it, and Alan Howarth, who was the minister at the time, then announced that he would set up a panel on the illicit traffic in antiquities. And this was set up under the chairmanship of Norman Palmer and produced a report which not only suggested that Britain should adopt the 1970 UNESCO convention, which it hadn't previously done but also that there should be some new legislation, and that is what in the end happened, The Dealing in Cultural Objects Offences Act.
					
						So the illicit traffic in antiquities panel was an interesting experience. I think it really made the, the relevant government departure, Department of Culture, Media and Sport think much more carefully than it had done and good marks to Alan Howarth for sort of realising that something needed to be done, and the Dealing in Cultural Objects Offences Act, it's not retrospective unfortunately - it was, became law in 2003 so it doesn't apply to anything that was found before 2003 and for that reason it hasn't had very much impact yet, but I think it will do as time goes on and a lot of the antiquities that appear will have been found after 2003. And it makes it illegal knowingly to deal in antiquities found after that time and illegally excavated in or exported from their country of origin. And this is very new because it isn't just protecting British antiquities. Most antiquities laws of most nations are quite good at protecting their own antiquities but they're not very good at protecting antiquities from elsewhere, and so this I think is quite a significant development. But of course the collectors don't like it. I appeared in a television debate with George Ortiz when I was very critical of The Royal Academy for showing a collection that was full, a high proportion of unprovenanced antiquities and very critical of George Ortiz. He had initially been basking in the glory of having this magnificent, and there were wonderful pieces, and he's very erudite. He wrote the catalogue himself. He did the lighting himself and so on, but I ended up by saying that I hope George Ortiz was the last of the great collectors, and he liked the sound of the great collectors so he smiled at that, but it wasn't intended as a, as a compliment. But the campaign goes ahead in the United States and elsewhere because there the situation is much more scandalous. Whereas the British Museum, when it really thought about the problem ten years ago, decided to have a, an acquisitions code, an ethical acquisitions code, the Metropolitan Museum of Art has declined to do so and articles have been written, criticising their position. Fortunately the Italian government has caught up with them and took them to court to get some antiquities back, including the Euphronios vase, the $1 million pot that they bought many years ago, by paying $1 million for it and it was clear then I think, certainly clear now that it was looted from Etruria but anyway the Italian government has to some extent caught up with them, as it has with the Getty Museum. And I was asked to give a lecture once at the Getty and I think I rather shocked them by pointing out they were buying all this stuff and they were thereby supporting the looting of antiquities, but they didn't want to be told that at that time and very sadly they went on buying unprovenanced antiquities so that Marion True, their curator of antiquities, was put on trial by the Italian government and I think there were others at the Getty, including the director, John Walsh and the chairman of trustees of the Getty who were very lucky not to be joining her in the dock because I think they shared responsibility for the purchases that were made. But the campaign is far from won in the United States and although the Archaeological Institute of America shortly after 1970 adopted a very ethical policy, and they won't publish unprovenanced antiquities in their journal, the American Journal of Archaeology, but the director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Philippe De Montebello goes on quite untroubled and pretends that everything is above board whereas it's clear that the Metropolitan Museum of Art has been continuing to buy unprovenanced antiquities. There was one very clear episode, the Lydian Treasure, when the Turkish government took them to court, and they first of all tried to claim, the Metropolitan claimed that the Turkish government was out of time, but then the Turkish government pointed out that they, the Metropolitan Museum had concealed the circumstances, hadn't displayed the treasure and in the end the Metropolitan Museum had to give that back to the, back to the Turks. And we have many scandals. We have the scandal of the Sevso Treasure in this country, which was bought by the Marquess of Northampton on the advice of the then president of chairman of Sotheby’s, Peter Wilson, as an investment opportunity, a scandalous business. It's clear that it was looted and they tried to sell it at auction. They'd offered it to the Getty but the Getty had thought it was too hot to handle. The Getty had found that the export licences from the Lebanon, which had come with the treasure, were not genuine, and so they decided to put it on auction in Switzerland and they sent it on a sort of round the world tour to gather interest. They sent it to New York where the law is rather different from what it is in Britain and there they were sued by the governments of Hungary and then of Croatia and of the Lebanon, each claiming they wanted the treasure back. Unfortunately, I think that was too many governments and so the judge decided that she couldn't decide who owned it and therefore the Marquess of Northampton, as the holder of the treasure, should retain the treasure, didn't say that he had good title, but she didn't give good title to any other person and so his lawyers have been trying to sell it ever since, I think. They put it on display at Bonhams, the auctioneers and that caused rather, this is just a year or so ago. I wrote a letter to "The Times" saying I thought it was very bad they should be putting these unprovenanced antiquities in a position it looked as if they were for sale, so the matter is unresolved I think. But in this country I think there is less traffic in unprovenanced antiquities than there was, and I think the museums in this country are not in general buying unprovenanced antiquities now, nor do they get government support for doing so, nor will the Art Fund, the National Art Collections Fund give them money to do so but in - and in Germany there've been improvements and in, in Italy there've been improvements, but unfortunately in the United States, although there are strong forces for good like the Archaeological Institute of America and although the Getty has now I think, learned from experience and now has an acceptable acquisitions policy, there are other museums, the Boston Museum of Fine Art, the Metropolitan Museum, the Chicago Institute, which I think are quite disgraceful and lead the world in purchasing antiquities without provenance, which means in effect, although indirectly, I don't want to be sued by them as I once was nearly sued by George Ortiz, in effect, indirectly, they're supporting and financing the destruction of the world's archaeological heritage. It's not that the antiquities are unprovenanced that matters. It's the fact that the archaeological record is destroyed and one loses all hope of finding any context for these, for these objects. So I hope that we can continue in parliamentary ways and in other ways to do something about that in this country. There's an all - party parliamentary archaeology group for archaeology, which was formed by Lord Redesdale mainly, of which I'm chairman and we try and keep an eye on things. I've recently been involved on a committee of enquiry about incantation bowls, another lot of illicit antiquities which University College of London found they had in one of their departments on loan from a Norwegian collector. That’s all got bogged down. The Norwegian collector has sued them. They've reached an out of court settlement with the collector not to publish our report, which indeed concluded that the antiquities must have come from Iraq, and come from Iraq after the beginning of the first Gulf War. So matters are really quite complicated. There's still quite hot issues, I think, but I'm hopeful this is a campaign, which we can win. I think we have begun to win it in this country but it certainly needs to be waged more vigorously in the United States.
					
						The Sevso treasure was a very curious case where these wonderful silver platters and silver ewers, magnificent objects of late Roman date, sort of 4th century AD, probably I imagine, found in Hungary. It's called the Sevso treasure because there's an inscription relating to Sevso, the owner of the treasure and there's some evidence, circumstantial evidence, suggesting that it may have been found in a villa on Lake Balaton in Hungary, but it's not altogether persuasive evidence. It didn't persuade the judge in the New York court, which is why it's still in the possession, whether or not with good title, of the Marquess of Northampton, so that we shall have to see what happens there. It's rumoured that the Hungarian government is trying to recover it and maybe they'll pay him a sum of money, which he will feel is sufficient. He had an interesting experience. When he'd had all the expense of fighting and defending a case in the New York courts, and he'd paid a lot of money for the treasure in the first place, he was advised by a new set of lawyers that his original lawyers, Allen & Overy, hadn't done him a very good job and it was even suggested that Peter Mimpriss of Allen & Overy, who was quite a distinguished lawyer, had been in contact with Peter Wilson and hadn't done a very good job to put it politely for the Marquess of Northampton. So his new lawyers helped him to take that case to court and, and there was an out of court settlement, which has never been publicly announced how much it was, but it's thought that Allen & Overy had to pay him about £20 million because they hadn't handled his case very impeccably. But since the good marquis got £20 million there, he shouldn't have to ask, ask too high a price for the Sevso treasure if he sells it on to the Hungarian government or whatever. But that's just a flagrant, it's worth dwelling on as we are doing, it's a flagrant example of the way antiquities have become commercialized, and that matters, not because one's against commercialisation, but because it promotes the looting of antiquities, which of course is what's happened in Iraq after the Gulf War and so on, so that's still, I think, a very active campaign where there's much more work to be done.
					
						Once we managed to get the final Melos excavations published, they only were, they only finally came into print last year, but we got them off to the publishers about four years ago. They took a long time to come through. I was able also to focus on earlier excavations that I haven't mentioned. This is back in 1987 while, by which time I was in Cambridge, and with Cycladic friends, Lila Marangou, the professor of archaeology in Ioannina University and Christos Doumas who was then professor in the University of Athens. We decided it was time to do some more work in the Cycladese and so we were able to excavate at a site which she had discovered on the island of Amorgos and also go back to the site on Keros, which I'd been the first archaeologist to visit way back in 1963. That was a very badly looted site, which, which I mentioned earlier, where the surface was strewn with pottery of the early Cycladic II period, the Keros-Keros culture and marble figurines and marble bowls and, and so on and it hadn't been at all clear exactly what the site was. It was hugely rich clearly with all this material just lying on the surface and no doubt much more having been taken by the looters, so that after 1963 Christos Doumas did some rescue work there on the site and so did the Ephor of antiquities, Mrs Zapheiropoulon and they became less and less persuaded that this had been a Cycladic cemetery. At first it was thought the looters had found a very rich cemetery. They'd been very careless. They'd smashed a lot of stuff and one was finding the bits that were left behind from their looting process, but as Christos Doumas and Photini Zapheiropoulon continued their work, they found more and more stuff all broken and they found no direct indications of graves, although they could all have been churned up, so it became very uncertain just what the site was. And there was a conference some, some years back in the, the 70s, which focused interest on that, so we agreed that it was time to have, have another look at that site and so we had a permit to do a surface survey on Keros and to do some digging in the disturbed area, so we did a site survey, which Tod Whitelaw, a former student of mine organised very well and we excavated in the disturbed area, found a lot more of this broken stuff but then it dawned on me that the breakages were nearly all ancient ones, and if it had all been churned up, they would all be recent or mainly be recent breakages. So we did a much more systematic study of the breakages and just about every piece had been broken in antiquity, and since there was no reason to imagine that people had fooled around there between the time it was in use and modern times, that made it very clear that they'd already been broken when they were buried and so that was really very mysterious. Well, it took a long time to get the excavation report for the 1987/1988, 1988 work completed and for the work on the site of Amorgos, but just a couple of years ago that got finished as well with the aid of a younger Greek archaeologist, Giorgos Gavalas, so we got those published and that meant one felt free to return to excavate again, because it's obviously bad form to have too many unpublished excavations hanging around. So we started again with that in the year 2006, and were very fortunate to find in a slightly different part of the site, to find some undisturbed deposit as it were, undisturbed in the sense of not recently tampered with and very much as it was put in the ground four and a half thousands years ago, but all smashed up and very fragmentary marble objects, ceramics and so on, and so it seems this was a major ritual site. These had been rather handsome objects. They weren't all broken by accident. They'd been deliberately broken and so we've had two years work. We excavated there in 2007 and we're going back there this summer to finish the excavation and that is going to be of great interest, I think, because they are so numerous, these objects, that although they're broken, more figurines, had they been complete, have been found on that site than all the rest of the Cycladic cemeteries put together, so that one begins to look on these sculptures as not necessarily just made for cemetery use, but maybe used for other ritual use of a rather different kind, that led to this very structured discard in, in this very special deposit so that's been a very interesting enterprise in, in recent years.
					
						One theme that has always interested me very much, that came to the surface rather during our years at Jesus College was contemporary art and particularly contemporary sculpture. Already while we were in Southampton, we'd had some good contacts with some artists. Indeed, I'd got to know William Turnbull, who is a wonderful sculptor back in my research student days through knowing Ted Power, who had that wonderful collection of paintings including American abstract expressionist paintings. And Ted also knew and was very encouraging to a number of younger British artists including Barry Flanagan, so I remember meeting Barry Flanagan briefly at one of Ted Powers' parties way back in the late '60s or early '70s. But while we were in Southampton, we had an artist in residence in Southampton, Ray Smith whom we got to know very well, partly because he rented a house next door to us where we were living in Chandlers Ford, and he's a very dynamic artist, written a number of very interesting books on how to paint and so on, not that I've used those books, but I've admired them, and we invited him to do a family portrait and he did a very beautiful family portrait and has since then done other portraits for us. We've kept in touch with him and his wife, Catriona, but while he was artist in residence, he organised a series of lectures and meetings and exhibitions in Southampton. I think Barry Flanagan came to one of those but I missed that. I was somewhere else at the time. But he then organised an exhibition of the work of David Nash, the sculptor in wood, which I very much admired and was able to buy a couple of small pieces from, not very expensive, and then he also organised a visit by Richard Long, whose work I hadn't really known much before that time. I'd heard of it but I hadn't, hadn't seen very much of it and there was a very good space near the theatre in, on the campus, a very well lit space, a large floor area and the work was called "Chalk Line" and it was just a line about four or five feet wide and I suppose about 30-40 feet long, of chalk lumps, which were very carefully and neatly arranged and put together. And there it was, "Chalk Line". And so when you first saw it, if you didn't know Richard Long's work, it was a little inscrutable, a little enigmatic, and Richard Long has never lectured about his work but because he was a good friend of Ray Smith, they arranged that he would organise an evening when Richard showed a sequence of slides of his work, and that was accompanied by music from people like Johnny Cash, mainly Johnny Cash I think, whose sort of folk type singing he, he valued, and it was a very dazzling display of slides of Richard Long's work in the landscape and it was amazing. It was put together in such a way that without any words, because there was no talk, he didn't appear in front, just afterwards we had a drink together, so he didn't speak to the audience, but this show of slides managed to put his work in context wonderfully well, so that this "Chalk Line", instead of being rather enigmatic was one of a number of works and most of his works were done in the landscape, although by that time he was doing some works in galleries of that kind. And I was fascinated by that in its own right but also fascinated in a way because of the rather superficial resemblance his "Chalk Line" had with the trench which we had excavated on the west side of the Quanterness Cairn in Orkney and the first year of that excavation we'd done, opened a trench on the west side of the cairn, which had involved, involved removing the turf and coming down on the very beautifully laid stone work, and those were not dressed stones, they were undressed stones, and our trench, I suppose just by coincidence, had been seven or so, or eight feet wide and 30 or 40 feet long so the dimensions of our trench, although it had gone downhill, down the slope of the cairn, were rather like those of Richard Long's "Chalk Line" and the stonework of our trench had been very carefully cleaned for photography and so on, so it looked very neat, it wasn't at all earthy by that time, and just the material, the materiality of the two things; one was a line of chalk; the other was a line of Orcadian sandstone, were more than superficially similar and I found that interesting in a slightly troubling way, sort of seriously interesting way, not a frivolous way. And I sent Richard Long a photograph, we've got some very good photographs by the very good photographer in Southampton, Nick Bradford, and so I sent him a photograph of the, the cairn side and we just got to know each other a little, which was very pleasant, so that when in, when I became Master of Jesus College, Kettle's Yard, which is the gallery for contemporary art in Cambridge, had a scheme where they by, whereby they would fund an artist in residence for a year and they liked to place one in successive years in different colleges, so they wrote to Jesus College, so they wrote to me as Master, saying we have this scheme, would you care to be accommodating this year's artist in residence in Jesus College and if so, please join the appointing panel. So the college council agreed that was a good idea. The Arts Council were paying the salary. We had to provide a room, and so the panel chose a very dynamic artist of West Indian origin, Veronica Ryan, and so she came and lived in the college and got on very well. She was interesting, and her work was abstract but used natural materials and was very interesting, and that was all going very well, and out of that came first of all, a small exhibition of her work, which we held, which was not very surprising, but then we had discussions and we thought it might be a good idea to have a, a sculpture exhibition in the college, and college doesn't have much wall space so it would not, unless new buildings were built, be very easy to have much in the way of paintings. The students had a good collection of art, which is lent out to the students, but that was never particularly exhibited except for the purposes of lending it out to individuals. And so we agreed and the college council agreed that we would have an exhibition and the college council provided some money to make this possible.
					
						One of the Fellows, an engineering Fellow, Bill Stronge, was already curator of works of art and was very keen on this idea, so the committee got together with Veronica Ryan and we wrote to a number of artists including Richard Long and Barry Flanagan through his gallery and a number of other quite well known artists but interesting sculptors who were doing sculpture of a new kind, a lot of good sculpture in England at that time. We had a very good response, so Richard Long came and did a wonderful work although it did cause some controversy. We were expecting him to come with a cartload of stones and do a, a circle of stones or something or wood or whatever natural material, and that was the expectation. But he arrived without a cartload of stones and said, he'd been to the college before, of course, to visit it. We'd agreed that his work would go in the Fellows garden, which is a very beautiful lawn. It's an enclosed garden with a wonderful tree, an oriental plane tree and he decided that, had decided that what he would like to do, was to carve a series of concentric circles in the turf of the lawn. The actual turf would be very carefully removed and would be kept moist so that it could be replaced at the end of the season and turf circles would be the work. And I thought that sounded a lovely idea, except that the college council hadn't given permission for turf circles and there were people on the college council who might not feel that the lawn of the Fellows' garden should be treated in such a way. However, there wasn't much option. One, one couldn't say terribly sorry, Richard Long, would you allow us to have another meeting of the college council and come back in a month's time? The exhibition was going to begin in a couple of weeks anyway so I just had to say what a wonderful idea this is, Richard. How can we help you? And so he carved the turf, which was a stunning work, which met with great acclaim, except in some segments of the Fellowship where the acclaim was less favourable, but in general the exhibition was a great success and the, the Waddington Gallery, Barry Flanagan's gallery, had sent some wonderful sculptures by Barry Flanagan, including his bronze horse, bronze horse 1983, which was inspired by one of the St. Mark’s horses from Venice, which had been on show in the Royal Academy the previous year. So it was really a great success and that started the series of sculpture exhibitions, which we've since then had every two years in the college and in general, I mean some have been rather startling. We had Nina Saunders one year, who had the bright idea of putting quilting, white quilting in all the windows on one range of first court, and we were able to get the permission of the occupants. Part of it was a library, which was, it was possible to block off that side. It had light on the other side and though that again raised eyebrows among some of the Fellows, it was very striking and so over the years we've had exhibitions. They were all, nearly always been mixed exhibitions. The second one we did was actually William Turnbull, just his sculpture, which was a, a wonderful experience, and those have been very good fun and have given the college some reputation in the field of contemporary sculpture, but also it made for me and other members of the college a very interesting involvement, and Barry Flanagan's horse is now there. It didn't remain there. In fact he didn't come to the original exhibition, but he was very popular and people said couldn't we borrow this horse, and I wrote to him and said could we keep it here for a while, but never at that point received a reply, but I sent him a photograph of a group of students, the student dining club all grouped around the horse and he was very tickled by that and rang up and said he'd like to give the college the horse as a gift, but that proved difficult because of Value Added Tax, which the college would have had to pay, so that didn't quite happen, but anyway, the horse arrived on loan and is actually still in the college and when the college had its quincentenary in 1996, having been founded in 1496, we invited the Queen to come and open the new library. Part of my job as Master had been to help raise some money for the library and then we appointed architects Evans & Shalev and the college's very beautiful new library was constructed and for the library we were able to use the 1% rule which we'd applied, that you set aside 1% for works of art. We were able to commission a figure by Antony Gormley, which goes at the top of the stairs in the library, so that was a nice thing to be able to do. And Antony Gormley we got to know in an earlier exhibition and then asked him to do this, so he's been a good friend of the college since then. Anyway, when the Queen came, I'd asked Antony Gormley and William Turnbull and Barry Flanagan if they'd care to be present by their sculptures, and his sculpture was in first court and so the Queen arrived first in her great Rolls Royce with the Chancellor, the Duke of Edinburgh, and so we met them and then I introduced the president of the college and he was escorting the Chancellor and I was escorting the Queen so we went first and very soon came on Barry Flanagan, so this is Mr Flanagan, Your Majesty. He's created this horse, so the Queen made some very polite, favourable comment and we went on, but I heard later that the Duke of Edinburgh said, “Something wrong with the ears of your horse I think, Mr Flanagan”, and Barry said, “Oh, do you think so, Your Royal Highness?”, so they had a minor disagreement about that, which obviously greatly tickled Barry Flanagan. He was very amused by that, and that's relevant because after the royal party had left and so on, Barry Flanagan stayed on for dinner and I'd seen in front of the Royal Academy that year, the very large statue he'd done, or sculpture he'd done of a cricketing hare, a hare standing on cricketing stumps, bowling, and so I'd said to him just conversationally, that's a marvellous hare. It would look really well on a cricket pitch, on a cricket boundary. Is there any chance you could lend that to the college for a year or two? We'd just love to have it here. And he'd smiled. He's not always a very directly communicative person so he smiled and said nothing and the, the week later I had a telephone call from Leslie Waddington to say Barry Flanagan has decided he'd like to give the college this sculpture, so that was very good news and that now stands on the cricket boundary. And so gradually over the years the college has bought, commissioned the Gormley. It was given the cricketing hare and it has quite a lot of other sculptures. It has one by William Turnbull. And then the Student Art Society asked Sir Eduardo Paolozzi to come and talk on one occasion, and Jane and I hadn't met him before but he sort of rang at the door of the Master's lodge. He arrived rather early, and so we got to know him somewhat, and he became a very good friend of the college and had, took part in our exhibitions and gave the college a bronze, "Daedalus on Wheels", and a very important collection of prints, so that one way and another, we've had very good and warm connections with a number of, a number of sculptors and indeed painters. We commissioned a painting. Although we don't have much wall space, we had enough to commission a painting by Albert Irving and then one by John Bellany and for the quincentenary, we had the idea of trying to raise some money by having a print portfolio so ten artists each agreed to contribute a print, which, and the portfolio was printed in an edition of 100 so we were able to sell the portfolios to the benefit of the college and that has also encouraged the, the continuation of our exhibitions and so on.
					
And all that is not only something nice that happened while we were in the college, and still continues, although I stopped being Master in 1997 and we moved back to our house in Cambridge, but the sculpture exhibitions continue, but it also encouraged me to be a little bolder in my interest in contemporary art. I had written a few things and I'd written introductions to these catalogues and so on, but through knowing Antony Gormley and Eduardo Paolozzi and Barry, Barry Flanagan, and a number of other sculptors including William Turnbull quite well, I felt that I could actually write something about their work, and in particular Richard Long, because I'd really got to know their work quite well and I'd corresponded with them and had their comments on things I'd written. I'd written an article on William Turnbull for the Cambridge Review way back in the '60s and then one on Richard Long more recently, so that when I was invited to give the Rhind lectures in Edinburgh, and that's a named series of lectures and it has, as you know, Paul, because you've given them yourself, has to be a series of six lectures, so you really, to give six lectures, you have to put your mind to what the theme is going to be, and there is the suggestion that they would like to publish them afterwards so it's an encouragement to think about the lectures rather carefully, and I thought it would be rather interesting to lecture or talk about contemporary art because I'd come to see that the way we look at contemporary art, and first of all sometimes find it rather enigmatic, and then have to get a handle on what it may mean and think about the context and look at other work by the artist and gradually reach some understanding through this engagement with the art, there's a real parallel between that process and the processes of the archaeologist when you're digging up the remains of the past and you start off knowing nothing about this particular period or this particular culture and you find this building maybe with these objects in it, like say a monument in Orkney, you find this building and you find these human remains and you find this pottery and so on, and out of the experience of excavating this, after, out of your material engagement with this structure, you begin to have some understanding of it and then you have to try and formulate that more clearly. That's perhaps where the archaeological theory comes in, but it all starts, most archaeology begins with digging and then, which is a kind of your engagement with the material and then you, you work at it from there and to a large extent one's encounter with contemporary art, which can likewise be enigmatic, comes from your engagement with it, usually in a visual sense, sometimes in a, a tactile sense as well and I'd been thinking over the years about Cycladic sculpture, which had been one point of interest for me and trying to get a better handle on that, and so it occurred to me that this would make a nice series of lectures, both about sculpture and the landscape, the experience of looking at sculpture, the earliest human impact that you can see, those wonderful Laetoli footprints, which are footprints in the ash of an early hominid in, in Africa, ash from a volcanic eruption and this hominid, Homo erectus or Australopithecus, I think it was, early pre-human form had walked in the ash and that had been preserved. The ash had hardened or solidified and so those had been excavated by Mary Leakey, and that is the first record we have of bipedal locomotion, of people walking upright. So, you have all kinds of interesting points of contact. Another which interested me was my recollection at Pompeii, where at Pompeii they found gaps, holes in the volcanic ash, and they realised that these were imprints of humans and animals, which had died and whose bodies had decayed. They also found wooden furniture where the wood had decayed and they had the good idea of pouring in plaster of Paris, and in that way got wonderful imprints of these, of the bodies, which of course, when the ash came round them, were just dying. In fact they're often very moving images of people who've just died, and you get a wonderful impression by these almost sculptures. I mean they're, they're plaster of Paris effigies, which are the casts of these people. Well, that of course relates in a kind of way, or can be seen to relate in a kind of way to the manner in which Antony Gormley chose to make sculpture. He stepped aside from chipping away with a hammer and chisel as many sculptors in stone have done, and instead made, had made body casts of his own standing figure or lying figure or whatever so there are points of contact there in the techniques to discuss and think about.

So then the way artists use artefacts. Tony Cragg makes strange creations of glass bottles or plastic containers and so on, and that leads to the focus of the, the use by artists of material culture and that very much ties in with Eduardo Paolozzi's work as a sculptor. He's always worked really in collage and put together objects and then often cast the end product and done a bronze out of that just as his graphic work is literally collage, cutting up bits of paper and so on. That was the way - he was one of the leading initial figures in, in pop art. So there really turned out to be a lot of ideas that I thought would make an interesting course of lectures, which I think were successful enough and then Thames & Hudson published those in a book, which I called "Figuring it Out", and I found it really quite a liberating experience to be thinking in this way about how we interact with the material world, the material engagement process as I think of it, and the experience takes one a little bit outside the very linear thinking, the very logical thinking of what do we do next. And so on in a very logical way and allows one to interact emotionally if you like, certainly interact directly with the sculptures or with the material artefacts that you're finding and that started, for me opened up new avenues in thinking, which in some ways are not so remote from those of some of the interpretive archaeology school who also favour sort of non-linear and sometimes rather empathetic and reactive approaches. But in my case I was able to feel that I was looking on this as a source of ideas and inspirations to apply to the material record but not to construct some alternative logic. I still very much believe in the principles of processual archaeology and trying to develop a, a coherent theoretical framework into which we can integrate our understanding, our developing understanding or our construction of our view of the past, so I rather dislike the rejection of the interpretive archaeologists of the achievements of the processual archaeology. I rather disapprove of their rejection of the philosophy of science as a, the right way of thinking about how we go about constructing the past, so that element of their work, their rejection of processual archaeology has always rather disappointed me, and I've not been happy with it. On the other hand one has to say that some of the more original thinkers have moved in very interesting directions. Chris Tilley has written very well about how he responds to monuments and to, to the landscape, so-called phenomenological approach, and mainly working in the British Neolithic, people like Julian Thomas or John Barrett have I think developed very interesting ideas, as has a former student of mine, a Matthew Johnston talking about the medieval period and though all of those are definitely self-avowed post processual archaeologists, I think I can almost forgive them that they're post-processual and in that sense I would say anti-processual because I think they're contributing something new, but as I, as I see it, what needs contributing is adding to the possibilities of processual archaeology rather than seeking to replace it. Maybe it doesn't make so much difference after all in, in the end, but I found that really a, a very refreshing experience and writing about that, indeed the lecture I gave, which, which went down best, I think, in the Edinburgh Rhind lectures, was when I was talking a little about the actual experience of, of digging and the way when you're digging, you're interacting with the soil and you're scraping the surface and so on, your interaction with the material, which of course applies at different scales. You interact sometimes through the microscope or you interact through aerial photography and I had an interesting experience with Kate Whiteford who's a very interesting sculptor when I was visiting the British school at Rome when she was an artist in residence and she was at that time, getting very intrigued by aerial photographs and we did a little publication together, which I suggested we should call "Remote Sensing" where it had her, her photographs and her drawings inspired by aerial photographs, which was, which was fun to do and so that was a case where we interact at different scales, through the microscope or from the aircraft, visually with the traces of our, of the past and in, in a whole number of other ways. And so I found all that an interesting way of the rethinking a little bit what the archaeological project is and what it's basis is, which is this direct experience of and engagement with the material reality of the past and therefore I found this analogy with the experience of interacting with contemporary art, helpful both for enjoying the contemporary art but also helpful for getting a fresh approach to the, to the archaeological record.

						The material engagement approach, as I now think of it and as I was saying, part of that, comes from thinking about approaches to the material reality, which one can think about in terms of sculpture or in terms of the archaeological record. I also found that in trying to think about cognitive archaeology one came upon some related issues. I began to see that when we're laying great emphasis on symbols, Leslie White suggested that culture is man's material adaptation, and laid great emphasis on the use of symbols and, a, a symbol, if you define it is really where one thing represents another.  X is a symbol representing Y, in context C. And so X is the signifier, if you like that terminology and Y is the thing signified. But I began to realise that the real innovations, if we're talking about the development of symbolic systems in the past. How humans began to create a more elaborate world, the real innovations weren't so much that this represents that, the signifier represents the thing signified, it was more the whole relationship that emerged. In my inaugural lecture in Cambridge in 1982, “Towards an Archaeology of Mind”, I'd spoke about those Indus Valley weights and how indeed it is the case that by looking at the weights and by measuring them, you become aware that there was a weighing system in operation which you can investigate, and that was for me, the beginning of some new thoughts in the field of cognitive archaeology. But when you ask yourself, okay, what do the weights actually represent? Well, this weight, if it weighs 50 grams, represents 50 grams. But, if you've never had a weighing system before, what exactly is going on?  And, and the interesting question becomes, how does this come about? And how it clearly comes about is an experience in the material world that you've been walking on the beach or something and you've got this pebble and this pebble, and they seem to be about the same in some way. We, talking of weights and measure will say they're about the same weight, but you don't yet have a concept of weight and then at some point you notice that you can balance things and that you have a piece of wood and a pivot or whatever, then if they really feel that similar they will sit and balance. And then you realise, that if you take this stone away and get a different stone of a different colour maybe indeed of greater density, the smaller stone can still be the same weight as the larger one if this is, as we would say, of greater density and so the notion of weighing comes from a new experience of the world, which is the weightiness or matterness of these things, the degree to which they are heavy and so one begins to appreciate that the whole notion of weighing comes about through a new experience of the world, a new material engagement with the world. And so, it isn't a question of just assigning symbols, it's whole categories of relationships which have to develop, before they can be described, and so you really have to have the whole business of weighing coming about before X, the signifier will signify Y, in terms of a weight system.
					
						I went to a conference on the social life of things, which was organised by a man called Arjun Appadurai and I thought for that I ought to say something about the Varna Cemetery and the earliest gold in the world. That was a cemetery in Bulgaria where the new radiocarbon chronology established that the gold found there was about 4,000 BC, and still the gold, the earliest gold know anywhere in the world and you find it in the graves and you find it in bracelets and nose plugs and so on, and I began to ask myself, how would you show that the gold was valuable? We all think of gold as valuable, but how do we know it was valuable to them? Because I realised I could say this is the emergence of a concept of value, which in a way could be a, analogous to the emergence of a concept to weight. Something new coming in to the world. But before you can say it is worth so much, you have to have the very notion of value. What is it for there to be a valuable material? And this gold seemed to be one of the earliest examples you can show where something was clearly being valued. You might say the same with polished stone axes in the Neolithic, but just a few - or maybe amber beads also.  So - but how would you show? We can see gold ought to be valuable because we all think of gold being intrinsically valuable. But when you think about it, gold is intrinsically valuable because all humans agree that it is valuable, otherwise it wouldn't be. And it’s what the philosopher John Searle calls an institutional fact, and I began to be interested in the way societies agree on certain facts that are only facts because they are agreed. Like, you know, the, the, the, the pound in your pocket is valuable or the whole business of money is just an agreed codified system. And in the case of the archaeology of gold the fact that it was being used in contact to the skin, for earrings and so on and bangles, was one indicator, and also some objects that appeared to be penis sheaths of gold in the graves and that would be the same line of thinking. But also there was one stone axe, in one of the graves that had been covered with gold foil and though it wasn't completely preserved, one presumes that the whole axe had been covered with foil to make it look like gold. Well, if you think about it that presumably implies that a gold axe would be more special and more valuable than the stone axe that they'd covered with this foil. And so I found that an interesting set of ideas to try and develop and I wrote about that for this conference on the social life of things, and it set me thinking much more about the emergence of really fundamental concepts, like the concept of value. And I see this within a framework of cognitive archaeology, think one's really getting at some of the issues of, how does a weight system ever come about or how does the concept of value come to emerge in different societies? Because of course in Meso- America, jade or feathers were considered even more valuable than gold, though gold was valued there. So, I, I thought that was an interesting set of ideas and I now have the feeling that it is possible to develop a kind of cognitive archaeology but it's not easy to do. One has to work out how it is that different societies, create difference of conventions for a living, formulate different institutional facts, formulate different value systems and this obviously relates to the archaeology of religion, although not directly, we're in the same sort  of subject area. So I got rather excited about this idea and I had a very bright research student who was doing a PhD, Lambros Malafouris and he completed his PhD, developing this idea of material engagement and using it in relation to the Mycenaean civilisation and talking about what a sword would mean and how important it was, and there was an early PhD dissertation by Paul Traherne in Cambridge, who wasn't particularly a student of mine, but he wrote a wonderful dissertation on the theme of the warrior’s beauty in the European bronze and iron ages, where it is the case that metal weapons become very prominent and also people riding horses in the first millennium BC and so on, and he showed how all these things fitted together and those societies had developed a way of seeing certain things as right, and ultimately beautiful and appropriate and that involved the use of swords and so on. So, all kinds of different ideas seem very possible and positive in the material engagement direction.
					
						When I had the very good fortune to win the Balzan prize in 2004, that was a nice thing to happen, because the Balzan prize, not only a great honour, it's been won by some very distinguished people and you go to Rome and have a very wonderful ceremony, it's presented by the President of the Republic and so on, so that's all very nice, but you also get given a very large sum of money. And the, what's supposed to happen is that, half of the money goes to you in your back pocket and it's not taxable either, prizes like that are not taxable. So that was very nice, allowed us to build a small extension onto our house, but the other half is supposed to go to developing some research involving young researchers. And so, I was able to put half of that portion towards the new excavations on Keros, which I mentioned earlier. And an excavation is quite an expensive thing, so to have some money to start with is pump priming before you start applying for grants, is a very good thing. And the other half, I thought might well be applied towards the fellowship in material engagement theory, so Lambros Malafouris, by then, Dr Lambros Malafouris got this position, applied for this position, and he's been working in this direction, which has taken him and to some extent me, more and more in the direction of neuroscience. To ask, what is the mind and to what extent is mind the same as brain? And it links with the same idea, the brain is inside the skull but the, the mind involving the way you behave intelligently, obviously involves the body and what you can do. If you think of the potter and the potter's wheel or the blind man and his stick is another example. The stick of the blind man is a very important part of the blind man's conceptual ability. But it's not eyes and it's not brain and, and this leads to the idea which philosophers, like Andy Clark have already developed very coherently along the theme of the embodied mind. So when I wrote much earlier, "Towards an Archaeology of Mind", I was using the right word but I certainly wasn't then making much of a distinction between brain and mind. I hadn't thought about it although talking about weights and the experience of weight is an embodied experience and the whole business of material engagement is an embodied experience, this was a step in the right direction, which I think developing material engagement theory and then trying to see how it works in practice with the neurophysiology of the brain and of the body, is a fascinating research direction, which we've been developing.
					
						It's perhaps appropriate to talk about the impact of publications on one's own work. And I had the great pleasure, in collaboration with yourself, Paul, of producing the book, "Archaeology Theories, Methods and Practice", which Colin Ridler and Thomas Neurath at Thames and Hudson had asked us to put together. And they wanted a, a text book really, mainly for university use on archaeological method and theory and we had the good fortune to discuss that together and just somehow see how that could be put together as a series of questions. What is the nature of the material evidence? When, for the chronology? What's it made of? What were the social relations? What was society like? What did they think? These became the chapter headings for our book and that gave us a chance, indeed the obligation to survey one aspect of archaeology. The methodology of archaeology and the theory of archaeology and I think, because we integrated the two rather successfully, and because you had your own particular strengths, for instance in environmental archaeology and so on, and I had some ideas in, indeed, cognitive archaeology that I wanted to develop in the chapter in “What did they think?” We had a lot to contribute, and it ended up, I think, as a balanced book, where the casual reader really didn't know who had written which chapter, and although we did tend to do it on a chapter-by-chapter basis, and so that I think was a very stimulating book to write and in my case encouraged me to think about the relation between the trade and the social archaeology and try and put the ideas about cognitive archaeology, in a much more straightforward and less highfalutin’ basis, not too much philosophy, more how do you get on and do it in the archaeological practicality. And so, I think we're both happy that that book has sold well and it was first published in 1981, were you reminding me?
					
						Indeed, I think one of the first experiences I had of that kind was much earlier, back in the 1980s, I think it was published in about 1986 and that was a meeting at the society for American Archaeology, where John Cherry and I put together a meeting on Peer Polity Interaction. And I mention that because I think on reflection that was one of the most interesting papers I wrote. There was a very simple idea, I'd been thinking about how you get away from diffusionist thinking, all these influences from one place to another and I realised that what happens for instance, in the Cycladic Islands in prehistoric times or in early Greek times, is that you, in early Greek times you had a lot of very small city states and they seemed to form independently as city states and they built up, and they sometimes competed with each other, sometimes even fought with each other, but after the interactions between them, the positive trading interactions, but also the competition, competitive emulation, as I called it, they sometimes, sort of, pulled themselves up by their own boot straps almost, and that relates to an idea I'd had earlier when I wrote a paper, “Trade as Action at a Distance”, for a seminar in Santa Fe, where I realised that many early civilisations develop on the same sort of pattern, which I call the early state module. For instance, the Sumerian civilisation, in the early days there was no central, most significant state. There were lots again of effectively city states developing in competition and then they grew and grew and then in the end one became dominant and then it became the Babylonian Empire or whatever. And you see very much the same pattern in early China in the Shang period and you have lots of, apparently autonomous centres, each of which is a small state society and then in the end they become assimilated, whether it's by the first Qin Emperor, the man with the terracotta warriors, or in ancient Greece it's with the development of the Athenian State, which in the end, swamped all the others or in Etruria with the Etruscans you see a similar pattern of early state modules which then ultimately become assimilated in Rome. So we had this very useful meeting of the Society, at the Society for American Archaeology and we invited a lot of people, we invited Anthony Snodgrass, Richard Bradley, wrote a very interesting paper. We invited David Freidel to talk about North America, we invited Jeremy Sabloff to talk about Mesoamerica, and so out of what was itself a good idea, I believe, John Cherry wrote a very interesting paper about early Crete, and so we managed to launch what I think is an interesting though very simple idea which in a way, I think ultimately answers the old controversies about endogenous and exogenous origins, gives one new insights into how things build up and develop their own dynamic. And I mention that in this context, because it was partly the publication of that, that made it a useful idea and that I think is what's been happening to some extent at the McDonald Institute. I was fortunate in getting a grant from the John Templeton Foundation on the theme, the roots of spirituality. They're very interested in the origins of religion and spirituality and so this seemed a good theme for us to address and we did one conference which was actually based at Les Eyzies on the origins of art and of human consciousness and that's now in press. And then, as you know, we did one on the world wide origins of figurative representation, art if you like but arts a rather, sometimes argumentative word, so figurative representation and that is being published under the title, "Image and Imagination" And you of course, Paul, contributed on the earlier origins of rock art world wide. And so, that I think has been quite a good way of operating in recent years and trying to focus on really rather difficult themes. Sometimes difficult get a real handle on the theme and sometimes by bringing a lot of well informed people together, and these have usually been by invitation, it's been possible to make more out of it, than would otherwise, perhaps have happened. So I think the publication initiative in recent years has been quite a positive one.
					
						So, how do you see archaeology at the moments and more importantly where do you think it is going in the next 10-20 years?

Well, I think one thing has become very clear, that one can try and draw on a number of different sources of information and try and work them together, but one has to develop a framework for working them together. Some years ago, about10, 15 years ago, I think in the first issue of the Cambridge Archaeological Journal, I wrote an article called, "Before Babel", talking about very early languages which arose of course, from my point of view, from my thinking about Indo-European problem, and I wrote then, perhaps rather optimistically about a hope for new synthesis, which would be between the fields of historical linguistics and prehistoric archaeology and molecular genetics. Well, certainly can't claim that the new synthesis has happened because all these fields are very controversial but nonetheless, I think most people would agree there must have been one reality. I mean if we're talking, whether we talking about genes, or language or material culture, at one particular time, in one particular place there were people making these pots, who had those haplotypes in their veins as it were, who were speaking that language. And there was a single reality, philosophers might wish to take a different view, some of them, but to most people it seems obvious there was a single reality and it's our job as those reconstructing the past, whether historical geneticist, archeogeneticist or linguists or archaeologist, to try and reach towards that. Obviously it's a very different question as how you decide what that reality was and how you decide whether you were right in thinking that, but that is, I think, part of the story. And so I think, one direction in which archaeology is going, is to think coherently, more coherently about those things and I think it does need a coherent theoretical basis, which for me is fine, if that's within the framework of science, speaking broadly,  I think the philosophy of science is a very good way of thinking about these things, so long as you don't automatically believe what this or that philosopher tells you. When Carl Hempel was writing about law-like behaviour and saying that all explanation has to be law-like in form, so the people were talking about the laws of culture process, that was probably a little over simplified and the criticisms of the anti-processual archaeologists were right in that respect. But in fact, there were very few philosophers of science at that time even who were taking so, extreme a position. And many philosophers of science see there are different ways of explaining things and different forms of explanation, even though we don't always know very clearly what those were. And that indeed has been the experience in the hard sciences. The philosopher of science, it's after quantum mechanics that the philosophers of science move in and tell you what quantum mechanics is supposed to be about. They certainly weren't in a position to do so until the great innovations of Einstein and Dirac and all these great thinkers. So, I think we have to continue to work on archaeological theory but in a pragmatic way and we'll have to be able to bring in these different components as it were, which I think is no easy task. And then, I do see the most significant progress as coming from more serious thinking, about how humans engage with the material world. I keep on using that phrase, material engagement, because it helps us to get away from the dualism, the distinction between mind and body or body and soul. That duality, which is often attributed to the philosopher Descartes, is actually unhelpful because we are embodied people and we won't understand the, the world if we insist on dividing the world and artefacts into signifiers and things signifying, these are relationships we've got to get into the middle of and so I, I think, trying to understand how the mind works, not just how the little neurons work inside the brain, but for the archaeologists, how the mind works in allowing us to learn things, how we modify our behaviour, through our increasing understanding of and engagement with the material world. Now a lot of that, I think, is very much in harmony with the thinking of the interpretive archaeologists, also called post-processual archaeologists. They use the term agency a great deal which I find not a terribly helpful abstraction, but I absolutely agree with what they're trying to say, that it's humans as being active in the world and active in an intelligent way that makes things happen and that changes the world. Ian Hodder used a very good line of thinking many years ago, which was the active role of material culture. Well, I think we can see it's not just the culture that's active, it is the humans above all that are being active using the material culture, yet it's true that the artefacts produced by humans, have an impact upon humans. In our contemporary society, probably the most powerful motivating force for most people is money. Well, money is a construct, a human produced construct, just, we were saying earlier with the intrinsic value of gold. That is a construct. It's not intrinsic in any way. And so, I think we have to be able to develop those lines of thought, and I hope when we do so, they may help us to understand a little better also, the origins of belief systems, the origins of religion. That's why I think the initiative which the Templeton Foundation supported us in, was a productive one, although I think the most interesting aspects of it, are not the elaboration of the religion, but how things come to be of great spiritual significance. It's very much at the roots of that process, which is why I think the Palaeolithic is so interesting and why cave art and rock art indeed, are so interesting, because these are some of the earliest indications we have of humans interacting with the world and beginning to create categories in the world which we today would call religious. So, I think there's a need for some fresh thinking which I think is going on and I hope very much that some of the original thinking of some of the interpretive archaeologists may actually begin to work more constructively with that of the processual tradition. And as I say, I think it's been a bit of a dislocation of the past 20 or maybe now 25 years that we've moved away from a coherent working in that direction. Perhaps diversity is essential and one needs different people's insights but I think it's a pity when a previous body of work tends to be rejected rather than expanded and modified which is what I feel about the so-called new archaeology, it started off as functional processual archaeology and as we've said in our book, we can see now, it needs to be cognitive processual. But those things have to be, not just slogans, they have to be made to, to work in, in the world.

					
						The other problem today, I think is a very much more difficult one, it's how we manage to create some kind of comparative archaeology. And we've all realised that the earlier formulations of law-like generalisations, the sort of things that Julian Steward was trying to do when Gordon Childe wrote of the urban revolution or the Neolithic revolution, these were ideas that could be applied worldwide but he actually only applied them to the old world and it was Julian Steward, who was one of the first to say, right, lets apply them across the board, and he compared and then Robert Adams, Bob Adams, compared develops in Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica in his book, "The Origins of Urban Society", "The Evolution of Urban Society", which is a really first class book compared, but it was written, what, 30, 40 years ago now, comparing those two, those two trajectories of development. But, if we're going to make sense of things, I think we have to be able to make these comparisons more coherently. And it really is very difficult to do if one accepts those who, the interpretive archaeologists, who emphasise the importance of the context. You won't understand this unless you understand the specific context better. Well, that is true but you won't understand it on its own either, I think. And so, I've begun to have the strong feeling that we need to develop some sort of framework where we can have a real comparative archaeology. We were talking earlier about Mexico and Jane and I had a marvellous time and we went down to Yucatan and went to Chitchen Itsa and Uxmal but there are very few archaeologists working in Europe who know much about the Maya or the Olmecs and those few who do, very often know mainly about the Maya and the Olmec and not much else. We had a wonderful visit to China, as, as I mentioned, where we went for a week to Beijing to give some lectures at the time of the publication of the Chinese edition of “Archaeology: Theories, Methods and Practice” and, and the visit was organised by Mei Jianjun who did his doctorate in Cambridge on early metallurgy in China and particularly in the, what used to be Chinese Turkestan, now the Xinjian Province, of  China and so we had a, I had a wonderful week there and that was where Aurel Stein did his discoveries and got records of the Tocharian language, which was the eastern most known Indo-European language. But although that was one purpose of visiting China another was just to think a little more about the early days of Chinese civilisation in the pre-Shang period, where really very little has been done in a systematic way to understand the origins of social complexity in, in China. It's very well documented for the Shang period, around 1500 BC, we have these wonderful burials at Anyang, which not so dissimilar from the royal burials at Ur 1,000 years earlier. They're, they're completely independent or largely independent from each other but the earlier formative stages of Chinese civilisation, and not well understood. In Mesoamerica they are increasingly, there's very good work on the Maya, and I think in some ways the most distinguished coherent field project in the world is that which Kent Flannery with his partner Joyce Marcus have been doing in Oaxaca, the Mexican area of Oaxaca on the origins of the Zapotec civilisation and the Mixtec civilization, and I think that's remarkably coherent work, because they take a very long time frame and they're examining the circumstances that led to complexity. Well, people in Sumer are working in, on similar problems, as Ken Flannery and Joyce Marcus are very well aware, in the Aegean, we've been working at similar problems. My book, "The Emergence of Civilisation" was very much tackling those issues, but nobody really has yet found much of a way, at any rate since the time of Bob Adams, has found much of a way of really successfully comparing these trajectories. And I had to give a lecture for the British Academy a couple of years ago, and so I called it "Becoming Human", and I drew on the DNA evidence, which I was mentioning earlier which gives us a clear picture of an out of Africa dispersal for our species of 60,000 years ago and I pointed out as I had done in an earlier article called "The Sapient Paradox", that whereas a few years ago, archaeologists were talking about the human revolution as if the most amazing thing happened was the emergence of Homo sapiens at a time when the French cave art, in the upper Paleolithic of France and Spain, seemed to be somehow typical of that human revolution. But now that we've able to situate the emergence of Homo sapiens much earlier in Africa and even in the beginning of some figuration or decoration, sights like the Blombos Cave, 70,000 years ago and the origins of human species probably by 100,000 years ago, then the dispersals out of Africa, 60,000 years ago, what happened in France and Spain 40,000 years ago, is now seen   as something very localised. It's just as amazing, some ways more amazing than it ever was, and, and of course you do find little sculptures, Venus figurines in Siberia as well as in France and Spain. But it's very localised and you have very little Palaeolithic art. Art before a period of 12,000 years ago, very little except in France and Spain and that extension to Siberia and some things in Australia. Well, you know all this much better than I do, Paul, because that's your special area. But I think that's not generally realised.
					
						And so the human revolution in the sense of the formation of Homo sapiens, was one thing which happened in Africa and then you have in different parts of the world, in my view associated with the development of sedentism, which is much closer to Gordon Childe's Neolithic or agricultural revolution, and these appeared independently it seems, in Western Asia and in China and in Mesoamerica. Human beings went to all, to all these places and in their different environments, they did their own thing with negligible communications between them in those early days, so communications developed much more recently. So, how do we get a grip on those processes? It's been obvious for a long time ago, since Childe spoke about the Neolithic revolution or the urban revolution as if it was one thing. Well, we can see that the agricultural revolution took place in, took place in different areas, but it still seems to us appropriate to call it “The” Agricultural Revolution. It was lots of revolutions but it was similar. There was sedentism, then there was the development of crop production, where animals were available, they became domesticated, permanent life, development of trade, beginning of value systems, maybe beginning of measurement. Then in some cases an urban revolution, we can call them cities in different parts of world but who authorises the word “city”, a single word for what were completely different manifestations in different places? Well, the only serious approach to that in recent years, I think is Bruce Trigger’s book, "Understanding Early Civilisations", where he set down very carefully to compare seven early civilisations, but I think he made one decision which may not have been the best decision. He decided to restrict himself to civilisations where he had some access to written records. And so he chose in general, very early literate civilisations, and that I think let him into some wrong directions. In particular it caused him to omit the Indus Valley civilisation, which in some ways is anomalous. In many early civilisations, like Ur and like Shang, you have rich burials, princely burials in many parts of the world, the earliest stage of complexity, Egypt, you have the burials of Pharaohs and all this looks very impressive, Moche Peru and so on, yet in the Indus Valley you don't see that. You don't see these very prominent people. And then again, he concludes, no doubt rightly, that in many early civilisations, you have the emergence of religious beliefs, new cosmologies, which link the ruler with the divine. And that I think applies very well in many Mesoamerican civilisations, you can see that happening. And in a different way, but quite a valid way in China, but in, in the Indus Valley civilisation, you just don't seem to find temples. You find great Bath of Mohenjodaro and other very strange and interesting things and maybe some symbolism with those stone lingams that they're supposed to signify the predecessor of the great Lord Shiva, but who knows, you just don't find it. So that I think, we need a much more sophisticated approach and sometimes I think that in archaeology, for all the advances we've made, we're rather like natural history at the time of Linnaeus. And Linnaeus made these wonderful advances and understood that you could begin to classify the world and set up the classification of the living world, but it took Darwin to think in more processual terms about how these different living systems came about. By introducing his notion of natural selection, and then it took Crick and Watson to show us the molecular basis. The DNA basis for the origins of life. Well, I rather wonder if in archaeology we haven't got to the Linnaean stage where we, we've got a good narrative in different parts of the world, we've got very good ways of recovering data from the past. I think that's really quite sophisticated, but we seem to be in a very primitive position, where we scarcely have a framework for comparing what happened in China, with what happened in Peru for instance. Moreover, if we seek to do so, there is one faction among active archaeologists who say - hey, you can't do that, you're ignoring context, you're trying to create laws of culture process. This is mere processual archaeology and we have to be post-processual. Well, I think we perhaps got over that particular debate, but the point I'm making is that we have no intelligent framework for comparing these different experiences, yet the one thing I think we can agree on is that after the out of Africa dispersal, the things that happened in different parts of the world, to some extent happened independently and then of course there were relations across Central Asia, so that the chariots and the Shang Burials are derived from the chariots further west in, in Europe and in the Ukraine, but the Americas were affectively independent from Europe and probably from Eastern Asia until a lot of things had happened and many developments had taken place. So that somehow the archaeological record, offers a whole series of effectively independent inventions of sometimes very much the same thing. And the common ingredient of course, is the human being, and the human being has got very much the same in DNA in all these different places, give or take a few mutations, a few differences in the haplogroups. But the physical basis is very much the same. So we have this wonderful challenge of how do we make sense? Why did these different things occur when they did? Well, part of it is because the same human beings, effectively, a child born today is very much the same as a child born 10,000 years ago in any part of the world. But the child very quickly becomes inculturated and joins a, a culture where there's generations of wisdom and experience together. So these are things that we don't understand and I don't think, I mean, I don't even see any serious discussion about how one could conduct a comparative archaeology or a comparative anthropology. These are the old challenges that the first anthropologists, Lewis Henry Morgan  EB Tylor and so on, were addressing, not very successfully, 150 years ago. But we don't really seem to have advanced very much since then in our analytical apparatus. So I, I do see archaeology at a very exiting juncture where all these things are coming about. We're beginning to relate linguistic and genetic evidence, and one could say much more about how the linguistic evidence would mean more if we had a good chronology, we could then think how the vocabularies really give us information and so on. A lot to learn from that, and we've got the advances in neuroscience that may help us to realise how the learning process operates in childhood and so on. But I think we're just like Linnaeus, being able to stick names, labels on things, and really not have much clue yet, how they came about. So I think for a new archaeologist today, it's a very exiting position to be in.
					
						Well, I think the computers now offer us the possibility, or those who are very competent in them, the possibility of ordering our data in a phenomenal way and the satellite imagery is going to make it possible to recognise many more sites and then ground truthing, do perhaps sometimes quite a limited amount of work on the ground to give this information and then sight survey, we haven't really spoken about site survey walking sites and getting information. We're getting so much more in the way of data there, from site survey and good excavation and satellite imagery and then we're getting very competent or those who are competent, I'm not necessarily one of them, getting very competent at handling the data, but I don't think anybody knows what to do with it. The point I've just been making about how people don't compare. I've not seen a serious comparison of Mesoamerica with Mesopotamia since Bob Adam's book which was just offering an outline. Now it's true actually that one piece of work I got involved in, arising from the early state module idea, that you have different centres, I was thinking about how one is able to, if you have an archaeological map of where you have a lot of different sites of different sizes which you have dated, and how you can reconstruct the political landscape, if you've got the distribution of population. And in that book, "Mathematical Approaches to Culture Change", published, I think 1979, a long time ago, published some very interesting work which I did with somebody who was then a research student, Eric Level and we developed a, a computer programme whereby if you started with the centre and you imagined a sort of bell tent arrangement and if a settlement out here, began to protrude above the bell tent. Maybe it was independent. If it was inside the bell tent, it was in the sphere of influence of the original centre. But then it became interesting, if you make the bell tent steeper or less steep, it changes the political configuration. Well, I think they're really very interesting ideas there and I suspect that in spatial archaeological geography, there is much more that could be done, certainly you then say, well, are we losing context? Well, yes of course you are, you have to think in terms of what the means of transport was and what the military means were to bring places within the sphere of influence or were they that militaristic or not. There are many questions to be, to be asked. But I think unless people start to formulate models, of some generality and then ask themselves, okay this is too general, this isn't allowing for the specifics in this case. What were the specifics and how do we understand that? I think it's not going to work. I fully see that if you get too caught in the comparisons, you lose the holistic truth of the particular civilisation or culture. You've got to know, it fails to be holistic, you fail to see that the religion and the sense of identity how gender is constructed in this culture impacts on these other matters and in the way that culture can grow and change or decline. So one has to be able to take account of that, but I think if it's just one culture at a time, it's not going to tell us very much. So I think, you're right, there's a huge amount of new data becoming available but unless we can find a way to make data from one place articulate in some sense with data from another place, it's not being put to very good use.
					
						I think one thing that turns out to be very important if one wants to know something about world archaeology is travelling around the world and in that respect I think I've been very fortunate. Quite early on, I was asked to become one of the lecturers on the Swan's Hellenic Cruises, which at that time were mainly in the Mediterranean and Sir Mortimer Wheeler was the great guru figure who appointed the lecturers, just as he did many things in the British Academy and he asked me to take part. Initially I wasn't able to because I was excavating in Orkney at the time that must have been about 1974. But I did go on the SS Minerva which was a, no the SS Ankara was the first boat and that was terrific fun, the deal is that one simply had a cruise, one wasn't paid for it, but one had a very interesting cruise, and at that time, there were very eminent people among the lecturers, that's how I got to know Henry Chadwick and his wife Peggy, whom I got to know and admire very much, and quite a lot of other very interesting people, so that when one had given one's own lecture, one was very much inclined to go and hear the other lectures, because they were really very informative and the passengers at, at that time, I think it's changed a little now, the passengers at that time were really very interested in the subject matter. They were on that cruise because they wanted to go to those sites and hear about them from people that knew about them. And so, that took one around to a lot of Mediterranean sites that one might not otherwise have been to, visited quite a lot of sites in Cyprus for instance, was regularly going to Constantinople. I knew many of the Greek locations before but one very agreeable cruise, we went through the Suez Canal and so we were able to go to the Mount Sinai monastery, St Catherine's Monastery in Mount Sinai, which is an amazing place, a wonderful experience and to Petra which I hadn't otherwise been to. And on that cruise also, we went across, by bus, to the Nile and went to Luxor and Karnak, which I hadn't seen before. Jane, my wife, was invited to do some paleo-ethno botanical works on, botanical work on the finds from Tel El Amarna one year, by Barry Kemp and she enjoyed that very much and found that interesting and so he invited me to go with her the following year, I hadn't been to Amarna before and he suggested quite a small but interesting project involving some site survey, localised site survey, for me to do, to do something useful, though I think he was probably more interested in the cereal remains than in my site survey findings, but that was a great experience, to be working in Egypt and gave on a little bit more feeling for Ancient Egypt and of course, allowed us to spend time in Cairo and then the Swans Cruises took us to Luxor and Karnak, as well as over the years to quite a lot of other places. And, and I should have mentioned that also the invitation we had in quite early days to go to Iran. Frank Hale was excavating the site of Ali Kosh which was one of the earliest villages settlements in Iran and he was finding a lot of obsidian so he wanted a study made on his obsidian. The obsidian analysis work was published by then, so we went out and I worked on the obsidian, saw all the obsidian fragments and selected quite a few for analysis and they were subsequently analysed, and Jane was doing work again on the cereal remains so that gave us the experience. My only visit so far to Tehran and then down a wonderful train journey down to towards the Gulf, to, to the town of Dizful and then by road it seemed very remote indeed. Dizful seemed a very sort of 19th or 18th century place, as we arrived there and went out to the village of Ali Kosh, where we were staying in mud huts. Our daughter, Helena, our oldest child, was just a couple of months old then, but we decided it was safer to take her while she was still drinking her mother's milk than it would be from all kinds of baby foods, which I think is, is basically the case, so she was with us and, but coming back from Deh Luran it seems as if we were coming to the very centre of civilisation when we got to Dizful, whereas the bright lights of Tehran were completely overwhelming when we got back to Tehran. But that allowed us to see some of the great sights, like Susa and so on and then, as I think I mentioned earlier, when we were filming at Hatra in Iraq, that gave the opportunity of seeing some of the great Sumerian sites and over the years we've seen some of the Chinese sites and been to Mexico a few times. It's still my ambition to go to Peru, I haven't been to Peru and I'd like to see something of the early civilisations of Peru. But these travel opportunities, they sometimes seem just like fun and indeed they are fun, but I think they're seriously useful and indeed the discipline on the Swan's Cruises of having to really do the reading and know about sites. Some of the sites I already knew about, if we were in Crete or the Cyclades, and or Troy or Mycenae, I could speak about that, really knowing the background anyway but when we did a Black Sea cruise for instance, I, I'd been to Vana, which I was able to talk about and Constantinople, but the other Black Sea locations, I had to read about first, so it was quite demanding. Of course, when one knows how to find the right classical authors it's not very difficult to, to read it up and one has some background to give to it perhaps. And of course not all the lecturers on such cruises are actually, here we are at such and such a place, this is what happened here. They're more background lecturers like radiocarbon dating. Or one very favourite place on the cruises was Santorini, where the great eruption was, and since the early days I've been in touch with that excavation project, Spyridon Marinatos was excavating there in the 1960s when Jane and I visited him and then Christos Doumas took over from him when he died and we've been in touch with that site and so easy to talk about that. But also very nice to have the opportunity of visiting such places quite regularly and all the sites on the Anatolian Coast, so those I think are important opportunities. And it's very difficult to see how one can really form a view of the importance of different sites or their significance in developmental processes unless you've seen some of them and can actually compare one with another.
					
						Another such opportunity came to me very recently when Victor Sarianidi, the excavator of this amazing, effectively new civilisation, newly discovered civilisation in Turkmenistan invited me to go to a conference there and to his site at Gonurtepe and it is all together extraordinary that, whole new cities have been discovered, dating from more or less the same time as the Indus civilisation, but in a part of the world where really very little had been known before. Sometimes we'd been called Bactria Matgiana Archaeological Complex, which is rather a mouthful. And I think the reason I was invited was because there's some speculation that these places might be relevant to the arrival of Indo-European speakers in India. Because one of the great problems in the Indo-European story, we were rather focusing on Europe in our earlier Discussion, but it's agreed that the people on the steps in the late Bronze Age and Iron Age were probably Indo-European speakers, indeed we know the Scythians were Indo-European speakers, but it's all together unclear how people speaking Indo-European languages got down to India and Pakistan and spoke languages that were ancestral to Sanskrit? Indeed of course there are many in India, especially some of the Hindu fundamentalist who insist that it all began there and that made for rather quarrelsome sessions at the World Archaeological Congress in New Delhi a few years ago. But, certainly that's a very fascinating question as how and when did Indo-European speech reach India and I think nobody has any very clear explanation of it. So those cities, or very major sites in Turkmenistan around 2000 BC or a little later, might be relevant to the story although, it's not really clear how we shall know. There are no written materials and so one has to work from the material culture, from the decorative elements and so on, and I suppose one would be looking for clear evidence of some movement of population, from one place to another, but one really doesn't seem to find that evidence at the moment. But anyway, it's only by going to places like that and keeping up with what's going on in such places, that one has any hope, I think, of having a perspective on these things. So it's great fun being a world archaeologist but as I was saying so far, I don't think much of any great good sense has emerged from the experience.
					