donald.hall

The 14th US Poet Laureate Donald Hall (1928-2018) was educated at Phillips Exeter Academy, then earned a bachelor's degree from Harvard in 1951 and a BLitt, from Oxford in 1953. He published many essays and anthologies of both poetry and prose including String too Short to be Saved: Recollections of Summers on a New England Farm, White Apples and the Taste of Stone, Without: Poems, and Ox-Cart Man, a children's book which won the Caldecott Medal. Hall was editor of the magazine Oxford Poetry, literary editor of Isis, editor of New Poems, and poetry editor of The Paris Review. He won many awards, including two Guggenheim Fellowships and a Robert Frost Medal. At the end of his first Oxford year, he also won the university's Newdigate Prize, awarded for his poem Exile.

This house where we're talking is a very old family house. The house itself was built originally in 1803, on an ox track and my great grandparents moved here in 1865, same family has lived here ever since. I've been here full time for the last 30 years. It's a big old farm house in New Hampshire, very cold in the winter, in the very beautiful country... nice hills around. My great grandfather moved here. He was a sheep farmer who had a farm way up in the hills about five miles from here and I figure that he... sheep farmers in general made a lot of money from the war, and at the end of the Civil War he bought this valley farm with a little more flat land, and my grandmother was born here in 1878, and my mother in 1903, and I was not born here, but I chose it. I chose this place. But my mother went to college, went to Bates College in Maine, and there she met my father who was from Connecticut, from a little town becoming a suburb, and his father had a dairy business, home delivery of milk and so on, and my father was the eldest of two sons of a self-made man. My grandfather down there - Henry - had gone to the fifth grade and worked with his hands all his life until he began to hire people to help deliver milk, and it grew and it grew to be quite prosperous. He was a self-made man. He was a hard man and he was a difficult father, especially for his eldest son. When my father and mother got out of Bates, she from... this society, which was long dresses and church twice a day on Sunday, and sometimes three times a day with Christian Endeavour at night, and a very kind of Calvinist society... when she went to Bates college, which is a little college, a good one, in Lewiston, Maine, she went to the big city, which of course is not a big city, but there was nothing around here.  And she met the man from Connecticut, and they fell in love. Well, he did not want to work for his father. He had a job, if he wanted, in the family business. He didn't want to do it. After graduation, they both taught separately for two years. She made a $1000, and he made a $1000, and they could not get married in 1925, which is when they graduated, at that amount of money, and after two years, they gave up. My grandfather took... my father took the job with his father, dreading to do it because he wanted to get married so much, and I was born a year later in suburban Connecticut, and I grew up there. I spent all the school year down there in Connecticut in a... in the '30s and the '40s when the neighborhoods were pretty... pretty conventional... they had their own conventions. The... our neighborhood was six room houses and with one... one car to a house and people tended to make similar incomes in the... in that neighborhood. It was middle class... middle, middle class. There was an avenue up a block from my house, on the other side of it... the people with more money, which in America we would call upper middle class, but not in England, you just had a little more money. Class was almost entirely a matter of income and education. Having gone to college in the '20s, and making what would seem like a ridiculously low amount of money now because the dollar's totally different, but he worked for his father. We lived in a series of rented houses down there, and then my parents finally bought a house in 1936 when I was eight and moved into it, and my mother turned 90 in that house and my father died relatively young. He died at 52, and he was an unhappy and thwarted man. He was very kind, very soft. He wept a great deal. I always thought it was a great gift to have a father who wept in your presence. I was an only child and one of the family myths when, I believe it's true, is that when I was a baby in the crib, he came home frustrated from working at the dairy, where he was pushed around and belittled and people were sarcastic to him. He could never do anything quite right. He came home at lunch and shook his fist over my cradle saying, 'He's going to do what he wants to do'.  And it turned out to be poetry. And even when it turned out to be poetry, he stood by it, and helped me, and they were supportive. I was the only child. I was the only grandchild, and so all the focus of the family, both in the Hampshire side and the Connecticut side, was focused on me.

I was rather reclusive as a child, didn't have many... many friends at school. I played the games with them and so on, but gradually... I... I began to spend a lot of time at home reading, and away from others. I didn't really feel at home with my own age group, my own generation until I went to college, and then I did with a... with a vengeance, and it was lovely.  But all the time there was the tension between the New Hampshire part of my family and the Connecticut part. The suburbs were sophisticated. They drank cocktails. This was teetotal up here, totally. And they had bridge clubs. Cards were forbidden up here. In this house and in this neighborhood by and large people did not dance, play cards, swear, smoke or drink. And she went down there and she tried to adapt, and she adapted fairly well. She played cards, she drank, she smoked cigarettes. She died at 90 of congestive heart, probably because of her cigarette habit. Her mother, Kate, who had never smoked, lived to be 97, always in this house until the last couple of years. But when we drove up when I was a little kid, I used to be told in the car remember not to speak about Bridge Club, not to say anything about drinking. My father would sneak off and smoke and they knew he smoked, but there was a... a secrecy and I knew that, but my grandparents here... I called the society puritan but they were wonderful people and I just adored them.

My grandfather and I were particularly close. It was the first love of my life, and maybe the greatest love of my life. We worked together, haying. This was one of those old farms, multiple products, very… very little cash. He would milk, with his hands, seven or eight Holsteins, and sell the milk which a truck would pick up out the front. He also had 50 sheep and he sheared the sheep and sold the young males, that… that was a little cash. The milk went to a New Hampshire dairy during the summer but to a Boston one in the winter and a monthly check for milk would be $7, $10, $15.  But they had 200 chickens, they traded eggs, sometimes they sold them, but they often traded them in a little store where they could get coffee which they could not grow, and they’d get salt which they could not grow. For sweetness, they had honey from the bees. There were a row of beehives out by the barn and the great stout sugar maples all over the place, and in March for a couple of weeks my grandfather would haul buckets of sap and then boil it day and night. Somebody else would help… to help with the fire, because they had to go 24 hours a day. A wood fire, under the sap, to boil it down to syrup. And I know, well before my time, in 1912, my mother used to tell me that he and his father in law, the original owner here, made 500 gallons of maple syrup. They sold it for a dollar a gallon and all the figures are extraordinary, but with that they would buy land. They didn't believe in money or bank accounts or anything like that. Nor did the culture. It was not a cash culture. They had huge vegetable gardens and my grandmother, with the help of her daughters, would can, oh 400, 600 cans of string beans and peas and blueberries and apples. Blueberries and apples for pies all winter and they would live off the land a great deal  With their 200 chickens where they had many eggs and traded them and they could also kill a chicken on a Sunday or more likely a rooster or an old hen, boil it for six hours to make it tender enough to eat. Eating up here was not very good. But in the afternoons in the summer, my grandfather and I would go haying. At the beginning I just raked after, I had a great bull rake which was about four feet wide, where I'd clean up the scraps of hay. But then - he had a hired man briefly, $2 a week salary room and board - who would pitch on, but then the hired man went off and I took on the pitching on or we took turns. One of us would be on top of the load of hay, packing the hay. This was a horse drawn cart of course, hay rack [sic], and he, in the morning would use a horse drawn mowing machine to cut hay and then rake it with a horse drawn rake in the afternoon. There was never a tractor on this farm. There was never an automobile. The…we would then rake it into mows and… from the mows we’d pitch it up, taking in three or four loads of hay on a good day. Three usually, four would be a big day and stack it away in the barn, where the cattle would have it all winter and the sheep. We would salt the sheep once every week or two, but they were low upkeep except when they got lost, or when they managed to get through a fence. But… for refrigeration, there's Eagle Pond which is about a 150 yards to the west of the house which would freeze deeply in February and there would be ice cutting. I… I never participated because I was at school in Connecticut, but he would saw out great oblongs of ice and… and truck it up to the barn where he had an ice house and a lot of sawdust and of course it would keep through the heat of the next summer.  And often there would be chunks in there from two years before if he hadn't needed it, but you would need the chunks of ice in the summer to keep the milk cool overnight or it would spoil. And every morning he would carve out a chunk and take it down to the ice box which was out in the shed where we kept our food cool but not cold. The electricity had come in some point in the ‘20s but they didn't have an electric refrigerator until, oh I think after the war, late in the ‘40s maybe. For heat, the winters were the hardest time for working, because my grandfather would get up alone at four in the morning and milk the cows, and then pack a lunch, have breakfast here, pack a lunch and go up to the hills. He had 400 acres and every now and then he could sell some timber, and that's what put the girls through college, selling timber, but a lot of it was pasture land. He would go up into the hills as the wood lot, and chop wood, chop down enormous trees, and then cut them in sections and then split them, and then bring them down. When the farm was prosperous - you know all farms went into a depression about 1918, 1919 - they had maybe two or three horses and a pair of oxen, and the oxen would bring down the… bring the ice up and do the heavy work like the timbers but gradually they couldn't afford to keep oxen and just one horse did it all. It was an immense amount of work spending the whole day in sub zero temperatures. It used to be much colder than it is now. With a thermos of coffee and some bread and cheese, up there in the mountains, but that's what he did to provide heat for the winter. So the winter work actually provided cool for the summer and heat for the winter as well.

Where I lived, it was a suburb of New Haven, Connecticut, called Hamden, and there were sections. My father had grown up in Whitneyville, which was named after Eli Whitney who had an arms factory there and built workers' housing which was Whitney's village. This was in the 18th century - 1795, 1798. So Whitney's village became Whitneyville, which is where I grew up, and Springland [sic] where we lived mostly was two miles away. More recent houses built in the '20s before the crash, and... the house that we bought, we bought in a bank forclosure. I say we, I mean I had nothing to do with it - I was eight years old - but... it... they were set in this place and people near each other, as I've said in Connecticut, resembled each other. Up here the diversity was so extraordinary. Some of my cousins lived in shacks. Some lived in trailers then and still do and others relatively prospered and we'd all been to church together, all classes, nobody very rich I guess. On the... on a Sunday... and there were festivities. New Hampshire has, still has in a diminished way, a wonderful annual holiday - Old Home Week or Old Home Day - and it started... it was planned by the governor in 1898, by the governor of New Hampshire, and I think it's peculiar to this state. It's evidence of the diaspora - beginning even before the Civil War but... but accelerating greatly after it, the farms... farms began to be abandoned. People moved in two directions - people moved down to the mills, textile mills in New Hampshire, they were within a few miles. There were mills in every town but textile mills were the big ones - Concord, Manchester. Along the Merrimack River which originaly supplied the water power for the mill. People went there and they could work just 12 hours a days for six days a week and make a living and that was astonishing to a lot of the farm kids that you could work that little and make a living. My gramp worked in a mill in Andover which is just four miles down the road, which was a mill to make hames, the wooden part of the inside of a horse collar. He had to quit because the sawdust got in his lungs and stopped him. But that was six days a week, 12 hours a day. And when at some point, around the turn of the century, that mill started giving half day off on Saturday, the old folks in town said, 'That ain't a week's work'. Well, the... the diaspora is what I was speaking of. The other people of course went west, and that began early - I mean people started going west in the 17th century, but it accelerated, and west meant Vermont, New York State. New Hampshire is a series of little mountains and little valleys, no room to spread out, very good... very little good earth, good soil for growing things. Along the Connecticut River, on both sides of the river, there are the alluvial plains, which is where now the cows still gathered for... to produce cheese for us - there's a lot of good cheese made around here - but the farms that... well the... kind of this farm, were farms that were not set up for prosperity but for independence and liberty.  And the governing idea of late 17th, early 19th century farmers here was to be a little nation of one, a nation of one family - a man, a woman and a whole lot of kids usually - and they were independent, and they made their own food. They didn't need much money, and that ideal and glory of liberty and independence, separateness, anti-commonwealth really, was a governing ideal.  And much of that notion exists today and it tends to help the corporations which is something which wasn't part of it to begin with because the corporation is theoretically an individual. It lasts in the so-called right wing politics of New Hampshire today. The farms emptied out. When I was a kid up here, when I was 10, 12 years old, my gramp and I would be off in the wagon and he'd point into a little clearing, and say, 'That's where the Barns's house used to be', and sometimes we'd walk in, and there was a cellar hole, and maybe a standing well, but generations of families had lived in these places. Many burned down, but many were simply left, abandoned, and the families died out or went to the mills or went west and farmed on a larger scale, and eventually farmed with machines of course.  And it meant that when... it was easy... easy to transport milk, it became too expensive to make milk at this kind of farm, and... and so on. It was always too expensive to grow any quantity of wheat, that you needed the big plains for, and it was easier with transport. But transportation, and the railroads growing from the 1840s on, opened up the west, opened up better land. The canals started a little, even before that, so you can see it. So I grew up here in a... in a sort of decaying culture. It was... it was probably by 1940 when I was 12, or maybe even later during the war, the population of New Hampshire was lower than it had ever been before or has been since. The population now is up to what it was maybe 150 years ago, but of course its people around lakes and summer people and retired people that have increased the population now - not farmers. You still have some, but in the places where the land widens out, you have enough land to farm.

Old Home Day was a response to the diaspora of America… of the New Hampshire people, and every summer there would be a particular week degenerating to a day sometimes, or two days, when people would come back and people would get prizes for traveling the greatest distance, but many of them would come up from Massachusetts or even from other mill towns in New Hampshire, for that matter, to go back to the towns that they'd grown up with, and see again the people they'd gone to one room schools with, and to high school and so on, if they went.  And there would be dances and apparently there were some bad boys and there would be some hard cider, and possibly a few extra births nine months after Old Home Day.  And there was always a play - they put on a play - people spoke, there were… there was a marching band, well not a marching band - a brass band. During my youth the brass band from Sanbornton always came and it was very hot, it was generally in August and they wore these great, thick, woolen coats with their necks up to here, blasting away. It was picnics all the time and… by the time I arrived it was just one day, so when I speak about dances and plays, and week long things, I'm dealing with my mother's memories, and so on. It… it just started… I think some towns had had it before the governor proclaimed it, but it became almost universal, not quite - not every town, but almost every town - had its Old Home Day, which was an acknowledgment that people have gone away.  And there was a guy who taught high school in Ohio who used to come every year, and he was called Professor and he usually got the prize for coming the furthest away.  But sometimes somebody would come from California even, and so on, and we still have it now. It's one day - it's a church service, a picnic, and then a talk afterwards.  Someone… I've given an Old Home Day talk several times and sometimes shows of photographs from old Old Home Days and you pick out your grandparents and great grandparents and show them around.  But it's… it’s you know, lost its meaning mostly. There was a boy here that I used to play with in the summers, maybe once in the summer I'd have a play day with a guy named Richard Currier [sic] who lived about two miles, no, less than that, a mile down the road, and he lives in Maine now, but he comes over every summer for the Wilmot Old Home Day and I see him then.  But apparently they were great long affairs into, probably, oh, into the '20s, at any rate, if not later.

Much of my poetry has been elegiac and looking at loss and I grew up here so much looking at loss in the summers.  Really as soon as Connecticut school stopped I took the train and came up here and I didn't go back until school was starting again. I just loved it here, growing up in this culture of loss - full of stories. There were lots of wonderful old people. They… the great aunts and uncles who came calling. And… they were storytellers, they tended to be storytellers - more the men than the women - but my grandfather was the greatest storyteller ever, just superb, telling stories of the old times, stories of the blizzard of '88, stories of what… something funny that somebody said to somebody else. He was always talking, and I… I didn't want him ever to stop talking. And… but then when the cousins came, and the great aunts and uncles, that was entertainment. There was radio by the time I arrived here, and we listened to the news, but entertainment was telling stories to each other, and had been for a long time. When my grandfather and grandmother were young there was the South Danbury Oratorical and Debating Society. I found a membership list and so on, and this is how the young people, the teenagers and early 20s entertained themselves. I can't remember how often they met… it was only two miles from here but there were still more people living in the area.  But the young people would get together and they would have cider and doughnuts and coffee and they would entertain each other. First people would sing songs or people would play the piano, and my grandfather could never hold a tune at all, but there was something else… neither can I… but there was something else that he could do, he could speak pieces. That was the piece speaking world… I mean school was full of memorization and recitation, prize speaking day at… at the school was a big day and people would recite - well The Gettysburg address because it's easy because its short, but also the Thorn of Crowns [sic] address that William Jennings Bryan made famous - a great piece of political oratory - but they would also recite Little Boy Blue by Eugene Field, a very famous totally sentimental poem about a dying child. There was a great epidemic of poems about dying children, but of course children died a lot more often then than they do now.  But there were also funny poems and my grandfather, who was a very positive fellow, loved to laugh, and he… he memorized hundreds, literally hundreds, of story poems that were funny.  And probably the literary height of his poems was something like Casey At The Bat. He would recite that for me once or twice a year. There were also parodies of Casey At The Bat. In Casey At The Bat, Casey strikes out, that's the denouement, so it's a sort of a sad ending, sounds really sad… it's a mock, a mock heroic… but there were other ones where Casey came back 20 years later with grey in his hair, not in… revealing his name and becomes a volunteer when a player is hurt and hits a home run, and my grandfather preferred those. But there were others. There was a wonderful one which was really about racial discrimination as far as I can tell. It was called Lawyer Green that he used to recite to me. Lawyer Green was a boy who grew up just like you and me… grew up in a little town only his skin was green… his skin was green… so he was mocked in school for having green skin and he went off and became very successful and became a famous lawyer and came back to the town and they all said, 'Oh Lawyer Green, we were’, you know, ‘we were wrong about you', and so on. And every now and then when he was saying a poem to me, his voice would rise and fall a little more than it usually did and I would realize he was singing a song, it was the only way I could tell. And he had the old fashioned oratory of surprise - ahhhh! - like that, and so on. He would be milking a cow and keeping time with the meter but then he'd have to take his hands of the tits and raise them to show astonishment, or so… or whatever, and you know, I followed him around like a dog, and he loved it, I mean he adored it. He had three daughters, no sons, and now he had a grandson, and he'd talk to me about farming. I don't know… I don't think he ever had the dream that I would follow him as a farmer. He was too realistic. He knew that this kind of farm was dying out, and down the road, here Route 4, there would be farm after farm where there was one old man farming, and the kids were… after a while the older kids were off in the army - it was the war. But, they were off working in a hardware store, or trying the western plains of Vermont - not very far - and the kids did not stay behind to farm. I can't think of a single one who did. Well, I do, but there weren't very many. The… this was the culture of stories and of poems being said aloud. Nothing like the poetry I came to write - God knows - but there was a lot of language all along, in the stories… smart answers, twisting of language to make a smart answer, and so on. So that in many ways it was more of a sort of literary influence from here, certainly in topic, and in the… in the elegiac topic, but also in the concentration on language.

Something happened in Connecticut when I was very little that certainly also contributed to the elegiac in me, a sense of loss anyway, and maybe even before I became so intimately concerned with the losses in New Hampshire. When I was maybe in second or third grade, or something like that, I sort of lost my mother. She didn't go away but she went away in the house.  She… I had been the only child, and she had been doting. She was lonely I think, in this you know, alien world that she had moved to, and she paid a great deal of attention to me, and it was wonderful love. At night often when I was going to sleep, I think I would deliberately keep myself awake, and say, ‘Mom, I can't sleep’, in order to get her to come upstairs.  And she would lie down beside me on top of the covers and sing in my ear. In retrospect I realize she did not have much of a singing voice but - oh it was bliss. It was absolute bliss. She sang songs she had known as a girl: "Keep the Camp Fires Burning", several war songs, songs that she had grown up with, and it was lovely passing off into sleep that way. But in general she was enormously attentive. And then she began to fade away, to become distant. She lost a great deal of weight. Doctors said she had nervous indigestion, or they explored her for problems in her stomach. She lost an incredible amount of weight. As a young woman in pretty good shape she probably weighed about 125, 130, and as an older lady she got up to 158 maybe. But she got down to 68 pounds, and I diagnosed her. She had anorexia nervosa - I'm sure she did. Nobody thought about psychiatry in that culture, in that circle, at that time. Instead, they did… well one doctor I know put her on Phenobarbital all day long.  She was already sort of, withdrawn, and she was on that for quite a while, and I would come home from… she stayed in bed most of the time. I would come home from school, and she would be lying in bed, usually awake, but distant, vague, and all that love was gone. It wasn't, you know, replaced by anything mean or cruel or anything it was just evaporated. I saw… my father used to take me out to breakfast sometimes, and she was too weak to get up and make breakfast, and he’d take me to a diner, and… but he went to work all day, and I went to school most of the day, but when I came home there wasn't much of a mother there. She stopped shopping. She stopped going downtown. Not entirely, not all at once, but gradually. She didn't take me to movies any more, which she had done, or take me with her when she was shopping, and I know that I resented it and was hurt, and something was taken from me, that came back in a million ways. We… we were very close when she was very old, and very affectionate with each other, and when I had been sick at Exeter and came back she took care of me, and she was a doting mother, but I lost it there at a time when I certainly didn't understand - or for that matter nobody understood. She got better. I knew just a few years ago, I knew a recovering anorexic who had been down to that kind of weight, and near death, and she said, ‘So I decided to live’, and I think my mother decided to live. She also had another doctor - a whole series of doctors - and one of them said, go out, go to restaurants, have a drink. And that was the point at which my parents took to spending maybe three nights a week at a restaurant drinking scotch and soda- and a lot of scotch and soda… and she did gradually recover, but it took a long time before she was all back. I remember maybe five years after the initial period, one time when… oh, she was still vague a lot of the time. I… I don't think it was Phenobarb… I was playing ping pong with my father in the cellar, and a ball went off the edge of the table, and bounced right near her, where she was watching.  And my father said,’ Luce’ - her name was Lucy, wanting her to pick up the ball.  But she didn't notice, and I said, ‘She didn't hear you. She'll hear you next year’. And after a long pause, I heard her say later, ‘I didn't like that crack’. She was just so detached, vague, away.  And she came back totally, and became perfectly normal, and never had a recurrence of it at all, but again I see, I think that she went through a… a hard time of loneliness, feel… and feeling I think disloyal to her upbringing in New Hampshire. She took me up here with her a great deal, and during school vacation, sometimes when my father would be working and my mother would take me up here - before I started coming by myself and farming - she would take me up to the farm and be reunited with her parents and her sisters. I think she was very lonesome there… she was… in Connecticut, in the suburbs, she was mocked for her New Hampshire accent. She had a good one, she’d worked out how not to do it, but she tended to drink cocer-coler, whereas other folks were drinking coca-cola. And years later when she came out to California, she crossed the Sierrer Nevader mountains - that many R's added to the State of Nevada… for quite some… but when she was older, she talked New Hampshire all the way. Nobody was around to mock her anymore, at that point… to make fun of her. And she had trouble, as my father had trouble with his father, she had trouble with being disapproved of by my father's mother who was a stickler for things. My father's mother would come to the house and run a white-gloved finger on top of the door jamb where you couldn't see anything to see if it picked up any dust, and… she was checking her out. It was awful stuff - goodness me - she had reason to be unhappy down there.

 
 
Back home in Connecticut, I turned on the radio and listened to Bob Hope and Bing Crosby, but soon enough I became - it… it seems fated when I think about my youth - I became a literary type. But this began, in particular, I remember it beginning when I was 12. When I was 12… Oh! I said the cars… the houses only had one car, but there were trolleys and buses everywhere so people got in from the suburb of Hamden to the city of New Haven easily enough and we would take trolleys to shop and trolleys to go to the movies.  And I took when I was 12, to taking a trolley into New Haven on a Saturday afternoon to see a movie, and I loved horror movies. I loved Frankenstein and Dracula and The Wolfman and… and spin offs like Abbott and Costello meet The Wolfman [sic], whatever. The boy next door was a little older, said, ‘If you like this stuff, you ought to read Edgar Allan Poe’. Sure enough I'd never heard of Edgar Allan Poe, but my parents had a fancy book of the month club dividend. Every house had book of the month club, every house had the Reader's Digest... of Edgar Allan Poe's poems and stories and I started to read him and I thought he was absolutely marvelous.  It was weird and morbid and just what I wanted, just what I loved. So I set out to write like that. First time… we didn't have creative writing in kindergarten at that time… and the first time I remember writing anything at all, and I'm quite sure it was the first time, I wrote a poem which I can more or less recite - and will - of course, all my friends say that it's the best thing I've ever done, but this was a 12 year old:
Have you ever thoughtOf the nearness of death to you? It reeks around each corner, It follows you through the night, It follows you through the day, (I... I never say it the same way twice.) Until that moment when, In monotones loud, Death calls your name. Then, then comes the end of all. 
 
 
 
I've written so many death poems, and I began with one, and it didn't sound like Pou… Poe at all of course, and I love Pound’s… Poe’s - I write about Ezra Pound too… I loved Poe's sound when I was 12, and I got over that, but I'd never imitated it. But there was another book in my parents library. They were great readers. They read all the time. This was another gift of theirs to me, that I grew up realising that this is what adults did at night. They sat in chairs and read. So I wanted to grow up so I sat in chairs and read. But in their library they had a biography of Poe, by Hervey Allen called Israfel... a great big 800 page biography, and I read that, and at some point, I was still 12, I read that Poe was extraordinary because when he was only 14 he was reading Shelley and Keats. Well, I had never heard of Shelley and Keats, but there was a Shelley and Keats ‘collected collected’ - one volume - in the modern library as a giant, $2.45 cents and I saved up my allowance and bought it and read Shelley and Keats and began to try to write terrible romantic poems.

Have you ever thought of the nearness of death to you?
It reeks around each corner.
It follows you through the night.
It follows you through the day.
 
(I never say it the same way twice.)
 
Until that moment when, in monotones loud, death calls your name.
Then, then comes the end of all.


So I got some Shelley and Keats, with what comprehension I'm not sure, but began to write predictably some poems in early 19th century diction, which were terrible, and for a couple of years I wrote... I tried to write stories too, but I think mostly poems, and it was one of the things that I thought about doing.  Another thing I thought about doing was being an actor and I... I took part in all the school plays.  My voice was such that I was usually asked to be the announcer, speaker, anytime... and I thought of... the common thread was that I had to be something outstanding you know, whatever, it's a very common thread. The... Oliver Wendell Holmes said that the... the desire among adolescents or something... the desire to be extraordinary is commonplace and it truly is. Then when I was 14, doing both of these things, I had the lead in the high school senior play when I was a freshman, and by the time the Sophomore play came around, I took a minor part, turned down a major part, because I wanted to concentrate on poetry entirely, and there was one particular event that did that. I occasionally went to boy scouts, I had to take a bus or a trolley, to boy scouts and I... I never took to boy scouts much, I think I remained a Tenderfoot but it was a way to get out of the house and I did it occasionally.  And one night I was talking with an elderly boy scout, a 16 year old, when I was 14 and I was a freshman in high school, and we were sort of bragging at each other, just beginning to get to know each other, and I said that I had written a poem in study hall that day, and he said, 'You write poems?' and I said, 'Yes, do you?', and he, at 16, said 'It is my profession'. It's a wonderful thing. There is an old movie called Bonnie and Clyde where Clyde says, 'We rob banks'. Very cool. Very cool.  But I felt that that was like we rob banks. And he was a guy named Dave Johnstone and he was a nice guy and we started talking about poetry and he knew about modern poetry. He knew about TS Eliot and Wallace Stevens who lived just up the street in Hertford, Connecticut. We also had a textbook in high school where I began to find some modern poems, but it was Dave Johnstone in particular. I used to go see him, oh, maybe as much as once a week, to talk about poetry, and this was... he lived in New Haven, just a few miles from me, but because he was in New Haven, and Yale University was there, he knew some, say, 18 year olds who were literary guys at Yale.  So I actually got at the age of 14 - I looked old for my age - to hang around with some 18 year old Yale guys who were talking about poetry and I was full of hero worship for these people who wanted to be poets, spend their lives with poetry, and for the poets themselves, and again, I saved up my money, and I bought collected poems of TS Eliot in cloth for two dollars and fifty cents, and took it home with me. I still have it. It's in my study right here, and I annotated it at 14, and... where Eliot at the beginning of The Waste Land dedicates that poem for Ezra Pound, Il Miglior Fabbro, I wrote nertz, because I knew by that time that Ezra Pound was broadcasting for Mussolini to the American troops and I wrote, and misspelled being a 14 year old pretentious, you know, wrote... Eliot wrote, 'I show you fear and a handful of dust' and I wrote 'epigrammatic symbolism', misspelling both epigrammatic and symbolism.  And... at the same time I was cutting down my load in the school play. Coming... instead of rehearsing all afternoon, coming back, going up to my bedroom and closing the door, and writing poems.

I was, you know, writing terrible long poems and they would be... one was called Night Wanderer and it was about me wandering around the Haven at night, sort of a romantic figure of course. I... part of all this was I loved poetry... I didn't know much about it, of course, but I loved revelling in it, and reading it, and I think I came to writing  poetry most out of loving poetry, but there was another thing that is always there... I wanted to be attractive to the girls, and I tried being an athlete, which was sort of the best way but I was terrible. I was cut from the eighth grade team in baseball, and never bothered to go out for anything in high school... I was just a terrible athlete, and so instead I would be the romantic figure. I would be the actor or I would be the poet, and became a poet, and that was certainly a motive. A few years back I was out in Nebraska and some... in a high school and a kid asked me how I got started writing poetry and I told  about Edgar Allan Poe and Dave Johnstone, and a tall  blond boy said 'Didn't you do it to pick up chicks?', and I said, 'Oh yeah, I forgot about that, yeah, I forgot about that part'. But that was certainly part of it, and I went about high school being the flâneur. I invented a sentence, that I used to utter from time to time, just trying to be interesting, crazy, weird, and the sentence was, 'Dead people don't like olives'. And out of nowhere, silence, walking along  beside a girl, I would say, 'Dead people don't like olives'. I don't think it was very effective, really, but there was all that side to everything, and at the same time I was reading poems. In my... in the freshman English textbook, there were poems by someone called HD - the American Hilda Doolittle who wrote under her initials - and I loved them. And they are very beautiful imagist things, very Greeky, and very assonantal. In so many ways, my way into poetry has been the sound the poetry makes. Beginning with Poe, who sounded kinda vulgar, but going on to poets like Pound and like HD, and made very beautiful assonance, particularly deriving from... the parts I liked the best probably... I think derived more from Greek lyric poetry than from anything else... it's the most musical poetry in the world.

I went to high school for two years - it was a great big public high school - Hamden High. It was during the war and the teaching was probably exceptionally bad. The young teachers were off in the war or in war work, and I remember the algebra teacher who was a defeated, cynical man. He never graded our papers. He had us grade each others papers, and I always got A's, because the other students... we all gave each other A's, I suppose.  And my mathematics, or arithmetic and so on, has always been abominable. I... in Latin 1 and Latin 2... it was a time when everybody took Latin who intended on going to college... you had to... but Latin 1 was 45 students chanting aloud Amo, Amas, Amat and so on, and I took... Mind you I took my two years of Latin and I took my English, but I remember in English class, I was writing all the time at home, and in one English class the teacher was a librarian, very shy, frightened of people, and was pressed into service in the absence of anybody else and she had us, I think she was perpetually fatigued. There were40 odd in that class. She had us write two paragraphs the entire year - unbelievable. I was writing all the time. One thing's strange about... I see in retrospect, strange, about the poetry writing I was doing, was that when I had written some long poem about the night wanderer or whatever, I would immediately go back and start writing it over again, revising it. I say it seems strange in retrospect because the beginning poet... a poet at 14, or a poet at 18 or 19 is often satisfied with the first draft or even thinks well, it is what I said, it must be sincere - anything else would be hypocritical. Which is a totally narcissistic attitude toward writing. But I started revising right away, and I revised poems. I have no idea how many times, now it takes me forever, I mean it's probably 60 to a 100 mostly, drafts of a poem, but I began right away, and I always continued to do it. It was at that time in Hamden High School... 14, 15, when I decided that this is what I wanted to do the whole rest of my life... I was going to be a poet.  And at first I thought I would support it by writing fiction and it wasn't quite as crazy then as it is now because there were so many magazines with so many short stories but it was naive of course, totally. I did want from an early age to support myself by writing, by freelancing, and ironically, I mean it was very unrealistic but ironically I've been doing it for 30 years now. It just took me a long time to get there. I was 46 before I quit teaching.

After two years of Hamden High I went to a prep school - what we call prep school - secondary private school... boarding school, in New Hampshire, but way south of here, called Exeter... Phillips Exeter Academy. My father had... it came from my father totally... he had gone to the local public high school, and it had been a miserable time for him. He had no aptitude for mechanical things, somebody told his parents that a good thing for a boy to take in high school was mechanical drawing, so he took mechanical drawing and he was depressed and miserable and did badly. He was second shortest in his class, obviously trodden down, working for his father in his spare time, but then somebody else told his family that... they were becoming prosperous, it was 1920, and suddenly in 1920, if you were a prosperous self-made business man, your kids went to college... they hadn't known that. But to go to college he would have to go to prep school, take some language, so after four years graduating from high school, he spent one year at Cushing Academy in Ashburnham, Massachusetts, and that changed his life. He grew four inches in that year. He was happy. He took Greek rather than Latin, just to be different and continued with some Greek when he went to college, and he flourished in his classes. He loved history. He loved English, and went off to Bates College where he enjoyed himself. He majored in history, my mother majored in English, and that's where they...they met, but he went back to Cushing and taught for two years, and that it was that he had to give up the teaching which he loved, and go back to work for his father, in order to marry my mother and have me. I was always aware of it, and I couldn't quite be guilty for my existence.

My father going to prep school was everything in his life, and he'd always plotted to do the same thing for me. I would go four years to public high school, as he did, and then I'd go off for a postgraduate year at a prep school before going to college.  But when I was about to be a junior in high school it was 1944, and we all knew.. we didn't know the war was going to end soon, and I would be drafted after high school. I would have to postpone college and he wanted me to get the prep school in sooner, so during my Sophomore year he started to look around at prep schools.  And Cushing is quite a good prep school but its not known to be one of the best, and the ones that he'd heard of that were the best were the big middle class school, not old family, but good schools were Exeter and Andover.  And he always spoke of them in that order - Exeter and Andover - people tend to for  some reason. Andover is just as good.  But he got around to applying me for Exeter - he never got around to Andover.  And we had... I had to take entrance exams to get in, and we had a sense that my schooling wasn't very good at Hamden High, and I had to be examined in, I think, math and English, which was easy because I was fluent, and Latin. I took tutorial from a high school teacher, from a neighboring town in Latin, and I think the only reason I was allowed into Exeter at all is that he had worked through a particular passage of Caesar with me, which had turned up on the Exeter exam, and I don't think there was anything crooked but I recognized it, and I was able, more or less, to translate it, so I did get into Exeter.  And then Exeter, when I went there, I just turned 16 when I got there, was the hardest and most difficult time of my life, for... in many ways it was, but certainly for study and work... I had no idea how to read a book or take an exam or anything, so that I felt.. I was put in the slowest math class possible, and I kept flunking it, and I finally passed with a D- and I thought it was only a 48, which should have been an E+, but my math teacher may have been better at math than I was. I took that course. I took... in English I was put in the slow section and I was advanced up to higher sections quickly, although my first papers got C's and so on. Exeter was very difficult in grading, I mean it was grade deflation, so that one realized that a B was a good grade, and so on, but I certainly didn't get any B's at the very beginning of that class, and I was in... in perpetual fear of flunking out, being... going home in disgrace. The first term I flunked, there were two sort of mid-terms, and I was flunking for both of them, and got through with D-'s and C's by the end of the term, and so on. I went out for track. I was trying to remake my life. My father, when he went to Cushing and remade his life, ran track, and I had never been any good but I studied it, I went out for cross country which I didn't like, but I learned I could run fairly quickly so I made the team in the winter, not as a particularly good runner, but as somebody passable, maybe third or fourth in... in a given distance, and that was a moderate triumph for me. All the time I was writing poetry and I suppose the people who saw much of me knew that, but it wasn't generally known, and that math class I was... math was a matter of total anxiety for me, and the teacher was a very nice guy who was the football coach, and every time... I kept doing things like forgetting to bring my book, or forgetting my homework because I was anxious about it, and he had a punishment that he would inflict on people who made mistakes and the punishment was... I suppose the worst thing he thought he could ask an adolescent boy to do, was to write a poem.  So he kept making me write poems all that fall and I'd bring them in and he'd read them and laugh and so on, and then the Exeter Literary Magazine came out and it was full of my poems, and he could've been angry, I suppose, but he thought that was the funniest thing in the world. I think that's one of the reasons why he passed me - I gave him a story to tell.

I really disliked the social feeling of Exeter. It was all males and it was wartime, and a... and a little town... all males.  There was alot of bullying and a tremendous amount of conformity. I decided publicly not to conform. It was a totally republican school... I was... it was the end of my first year when Roosevelt died in office and the boys made a snake dance to celebrate Roosevelt's death,,, they all came from such republican families, and suddenly at the front of the dance somebody said, 'Oh my God, Truman', and they stopped dancing.  So I subscribed to the weekly version of the communist paper, The Daily Worker and when The  Worker arrived in my mailbox, I would take it down to the butt room where everybody gathered to smoke and open it up so that everybody could see I was reading The Worker. I mean I was not a very popular kid but I was certainly courting it as much as I could. And the great social event of the week - the only social event of the week - was a movie for the entire school in the gymnasium on Saturday nights, and I went once maybe, but then I stayed home, and I was all by myself- I had my solitude again. I was the only boy, at any rate, in the dormitory and I worked, I say I worked, I wrote on poems... I worked on poems while I was there, and I continued this total dedication to being a poet. I forgot to say earlier that even when I was 14 before Exeter, I had started sending poems out to magazines. I got plenty of rejection slips from The New Yorker and The Atlantic Monthly. One from The Nation came with somebody's note on it, saying if you really are 14... so I had been bragging about my age... you know if you really are 14, you're not so bad.  But just as I got to Exeter, a little magazine started to print some of my things, and the first ones I remember selling were poems written here about the farm, about haying... haying with my grandfather... this was the poetry place so much... I worked when I was in Connecticut, I worked when I was at Exeter, but up here, where... there were no other kids, where I could hang around with my grandparents and have some time alone in my room, I wrote poetry and I wrote about this... this place. I wrote about Summerholt. I wrote about the, you know, elegy of it... the old culture here, and those poems began to come out when I was first at Exeter when I was 16, and you know when I first published in a non school magazine, and so on, I thought... I was very excited... I thought I was about to get the Nobel prize or something.  But then I read the magazine more carefully and realized these weren't very good magazines, and maybe my poems were not very good either.

When I came back to Exeter for the second term of my first year, I had passed at the end of the first term, just barely, and I was on the track team, and things were looking up a bit, and then some bad things happened. I had progressed to, I think, three different classes in English, that were harder, but I heard that there was a... an elite class, 'English three special' for the brightest guys inthe school, and I decided I wanted to be in that, and my present English teacher said, 'That's fine, go talk to the teacher of three special. Maybe he'll let you in.' And I went and talked to him, and he was a man who was kind of a figure of fun. He was an... an apostle of clean living. He led kids during sporting period at chopping wood in the country and he was all for everybody being clean cut, and he was bright actually. He had done a PhD from Yale, and he was bright about literature, but he was a prig. He told me when I came to ask to get into his class that he loathed my poetry, that he had read it in a magazine.  And that was a challenge for me. He said that it was like EE Cummings and all that modern stuff and he didn't like it. This was an older faculty at Exeter at this time because of the war. There were lots of instructors off in the army and the English faculty, who could teach Shakespeare and Moby Dick, and most of them knew a hell of a lot about literature, tended to dislike all modern poetry. There was one guy there, a man named Leonard Stevens, who loved modern poetry, and I never had him as a teacher, but he and I could talk about it and that was a great saving thing for me. But Chilson Hathaway Leonard was the teacher of this special group and he told me he loathed my poetry, and did I want to be in the class anyway? He read over some themes I had done, and he said alright, you could be in. So, I took his class and I wrote a paper for him about a bar that my parents had taken me in for a couple of years - they drank quite a bit and I was with them - and I wrote about the drunks in the bar and so on, and he handed it back with some derisory grade, saying, this is not a subject for a young American to write about. And then I wrote another one about chasing wild heffers with my grandfather, and that got back with an A.  That was something for young Americans to write about, and there was a bit of culture, but the students were very bright... students are always more important than the teacher anyway, and it was... it was a good bunch. So one day he said he was going to give a free theme - we could do anything we wanted, and he really meant an essay, but I went to him and said I would like to submit poems. I was challenged. I wanted to convince him. And he said, 'You know what I think of your poetry?', and I said 'Yes', and he said, 'Alright, go ahead'. So I did. At the same time, the mid-term exams for the winter term came out, and I was flunking everything again, and I was cut from the track team, I think because of the grades. If you were flunking, you couldn't participate in varsity athletics. So it was just a dreadful time, just a dreadful time. And after I'd learnt I'd been cut, I went to the class where the free theme was going to be handed back.

And then this man did an extraordinary thing, and it has some importance in my life really.  He spent the entire class period reading aloud my poems to the brightest kids in the school, and saying sarcastic things about them, just sarcasm, mere sarcasm.  He also told the class - we did not know each other's grades - and he told the class that I was flunking.  And these guys were all taking special math classes, special physics classes... they were the generally bright people. And, at the beginning, as he'd read aloud a poem, he'd say something to dismiss it, they would laugh, and then they stopped laughing, it was just so extreme. I think it was 50 minutes, and he didn't do anything else but read through these sort of 20 pages of single space of poems, and ridicule. And he did say from time to time that he knew what it was like to want to be a poet, he'd wanted to be one too, and Hall was flunking because he was spending all his time on this nonsense. And we were gonna... he was doing this to shake it out of me, that's all. And I felt like tears in the class, but I didn't cry and these... the other students simply became very silent.  They were bright kids, but they were adolescent males at a prep school - they were not compassionate sorts, but as I left the room, two or three of them sort of touched me on the shoulder, or something... it was amazing. I got back to my room and howled with tears of rage, and swore that I would work harder on my poems than I had ever worked before. I don't know that I did, but I had... I had the motive of revenge going for me. And the story goes on, oddly enough, not forever, but it's... I think it's worth telling. I grad... I recovered, I learnt how to study. I began to get my B's. I... I got admitted to Harvard. I began to publish poems quite a bit. Then I began to publish professionally, and  I published my first book of poems when I was 27, and Exeter invited me back to give a poetry reading to the students.  And, fine... I remember driving into the town feeling the old terror coming over me, as I went back into the town, but of course I was glad to be asked and so on, and when I arrived, I discovered to my astonishment and some horror that they had has asked Chilson Hathaway Leonard to introduce me that night. Nobody knew what he had done except the other students in that class. I had been uncharacteristically silent about it. I hadn't talked about it to my parents, to my best friend. It was just so horrible, I shut up about it. I thought about it all the time, but... so people didn't know. What they did know was that he had come into the, you know, English coffee room grumbling about my terrible poems when I was a student, and then, whenever something  turned up in The New Yorker or The Atlantic [sic] or something, they would tease him about it, so it was something whereby they... they teased their friend, whom they were a bit irritated with in general anyway. And they thought it was funny.  And my book came out, my first book came out and got a lot of praise and then they asked me up to read so they teasingly got him to introduce me. Well, you know, I thought of getting up there and telling the story. I thought briefly... public revenge is always revolting and so I didn't do it... I just said thank you and read my poems and so on. A few years later - this story has one more episode - a few years later I was writing a piece for The New York Times Sunday Book Review about a poem by Wordsworth - the daffodils poem that everybody knows - in which I have a sort of unusual interpretation - I won't go into it, it's kind of fresh of me, but I think actually it's pretty valid, and talk about the relationship of... of daffodils and daydreams to gold and investment, and so on.  And at the end of the piece, I knew people would... some people who love that poem would hate my reading, and I said, well anybody who thinks this disturbs his reading of the poem, never really cared about the poem anyway they just remembered  some postcard that an English teacher handed around in a classroom. Well, I had no recollection. I thought I was making up this scornful thing, and I got a postcard of daffodils in the lake country, put inside an envelope, and Chilson Hathaway Leonard had written on the back of it, I suppose your fingerprints are still on it. Incredible. I still don't remember that he handed it around, but it would seem too extreme a coincidence. I believe I was taking unconscious revenge, and as long as revenge is unconscious, you can forgive yourself.

I was at Exeter for two academic years, but I took three years to do it. I didn't flunk, finally, but in my second year I took sick... I was very, very unhappy there. By this time, I was not so frightened of flunking out, but socially it was just awful, and I had no friends and felt very solitary, and of course I do realize I provoked the... my isolation, and cherished it, but I was unhappy.  And in January, perhaps, I began to have a migraine headache every day. I'd begun to have migraines a little in the fall, and then I had some pain in my head, sometimes all day, sometimes for 10 minutes, every day, and it was accompanied by a low grade fever, and that was in the infirmary for weeks and then the school asked my parents to come up and take me home.  So they did, and I was restored to my mother.  And she went down to the Yale Co-op and bought me books and I wrote a novel while I was in bed - it was wonderful. I did spend a week in New Haven hospital for observation - they tested me for brain tumors, and, oh, glandular problems, and so on. I think it was psychosomatic probably... depression, desire to get away... desire to be restored to the mother. She... she was a great nurse, took great care of me. But at any rate, at the end of the... when they couldn't find anything wrong with me, somebody finally said, throw... throw the thermometer away, and gradually the headaches stopped, and when I finally took my temperature again it was normal, and I went back the following year. But I did write a novel that year when I was 17. I remember, now I think it still exists somewhere, but it will be a terrible day if it ever gets printed. It was terrible, and I wrote another one when I was 19 actually, which was probably worse. And at that point, by the time I was 19, I decided, well, no prose for me. I'm no good at it. It'll be just poetry. But... I went back to Exeter for my senior year, and there were a lot of veterans there - there were 12 or 14 guys who had been in the army, the navy, the marine corps, who needed a postgrad year before college, and they changed the sense of the place for me. Two of them became the people I saw most often, and they were more grown up, and not - so much of Exeter came from... they were boys from prominent families in the Midwest, but an awful lot of Episcopal day school kids from New York, and... who came from rich families and so on, and it was just totally alien to my background.  And they all had brothers and sisters, I was the only child.  But when the veterans came back, I hung around with a couple of them, one of them is still my friend by correspondence, and that made the last year a lot easier, and it kind of changed the tone of the place as a whole. The sort of leaders before were in the presence of these people who had been firing guns in the Pacific 12 or 13 months earlier, and it sort of chastened them, I think. And I got into Harvard, and everybody got into Harvard from Exeter at that time. Not everybody, but an enormous number of people. It's hard now, but I got to Harvard and there I... I feel that I came home to my generation for the first time in my life.

When I went from Exeter to Harvard, my life really changed utterly. I still went that summer between Exeter and Harvard, I... I came up here and hayed with my grandfather, but I all... I had also found my first real girlfriend. I  always was going out with girls and girl crazy, and taking girls to dances and so on, but when I was in the hospital being looked at, I had met a girl who was called a candy striper. She just came in after her... after her high school and cleaned rooms a little bit, and she was... oh maybe I was 17 and she was 16, and I took to taking her out, and I had a three year romance with her that broke up while I was at... at Harvard. But it was at the beginning of my, sort of becoming a teenager, I suppose. But then I came to... to Harvard from... from this place, and I was in a freshman dormitory - a very old building called Matthews Hall - I had two roommates - one was from Andover, and another was from high school in Saginaw, Michigan.  And I was an Eastern liberal, and therefore I had to be kind to the guy who was so unlucky as to go to a Midwestern high school, and I did everything but help him across the street. I'm embarrassed to think of this... I spent 17 years in Michigan later as a teacher.  But, I didn't particularly get along with my roommates but I began to enjoy the company of guys my own age for the first time, and there was one amazing scene in the first week or so at school when all of the incoming freshman on our floor gathered in one room - I think it was my room, the room I shared with two other guys - and we were talking, and somebody mentioned poetry, which was doubtless me, but I don't remember that, and we... everybody in the room... nobody puked, nobody said, ah, fruit poet, the way I'd been called fruit poet in high school, and so on. Everybody quoted something that they'd remembered, and it... Kipling's If, or, I don't know, stuff you memorized in school, but everyone was willing to talk about it, and it just amazed me.  And then many more amazing things happened... I took some good courses. I took Greek. I took a philosophy course. I... I got out of freshman English - it was an exam and you could get out of it - and so I took a creative writing course, and the teacher was an American poet named John Ciardi, who died a few years ago, and who's not much spoken of now, but who was an up and coming poet at that time... it was exciting. He was beginning to publish lots of his poems in The New Yorker. He was a good teacher... he had a wonderful voice and he was frank but not cruel, and it was a wonderful class. There were a number of people in there who were talented, but the most astonishing figure was up front on the left, where there was a little guy who was outrageously witty and outrageously effeminate. He was a four year veteran of the navy named Frank O'Hara, and that's my first visitation with him. He was writing short stories at that time, not poems. He became a very famous poet, and then died relatively young in an accident while he was a curator at The Museum of Modern Art... Frank O'Hara. But he was terrifying because he was so witty, but he was very smart. And Ciardi admired him, liked him, and we all got together. That was of some importance. I was with people who were writing, they wanted to be writers, for the first time. People my own age, that is.

Then I went out for The Harvard Advocate. The Harvard Advocate is the literary magazine at Harvard, and it's been around since the 1860s. It published TS Eliot when he was young. It published all sorts of people, EE Cummings published there, Malcolm Cowley, Wallace Stevens, the... Frost was briefly at Harvard but he never published there. It was probably beneath him... I don't know, but I... you tried out to become a member of the editorial board, and I tried out in my second term. First term, I didn't know what college was going to be like, and I didn't want to be confused, so... it was easy compared to Exeter. The grades were much easier, and so on.  And so I tried out for The Advocate, and trying out, you came to the organization's building... a big room,,, and mixed with the other editors and talked literature. You also read manuscripts for them and made your comments and they could read your comments and so on... they were judging you, and the first night I was there, in February of 1948, I met the man who's the poet Robert Bly, who has been my best friend now for, what is it, going on 57 years.  Just last week I was out in Minneapolis doing a series of platform events called Literary Friendships, run by Garrison Keillor, the great American radio host for A Prairie Home Companion, and Bly and I were on the stage reminiscing and poking fun at each other and so on for an hour and a half, and later this will become a radio programme.  But I met him, and he was an austere looking figure at that time... very skinny, in a three piece suit... he's been very flamboyant for the last 40 years, but he wasn't then. He was in a brief Harvard man mode... he didn't open his mouth much, and didn't find much to praise in the world. At Harvard, you said of somebody, he's not very bright, or he's rather bright. I gave it a little Oxford in my accent there, but Oxford had some similarities.  But at any rate, he was very bright, and we had a wonderful time. We'd be talking about Robert Lowell who had just published Lord Weary's Castle a year earlier, or Richard Wilbur who was publishing his first book maybe that year, The Beautiful Changes, and we both knew the poetry cold, and we both knew Yeats very well. We talked about the poets that we were fondest of, and when I came back another time, I went to find him and talk to him and soon enough, I think by that summer we were hitchhiking together and starting a correspondence.

We went hitchhiking together - kind of a disastrous hitchhiking trip together - but the friendship endured, and we began to write letters to each other, and I think there's supposed to be something like 20,000 letters - that is 10,000 each, back and forth. He's a great letter writer, and I'm notorious for writing lots and lots of letters.  And in the letters we'd show each other our poems. I've said I'll know if either one of us has ever published anything without showing it to the other first. We don't always approve of course, I mean we don't always agree with what the other says, but we've helped each other a lot, and each of us has words in the poems of the others.  When I went to Oxford and met Dylan Thomas and Vernon Watkins, I discovered that grown-ups did this too... they had lines in each other's work, but I though it was just us. And Bly was my closest friend there, and in all... all in all is my closest friend forever, but there were other remarkable people around at the time.  Adrienne Rich was at Radcliffe in the same class, but because of the politics of the time, she could not be on The Advocate [sic] because she was female, however, we did publish her in The Advocate - we could do that.  And we saw her and talked with her. It was Bly who found her one time at a mixer over at Radcliffe and said he'd met this girl from Baltimore, father's a surgeon, knows all about modern poetry, and I met her later, and in fact we double-dated. Adrienne was my date, and Bob Bly had a Radcliffe friend of hers and we sat in a beer hole and drank beer. A few years ago I met the... Bob Bly's date again for the first time in 50 years, and I said, 'What did we talk about those nights?'  And she told me, she said, 'You and Adrienne and Robert read your poems, or said your poems'.  So she was our audience... very important. She was a very bright, lovely woman. But... anyway the friendship with Adrienne actually ripens later, not then when we were undergraduates, but she was another one... there were so many of us who went on to publish so many books, who all knew each other at that time. Frank O'Hara was not on The Advocate, but he knew everybody who was. John Ashbery was an Advocate editor before me, and so was Kenneth Koch, and, who else? Well later, Louis Begley, the novelist, and Harold Brodkey, the novelist were there. I'm afraid I'm leaving out one of the poets.  But anyway, O'Hara, Ashbery, Bly, Koch, Adrienne Rich and me...
[Q]  Was it Ginsberg?
No, he was at Columbia.  It was a great gang and we didn't all love each other and we quarreled, but that was fun... the competition was strong. Half of us were veterans of the war... Bly had been in the navy, and so had... had O'Hara. Koch was in the army. Ashbery, and Adrienne and I were too young, and had not been, but those of us who were younger I think learnt by competition with the elders also. We would... when we were accepting poems for the magazine, we took ourselves very seriously... nobody was printed because he was a favorite. We would stay up at Editorial Board meetings, arguing until two, three in the morning about what poems were good enough to print in The Advocate.  And that's very self-important, and I don't regret it for a moment... we were taking it seriously, we were taking poetry seriously. We were arguing taste. We were learning by competing. It was wonderful. And The Advocate was one of those centers of my undergraduate life. I had wonderful classes but I also had tutorial with a couple of very good tutors, but best of all was probably the other students at The Advocate or in the dining hall, where a kind of spirited bull session was constantly going on, and yeah, we'd look for trouble. I remember taking my tray and pushing it up to a table full of musicians... there was a talented organist, there was a flutist who became a musicologist and I put my tray on the table, sat down, and said, 'Music is immoral... is immoral'.  And we were off, we were off... it was a wonderful time. There were bad moments... I broke up with my girl from high school, and oh, had a series of dates and adventures... all of which turned out to be disasters. I met there my first wife, whom I married later. I'm not going to talk about that marriage... it ended in divorce after 15 years, but it was there that I found her.  And as I went on to Harvard, things became easier for me. With... when at Exeter, C had been a good grade, but I think I only got one C at Harvard. I found out you don't have to get C's at Harvard, and I was terrifically tunnel vision... I majored in English, and oh, took it easy on myself with the required distribution... you had to take something in science... I took something very easy, and so on. But within English, I took almost entirely poetry... I skipped prose, and I never took a course in music. I never took a course in art, and just a few years later I wrote a book about the sculptor Henry Moore. I did... I began in my last year... year and a half to look at pictures more, to broaden out more, to go to jazz clubs a lot in Boston, and so on, but, it was in general, an enormously happy time. With The Advocate and the dining hall at the center of it really... is great friendships, great conversation, that went on and on.

By the time I was a junior... senior... I began to get more ambitious academically, or... I was ambitious from an early age to write poems and that didn't get any less. It got more if anything.  But the poets that I paid attention to were changing. I'd fallen in love with Hart Crane while I was still at Exeter I think, and he followed me to Harvard, but in gentle... I went from one poet to another, like a fickle suitor, falling in love, imitating, and... not purposely imitating, but necessarily imitating, and then finding somebody else.  And while I was at college, there were a couple of living poets for the first time, especially Robert Lowell and Richard Wilbur, who were older than me, but not that older than me, who took over... but also Yeats. I wrote my senior thesis on Yeats, and I... when I became a teacher, I taught Yeats all the time. I still read him. I still love him, but I'm no longer so concentrated on him at this point.  But he took over a great deal at that point, and as a result, in my first book, you can find traces of an Irish brogue from time to time... I can... I can hear him.  But when... I sort of took over The Advocate, and ran it, and other things... publications, and so on... I began to get ambitious for what I would do next. At some point, when I decided that I could not support myself as a novelist, I thought, oh, I'll be a teacher. It was a time when poets were just beginning to be teachers. Now, it's... oh for many decades now, it's assumed that that's how you're going to make your living, as a teacher, but that was beginning at that time.  And I thought I would do a PhD in English, and become a teacher, and that would give me time by, oh, the variety and the schedule, you can... you can work on poetry now, and then attend to teaching otherwise. It's ... it's not 9 to 5, not in college teaching which is what I wanted to do. And so I... I had that, but then I began to get more ambitious, and I thought maybe I can get a fellowship after Harvard.  And I was... didn't get the idea until it was too late to apply for a Rhodes to Oxford, and I applied for only one that might take me to Oxford... something called a Henry Fellowship. It's English money, and at that time it paid for four students from anywhere in England to go to Harvard and or Yale, and four students from the United States to go to Cambridge or Oxford  So I applied for the Henry, although my grades... there were sort of straight A kids who were applying for these things, and I was mostly A's by this time, but my record as a whole wasn't that good, but they didn't just go for grades either. I was interviewed for the Henry, and I think I was interviewed because one teacher on the board of interviewers had been my teacher in a class where I had done very well, and so he said, 'Let's interview him'. And I came into the interview feeling competitive and fresh, and happy, and just talked as I would talk to undergraduates probably - competitively, and so on. I remember saying that... the question was about the reception of poetry at the moment. Time magazine had just put Eliot on the cover, and I said, 'Well that is a nice sign'. It was because of The Cocktail Party, but, at any rate, it was nice to see old Eliot on the cover of the Time, and then I said- but then they ruined it all by putting Christopher Fry on the cover later. Christopher Fry at that time was an English playwright who wrote in verse, and was very popular- you don't hear much about him now- he wrote a play called, The Lady's Not for Burning, and so on. I didn't like his work at all, and when I said this about him being on the cover of Time, ruining the Eliot cover, somebody said, are you a snob about Christopher Fry?, and I said, no, and I quoted lines, and bad metaphors. I could go on and on, arguing as I would at The Advocate or at the dining room table, and I was perfectly forthright about it. I came out of the interview, and was walking around and thinking, oh, I was too fresh, I talked to much, and I ran into a guy who has become a professor of English since, who was junior 8 Phi-Bet, which meant all A's for every course he took, and he had been interviewed after me, and I said, what'd they ask you about?, and he said, Christopher Fry, and oh, well that was because I'd just talked about him, and I said, what did you say about him?, and the guy said, well I said that I thought that he was a promising talent who might indeed develop into a considerable figure of contemporary literature. You know, I thought, that's what they wanted to hear, not what I said, but I was wrong- what they wanted to hear was what I said. I got the Henry and he didn't.

I applied to Cambridge, because I was still thinking of... I suppose, Leavis, and of Cambridge as being in the forties, a stronger literary place, but the other three guys who got Henrys were all scientists, and so they all went to Cambridge, and  I said, 'OK, Oxford's fine'. And so I wound up at Oxford, and I wound up in Christ Church, because the dean of Christ Church was an ex-Henry fellow... he was Canadian, and he was having to do with the distribution of Henry fellows in... at Oxford, and so he picked Henrys for his college.  And, it was a good thing, because Balliol had about 80 Americans in it - very, very bright... famous names now, more or less - but they tended to gather together, they tended to eat together, and so on. Christ Church was 530 students, and there were only 12 Americans, and we knew each other, but knew necessarily we were put into an alien milieu.  And Christ Church was more alien than many of the other colleges would have been, because it was Eton, and Harrow, and Winchester, and so on. It was the remnants of the posh universe, and it was... there were a lot of fox hunters, people ran to the hounds and so on. It was really alien, and I loved it... just for how different it was. I had never been out of my country until that summer when I went over early after graduation, and was here in New Hampshire only one day that year... but I went over and traveled in France, and Italy, and Scotland, went up to the Edinburgh Festival, went to the Festival of Britain and I saw my first, big, large scale Henry Moores out of doors there, and was very impressed.  Went to the theatre a good bit. This was a time in London when you could stand in line, and... and have a seat way high up in the theatre for 35 cents, two and six, be a few rows down for 50 cents, three and six, it was amazing.  And I saw Donald Wolfit do Tamburlaine at The Old Vic. I saw Peter Ustinov do The Loves of Four Colonels. I saw The Lyric Review, which was very funny. I can remember plays that I saw in that first few weeks just before I went up to Oxford.

It was also there, before I went up to Oxford, that I first met TS Eliot at Faber & Faber. I had had a connection with him earlier, slightly, because while Robert Bly was still running The Advocate [sic], we had, without his permission, reprinted all his undergraduate poems in order to sell copies of the magazine... we were in debt. And we not only reprinted them, we misprinted them. This was of course before photocopy, and Bly set two of the drunker editors to type them out of old bound volumes of The Advocate. There were, I don't know... seven or eight poems by the young Eliot. The... the young Eliot began by writing about how flowers come in the spring and they wither in the fall, but by the... by the end of his four years, he was writing, 'Romeo, grand sérieux, beneath a bored but courteous moon'. He had discovered Laforgue... wonderful transformation. And Eliot wrote a very angry letter to The Advocate, and by that time I was running it, so I had to answer the letter. At the same time, this is in my senior year, I guess, I was asked to edit an anthology of the juvenilia of famous men from The Advocate, including of course, Eliot. I mean without Eliot... nothing. So I had to write him back and apologise for this unauthorized and misprinted reading, and ask him for permission to... to reprint them.  And I wrote him a fawning, apologetic letter, and he wrote me back, beginning, 'Mr Hall, I wish that you would date your letters'. And, I've dated every letter since, you know. But... he then he had come to The Advocate before I had left, for a cocktail party after a reading... someone had told him I was coming up to Oxford, and he sought me out and asked me to come see him at Faber on the way to Oxford.  Which was amazing, but he was a very kind man to me certainly. So, when I was in London waiting to up to Oxford, I wrote him a note at Faber. I was staying at a... Tavistock Hotel... terrible hotel right near Faber & Faber, and the British Museum, and he wrote me a note, to drop around one afternoon, at three o'clock, and to send him some poems.  So I sent him some poems, and agreed to come by, and he had made a mark on... you know a pencil mark or two on pages of poems... keep this one, and so on, not very much.  But we talked for an hour, and I was totally boring, because I was so overwhelmed by being in the presence of the great Eliot, whom I had been reading while I was 12 years old... trying to read... when I was 14... and who was the king of the mountain so much, as a poet.  And I'm sure I was totally boring, but he knew what I was going through.  And we talked about... he talked about our literary generations, as if I had one.  And he talked about the poetic drama... we talked a little about that. I don't know what I said... I'm sure I didn't say anything intelligent.  But then after an hour, he scraped back his chair a little, and I pretended it was my idea, and I leapt up to go, and he lingered in the doorway with me, waiting to say the final words.  And he said, 'Let me see, 40 years ago I was going from Harvard to Oxford... now you are going from Harvard to Oxford. What advice may I give you?' And, I just waited for this incredible,  historic, moment that I'd be recounting to Peoples Archive a hundred years later.  And with a comedian's exact pause, he said, 'Have you any long underwear?', which was incredibly funny, but I didn't know it was at the time. I said, 'No, no, shall I get some?' So on the way back to the hotel, I bought long underwear. And six months later I realized that was funny, that was very funny.  And he was like that... I saw him... when I... I saw him many times again, when I had stopped being so anxious, and was actually present when I was with him, and I heard him do that kind of old possum joke.  He didn't care whether you thought it was funny or not, it was just, it was a wonderful line, a wonderful line.  He was a dear man, so, when I was at Oxford, I saw him maybe once a year, twice a year, and when I came back to England I did... and finally, many years later, after his second marriage, I did The Paris Review interview with him, that's the only formal interview, but otherwise we just talked. One time I was in his office and there was a great picture of Groucho Marx on the wall together with Marianne Moore and Charles Williams, and a few others.  And I noted Marx, and he said, 'Would you like to meet Groucho Marx?', and I said, 'Yes', but it never happened... it would have been an encounter I would love to have been talking about.

Then I went up to Oxford, and took the train up to the town, and asked the taxi driver to take me to Christ Church.  And when I arrived at Tom Tower, there were two gentlemen, as I thought, dressed all in black, with black bowlers on, who immediately grabbed my suitcases. And... they were elderly folks, and I thought, no, I should carry the suitcases. I didn't know the rules. It took me a long time to learn the rules. They did take me to my rooms... Meadow Buildings four, overlooking Christ Church meadows, and when I got into my room, the young man... a man older than me, quite young looking... came to me and said, 'Good afternoon sir, I am your servant, sir'. And again, I wanted to say, 'No, you're not, take it back, don't say that'. I'd never been out of the United States, and of course, Oxford... this was England of 1951, which was already changing considerably, but Oxford less than other places, and Christ Church less than the rest of Oxford, so that it was still kind of holding on to the... the Brideshead mode or model at that time.  And... oh, I made all sorts of social errors, but I came to love Oxford also, and to have a wonderful time there.

I felt very strange at Oxford at first, never having traveled out of the country, except a little bit that summer.  And in that society of Wykehamists and so on... but I had a wonderful time finally and got to know them... got to know lots of people. At the beginning, I felt very lonesome. I would go to hall... I wouldn't see anybody otherwise much, and if I sat down and asked somebody to pass the salt, it seemed as if somebody was always rude in answering me.  And it's just the Eton rag as we called it and so on. I mean being rude was kind of a language, that's all.  And there were frequent remarks about American habits, and this's and that's you know, but it was nothing... nothing to worry about. The thing they were suggesting to... being more time in the vast prosperity of America, and one heard about that of course, all the time. Everything was so cheap in England to me, at that time... no longer... but I loved pubs and pub food.  And, for four years at Harvard I had gone to lots and lots of lectures, and in two years at Oxford, I never attended a lecture. I... I did a BLitt not a BA, because... well I had a BA... but it would have been totally different to have the Oxford BA, but I wanted to write about something, and I wanted to... to have a good time and to write poems all I could, and it was really the easiest thing. I spent two years there, which was the minimum for a residency for a BLitt, but I actually only worked on it from the first note to the final draft for about 18 weeks out of that whole time. I didn't work at all the first year, except that you had to take a qualifying exam. A qualifying exam's pretty ridiculous, but it just meant that you were serious... you wanted to take it... you weren't just hanging around Oxford.  And there was a three hour exam on Locke, Berkeley, and Hume. I've never been any good at philosophy, but I managed to get by. I got only one reprimand in my oral, where a philosophy Don said that I had called Samuel Johnson an intelligent man, in which case I was of course mistaken. I was quoting Johnson about kicking a stone to refute Berkeley's idealism, you know, that's all.  And then for the other three hour exam, you had to do sources, methods, and authorities in the study of oh... Elizabethan literature, 18th century literature, or 19th... the 19th was the closest so I took it. And what I did was read a book about the history of the Macmillan company [sic], and recite it. The main essay was, you know, that was one of the subjects you could take... so it was mickey mouse really. And that's all I did. I went to parties. Oxford was the greatest party school I'd ever known anything about. At first, there weren't any, but then I published poems in The Isis - the weekly magazine there - and I discovered that poetry could be a means of social climbing at Oxford. I was immediately invited to parties all over the place, and oh, I remember the first party I went to, right after it came out, and I had fallen down and hurt my knee - I had a migraine that knocked me down.  And my scout had, of course, found me a cane, so I came to the party with a cane, and sat down with my leg extended, and a very attractive woman, named Anne Younghusband who was engaged to Simon Broadbent... I loved their names... came to me and said, 'Do you need that cane, or is it affectation?' And that was the kind of thing, of course, that was all over the place, but by this time, I was innured to it... I didn't, I wasn't... didn't have feeling... it was just the way we talked. There were bottle parties all the time, and I, oh, you know, I went to those straight gin parties, and missed the time the gates close.  Had the classic experience of climbing in, fell into a drainage ditch. Two policemen pulled me out, and took me around to wake up the night porter and let me in, and the policeman said, 'This man says his name is Donald Hall', and the night porter said, 'So he is, so he is', and let me in.  And the next morning when the scouts were serving breakfast, they were all sort of giggling that word had gotten around. Shortly thereafter, I won the Newdigate prize. The disciplinary officer of Christ Church was oh, Trevor-Roper - The Last Days of Hitler man, and he had to see me about climbing in, but he didn't fine me, and when I won the Newdigate, he wrote me a note saying he had been regretting not fining me, but now that I had won the Newdigate for Christ Church...

The Newdigate is Oxford's annual poetry prize, and it goes for a... they commission a poem with a certain title, and my year... the year before me it was Captain Carlson who was a newspaper name, because he'd stayed with his ship when it was sinking. My year, it was Exile - that fashionable, existential term - and I was out of my country for the first time, and so I took the title and ran with it. I was only slightly disconcerted by the notice that was posted for the exam which said... I doubt that they do it anymore... the poem need not be written in heroic couplets. The Newdigates were always about 300 lines, and the longest poem I had ever written was 48, so I stretched myself. During Christmas vacation, and again at Easter time, I spent the six week vacation in Paris having a wonderful time in a little hotel.  And every morning I would wake up and the petite bonne would bring me coffee and croissant, and I would lie in bed and work on this poem all day - well not all day, all morning.  And I would begin to think about what I'd have for lunch and supper during the day. The afternoon I would usually go to a museum. This was in Paris, but that's where I wrote the poem  called Exile, which won the Newdigate, and caused a lot of stir. It caused a stir largely because the Chancellor's Essay Prize [sic] went, at about the same time, to an American, and an American was for the first time elected president of the Oxford Union, so that - Yanks take over Oxford you know... the scene.  And Time magazine wrote a piece about it, printed our pictures, and it kept me out of the Korean War, curiously enough. I had... the Korean War had started when I was a senior, and I was examined and about to be drafted, but students got deferred and then graduate students got deferred, and I was at Oxford, but there were Americans who were rich and went in and enrolled at the Sorbonne and didn't do anything, and got a left-wing professor to sign for them.  So that the Director of Selected Service in America issued a ruling that only Fulbright scholars and Rhodes' would be exempt if they were at a European, foreign  university. Without my knowing it, my father took a copy of Time magazine down to the Appeals Board... to the Draft Board in New Haven, and they exempted me from the draft.  So I stayed on for a second year, instead of going to Korea.

I was a little older than the other undergraduates, or than the undergraduates, and I eventually felt very confident and I came to be sort of dominant in the poetic scene at Oxford. I became literary editor of The Isis, the weekly magazine, and editor of a quarterly magazine that the Poetry Society put out, and head of the Poetry Society, and I edited the annual Oxford poetry anthology, and so on. I was... I was doing it all, and enjoying every moment of it. There were lots of poets at Oxford. For most of them, poetry was when they were young. Oh, there was a statement... To be a poet when you are 20 is to be a poet, to be a poet when you are 30 is to be a poet, oh... is to be 20... sorry... To be a poet when you are 20, is to be 20, to be a poet when you are 30, is to be a poet. Well, you know, from the age of 14, I wanted to be a poet. I wasn't being 14, and there was a lot of attitude toward poetry which was very goopy at that time... they hated the notion of technique, and therefore I exaggerated everything about technique, being very American.  And Christopher Ricks, who's a very good critic... who... later a Don at Oxford, he was an undergraduate then. I never knew him - he came up after me - but he heard what people were saying and apparently I was quoted as saying... 'You gotta fake it, but you gotta fake it good'. Tough guy... you know that sounds like imitation Theodore Roethke actually who played the tough guy a lot, and so on.  And I don't deny that I may have said something like that, just to shock them, you know. They were all so flowery about poetry in the spirit, and not revising and all that stuff. Elizabeth Jennings was there then. She was a little older. She'd graduated and was living in town, and she was publishing and doing some good stuff.  But the poet I met there whom I continue to admire enormously who is younger than me, is Geoffrey Hill. I think he's the best English poet alive.  He's a marvelous poet - he's very difficult - and just... he lives in Boston now, teaches at Boston University and... he has an intense following but not a very broad one. He's published now, I don't know how many - at least a dozen books or so. He's very, very good, and I met him at the end of my first year. He was a policeman's son, and I published him in The Isis, and invited him to a Poetry Society sherry party at my digs... no my rooms, I still had rooms then.  And, when I told him that I admired his poem, he sort of shuffled his feet, and bobbed his head, and sort of figuratively touched his cap. I thought he was mocking me, but he wasn't at all. It was as if he was meeting Prince Philip and getting praised or something. But then, my second year there, I saw a great deal of him. We saw each other almost every day... talked poetry all the time. I had a car then and I drove him to his 21st birthday at his parent's house in a little town in Worcestershire called Bromsgrove, where his father was the constable in the town. That friendship with Geoffrey was enormously rewarding, and he was just wonderful. I became editor of a series that was rather important - The Fantasy Poets. It had started the first year I got there, and I was printed in the series, but the editor of it was de facto the head of the Poetry Society.  So I took over the editorship, and I asked Geoffrey, before I really knew him, that time when I first met him, if he had enough poems to send me. You had to have six poems, I think, for the little tiny pamphlet, and I was back here in the summer, at this house, when his... an envelope arrived from him, which included a wonderful and famous poem called Genesis, and other excellent early poems. He was 20 years old, and I read those poems, I could not believe it, and I... I remember waking up in the middle of the night, turning on the light to read them again - I could not believe that they were so good. So I printed him in The Fantasy Poets series, and other people. And eventually all of these little books got... little pamphlets got reviewed, and so on, and Todd [sic] printed Thom Gunn, and... not Ted Hughes. Ted had not yet dawned at that point. I can't remember whom else I printed.

I came back home and got married - my first marriage - and then lived out on Banbury Road in digs with my wife, as a second year, when I began taking notes. I wrote a thesis... I wanted to write about prosody. Eventually I intended to write about the prosody of modern poetry. I never did, but I wanted to do background to it, and so I had a supervisor called Catharine Inge, who was the only Don at Oxford in English who was interested in prosody, and we arrived at a... something I could handle, which was to write about 18th century prosodists in England, and there were about 10 of them that I wrote about, including a wonderful musical prosodist - I think he's wrong - but incredibly original, named Joshua Steele.  And I worked at the Duke Humfrey's Library at the Bodleian... the oldest part of the Bodleian. You'd come there and order books and it would take them about two hours to deliver them, and so you went and drank tea for a while, and came back.  Or I went down sometimes - Bodleian didn't have all the books - to The British Museum, and worked in that circular reading room, which was great fun.  But I wrote it and we didn't... didn't go abroad that... yes, we did that Christmas time. That Christmas time, we drove across the Channel to France, to Austria, and then out through the Russian sector into Yugoslavia. We were going to Greece... we drove to Greece, and in Yugoslavia there were no real viable roads. We had to forge streams in our Morris Minor, and it was astonishing - we got stuck a couple of times. People who happened to be working in the fields, and they lifted it up - it was a very light car - and carried it, and so on. And then we drove down the length of Greece to Athens, and coming back, I put it on a boat at Piraeus, and took it over to Brindisi. I didn't want to drive back. When we arrived in Skopje in Southern Yugoslavia, we went to the travel bureau which we had to go to, and they said, 'Yes, and you came from Dubrovnik', and I said, 'No, we drove down from Niš', and they said, 'No, that's impassable'. I said, 'Yes but nobody told us!' We drove down from Niš, and it was a wonderful trip, and I wrote about that too of course, and came back and finally got down to work on my thesis, and got it done, and graduated.

All the time I was... I was working on poems. I was beginning to publish. Toward the end of my first year at Oxford, about the Newdigate time, I sent some poems to John Layman who was doing a BBC radio programme... Third Programme called, New Soundings, and he had recently published the first poems that anybody had ever heard by Thom Gunn, who was over at Cambridge.  And I sent stuff in, and he took one of mine, and it was the first time I ever received a paycheck for my... for a poem. And then I began to sell to American magazines too, while I was at Oxford first, and then after graduation we returned. At Oxford I had applied... while I was there, my last year... I had applied for graduate school at Harvard to do a PhD, and I didn't really want to do one... I wanted to spend another year on fellowship somewhere.  So I applied for a Fulbright, and I did not get one.  But also, at... in Oxford, I had... I had met an American who had had a creative writing fellowship at Stanford University, California. He told me about it. I applied for that. Anything to avoid graduate school, and I got it. So we came back to America, and drove across the country, with my wife pregnant with our first child, out to Stanford.  And I spent a year at Stanford working with the American critic... new critic, Yvor Winters, and I've written at length about working with Winters. He was a strange and powerful man - I learnt a great deal from him - and, my first child, my son Andrew was born in April, out at... in California. While I was out there that year, that year at Stanford the year after Oxford, I finally began to publish a lot. Every time I sent poems out to a magazine, they'd take something, and it was an amazing year - it was very exciting. I felt that heady thing of early success. Somebody wrote me that my letters sounded like press releases, and they were right, you know. And, I tried to tone myself down a bit, but, I wrote a poem when Andrew was born, which was published in The New Yorker under the title of First Child, and it is the poem that, probably of all my poems, that has been more reprinted in anthologies. It's called, My Son, My Executioner, which is the first name... first line of the poem. I was 25 when I wrote it, and in the poem I think I feel my age considerably at that time - I've been feeling it all my life - but The New Yorker took another poem, and then many other magazines did.

At Harvard, there's something called the Society of Fellows. It was started in the early '30s at Harvard. It's quite... it's quite like certain fellowships in England, and I gather some in France as well, where young men, and now it is young women as well, are given three years of absolutely free time.  That is, you don't teach and you don't take courses formally, and you follow what you can do, and it is a Society of Fellows, as it... with certain fellowships at All Souls, you can be elected to do almost anything.  And as a Society of Fellows often they found candidates who where combining disciplines in ways that a particular department wouldn't handle.  When I... my first... there was... a kind of high table every Monday night, at the Society of Fellows, and the first night I was there, I turned to the man on my left, a saturnine young fellow, and I said, you know, 'What are you in [more or less], what's your field?' And he said, 'Mathematical linguistics'. And I said, 'I'd never heard of that'.  And there was a good reason why I'd never heard of it... that was Noam Chomsky.  I had never heard of Noam Chomsky, but everyone has been hearing about him ever since, and he had invented the field. It was a remarkable bunch, I had... when I was an undergraduate, I had known Richard Wilbur, the poet, who was a bit older than me, and he had been a junior fellow, and that's what gave me the notion that that would be a wonderful thing to do.  Three years to read and write, nothing else - you didn't have to go to the dinners even. The dinners were great fun to go to... oh I had dinner with Vladimir Nabokov one night, and I had... Mr Eliot came once a year, every spring, and the guests were remarkable. There were senior fellows - 10 - mostly professors, who elected junior fellows who were in residence, perhaps, 20 or so, so there was 30 there, but then people would bring guests. Edmund Wilson came to dinner twice a year, but it wasn't just the literary ones... I met the scientists too.  And one night when I was about 27, I introduced two Nobel Laureates to each other. I knew one of them because he was a senior fellow - Ed Purcell - a physicist, and then the other was Linus Pauling - a chemist who was visiting - so I introduced them... it was very heady stuff. The other junior fellows were often remarkable - Marvin Minsky of MIT and artificial intelligence was in my group, but there were others who've gone on in physics, and logic, and mathematics, musicology.  While I was there, the same year I was there, another poet was elected, John Hollander, and he and I have stayed in touch ever since. It was a marvelous time - three years - I worked mostly at home. I could have an office if I wanted one, to work in, but I did have that three years of absolutely unfettered time. I worked on poetry every day, mostly on poetry. I made gestures toward writing about the prosody of modern verse, but I never got very far with it.

My three years at the Society of Fellows were wonderful. I read everything... I wrote so much. I published my first book, but they were mixed. They were... there was a great big mix about one thing in particular. I'll just say by... by way of a footnote here, that I was writing a great deal, I was publishing... I no longer like many of the poems I was doing then, and... and like some earlier ones more. I got too clever, and I put that partly on the extreme cleverness of the people I was among all the time. And my poems were not so emotional. They, oh... were sometimes more conceptual, and tricky, and right now, I'm putting together a... you know 55 years of poetry, of Selected Poems that will be out in 2006, and I find myself leaving out a lot of those, just picking maybe the... the very best.  So, although I, you know, I had a good time writing a lot, and reading a lot - and it may... it may well have been very important in my later development - still I don't think I did my best work then.  But I did publish my first book of poems, and that is a very big deal. Oh... the circumstances with the publishers are anecdotal, unusual, but probably not worth going into. I assembled a collection... I had started a collection... trying to sell a collection much earlier, when an English publisher, while I was at Oxford, because of the noise about the Newdigate... an English publisher - can't think of his name - wrote and asked me if I had a manuscript.  Thrilling!  Really he wanted to sell sheets to America, and make some money, if we could find an American publisher. He didn't want to publish it in England alone, and so that was not particularly flattering, but that got me started with an American agent. The English publisher contacted an American agent to send a book around, and it wound up with the Viking Press, which was... that was a small, independent publisher at that time - long before it was taken over by Penguin - and had some very good editors there.  A man named Pascal Covici, who's quite a famous editor, and Malcolm Cowley was an editor part-time. We... they saw a couple of versions of it. I kept sending it out in-between to other publishers - it would be a small tight version, and a big sloppy version - each time I'd change it from one to the other. The one that got taken, finally, was the big sloppy version, and it's a long book, a long first book.  And there's very little of that that I will re-print in my Selected Poems now, but it was... it was thrilling.  But it was absolutely enmeshed, the publication of it over the year of 1955 with another event. My father who was 51 had a backache, an X-ray, a spot on his lung. I went down to see him before he went in - it was cancer - and he went in for an exploratory operation to see if they could remove a lung, and my mother and I took him down and went back to wait for the surgeon's call.  And the thing was, if the ... if they were to take the lung out, it would take eight hours or so. The surgeon called in about two hours. It was inoperable, so we knew that my father would die, and I called up my wife who was in Cambridge by the society to tell her that my father was going to die.  And we spoke at length, and wept, and at the end she said, 'Oh, a letter just came for you today from the Viking Press. Do you want me to open it?' And so I said, 'You might as well'. And that letter accepted my first book of poems for publication - just extraordinary. And I called up the... it became a device for cheering up my father who had been leaning toward death. He had no ambition for himself, and it was all put on to me, and everybody knew this was the big thing - to have your first book of poems. I was 27 years old, and I called up the nurses, and they told my father, and he was, of course, in bad shape after the operation, but he knew it, and was thrilled about it. Then I set out to publish all the poems in magazines that were in there, so that, you know every week when I saw him, I could bring him another publication and so on.  And my joy in the book was considerable, but extremely confused, because the book was a device for cheering him up by this point, my first book of poems... but I... of course I was thrilled by the book all the same, but it came out in December, and it came out just before he died. It came out early in the month and he died on December 22nd and was buried on Christmas Eve, but he held the book - he saw it - and he said with his ruined voice, his voice was mostly gone, holding the book, 'My cup runneth over'. And it was good for him. We also watched the Dodgers beat the Yankees in the World Series - it was one other good thing that fall. I was living a couple of hundred miles away, with a little child - a wife and a little child - and I drove down to see him, or sometimes all three of us came down, about once a week, and I missed... I was going down one morning and he died the night before, so I missed being with him at his death.  But he was so much in denial - or he knew he was going to die, but he couldn't speak of it, couldn't possibly speak of it - that was the kind of man he was. He consulted medical dictionaries, and so on - I mean he knew, and, but it was the last time I saw him, just about a week before he did died, he was thinking about the future of course.  And he said, 'If anything should happen to me...' you know, and so on. This was the reverse of the way Jane and I were with in connection with my cancers, over the leukemia that... that killed her - we were always frank and open, but that was how he had to do it - it was his character.

When I published that book, it had a remarkable response, and a response that it did not deserve, and whenever that happens, then you get knocked down for it later.  It wasn't that good a book, but people were looking... the magazines... the magazines of criticism were looking for the new poet.  This was 1955, and seven years earlier they'd had Robert Lowell, Richard Wilbur, but they hadn't trumpeted anybody for a while.  And it came out, and oh, it won a prize, and it was listed for the National Book Award, which is ridiculous really, and it was reviewed in the Sunday Times Book Review, the Daily Times Book Review, the Sunday Herald Tribune Book Review, and... and daily, and every magazine. Many more magazines reviewed poetry at that time. There was much less poetry published, but much more was reviewed, and reviewed by more competent people - it's curious, there's been an enormous explosion of the numbers of titles over the last 50 years, and the numbers of books sold - certainly the numbers of people trying to be poets - but the amount of response, critical response has diminished.  The... the reason - this is just a little insert - why... why there would be so little response, but so much more sales, is the poetry reading.  That is how people find out now, that wasn't going on in 1955... very little.  And anyway, they'd had a tremendous amount of response, and the first wave of reviews in the daily's, and the weekly's  and the monthly's was highly positive, and then about a year later the quarterly's hit in, and then - they were the old pros, you know - had  had time to look at all this prose, and I began to take my lumps, and some of them were actually intelligent lumps, and they called me on things they were right to call me on, and I had... had me walking up and down a lot, thinking about my faults, and that was helpful.

In my third year of three years at the Society of Fellows, I had to look for a job. Here I had been on six years of fellowships in a row with nothing to do, and it was of course insulting that I had to do something to get... to get a salary, but I knew it would be in teaching, and I knew by that point that I did not have to go to graduate school. I could do it because of my book.  And there had been another book just after the book of poems... I edited an anthology, called the New Poets of England and America. Because I'd just come from Oxford, I knew everybody in England very well, and it was... I was necessary for the... for that portion of the book. It was... the book started when one poet had an idea, and sold it to a publisher, and then brought in a second poet, and then the second poet brought in me... I was the third one coming in. It was Robert Pack, Louis Simpson, and me, who were doing this, and we met from time to time, we read everything, we found things and gave them to the others to read, and then we would vote, unanimous sometimes, sometimes two out of three.  And it came out in '57, and it did not have a single... a single Beat Poet in it, so it always became known as the academic anthology - the anthology of the academic poets.  And the subsequent volume by Donald Allen was the Beat anthology.  And when we were... we weren't reading and rejecting the Beat Poets - we didn't know about them - and it's true that there was for a while, the battle of the anthologies - it's been called that - the battle of the anthologies, where people would take sides and, you know, all the stuffy people would defend us, and all the more interesting people would defend the Beat Poets, and so on. It was very annoying, but we had not read any of the work of Allen Ginsberg or Gregory Corso, and so on, and if we had read it, we probably would have disliked it, I should say. It attacked our citadel. We were metrical. We were following in the... free verse modern poetry was free verse... but then in the late '20s and '30s with John Crowe Ransom, Allen Tate, WH Auden, poetry was swinging back into metrical forms again, and there was some of it which was very good and very beautiful, and we were picking that up.  Very few of us were writing free verse - that's not the only difference obviously between these schools, but we printed... oh, we printed Thom Gunn and Ted Hughes, and Philip Larkin, and Geoffrey Hill, and many others from England, and we printed very many good American poets - the best. It was at the time that WD Snodgrass really first came to attention, because it was before the publication of Heart's Needle, and it... it helped a lot of poets get going, and it was good.  But there were many bad poets in the volume who looked good to us at the time, and that will always happen with any contemporary anthology. It was great fun to do, and I enjoyed the process of editing and promoting the people who I thought were good. I had already been doing it, earlier, by editing for The Paris Review.

George Plimpton was at Cambridge, and I was at Oxford, and I won the Newdigate, and George, whom I had known a little at Harvard - we had lunch together - we were on different warring magazines at Harvard - I was the literary magazine, and he was the Harvard Lampoon - the humorous magazine.  But we were friendly... know each other well. He came over with his Cambridge college, King's, to play tennis against my college. I was not playing tennis, but, after the match, he wanted to have dinner with me, and we had a bibulous dinner, at Whites, on... oh, on this side of town, and it turned out he had an idea. He, and some friends of his in Paris, Peter Matthiessen, Thomas Ginsberg, Harold Humes, were starting about... talking about starting a magazine, The Paris Review, and he wanted to solicit my Newdigate poem for the first issue. So I gave it to him, and he also wanted me to find some other poems that he could  print. None of them... they were all fiction people, and so on... none of them cared anything about poetry. So for that first issue, I published a poem by Robert Bly, which was the first real publication of his, and I think, maybe Adrienne Rich, I did shortly. Second issue was Geoffrey Hill, but also in that first issue, I published a poet called F George Steiner, who is no longer known as F and is no longer known as a poet, and oh, one or two other people. But before the second issue, I was invited to become Poetry Editor of The Paris Review, and it was great fun.  I did it about for about nine years. I was... I was mentioning in connection with the anthology, but the feeling really began with this book - the notion that I was trying to define a generation, or we were - a bunch of us - and that these were to be poets of... in our 20s, and we got older [sic]... but I think it worked very well. The Paris Review became influential, and it is still going now, 52 years later. George died just two years ago, suddenly, unexpectedly. I had talked with him on the phone the day he died, we've stayed in touch.  I was no longer Poetry Editor, but every now and then he had wanted my advice about something or other, but, for nine years I had a happy, combative sense of suppressing stuff I thought was no good, and seeking out stuff I thought was wonderful. I remember one day, when I was in the Society of Fellows, writing letters to two strangers, I had been reading their poems in magazines - James Wright and Louis Simpson, and they both became close friends - they both sent me poems. Louis sent me one and I got him to change one metaphor in it - he never forgot that - and Jim Wright sent me four or five - he was the expansive type - and I probably took three, which I liked very much and which are in his collected poems.  And then I got to know them, and Louis Simpson was one of the anthologists talking about making the book, the New Poets of England and America, and in fact, he knew, I... because of The Paris Review in particular, I knew more of what was going on, both in England and America, than either he or the other editor did, so he brought me in.  And we published this book, and it was reviewed everywhere, the New Poets of England and America. It was the first post-war collection - came out in 1957 - two years after my book of poems, and it was the first attempt to collect a new generation of poets, so it got a great deal of attention.  And then, it got attention as the academic book would for the next 10 years or so with the battle of the anthologies. We, the poets, for the most part, from the two sides of the war, got to be friends and started mingling. I got to know Allen Ginsberg and Gary Snyder, and lots of the people that were in the other anthology, and we worked together, and in lots of ways our work came more nearly together, finally.

The fact that I had the two books - mostly my book of poems, but also that anthology - meant that I could get a job without a PhD. It was at a time when the universities were each deciding it ought to have one poet in the English Department - it was a big department - they were all PhDs - there might be a fiction writer and a poet. It was before the explosion of creative writing, and  graduate degrees in creative writing. There was only one place, Iowa, that was doing the MFA with the writers workshop at that time, but most colleges put in creative writing courses, optional courses, to take mostly by the approval of the instructor looking at your work, so they wanted somebody to do that.  But I actually... and I'd looked around for jobs, and I was offered instructorships - that was the lowest level of hiring teachers and it was common at that time, when you had a PhD, your first job was as an instructor, then an assistant professor, and then if you made associate professor you had tenure. Well I was offered instructorships at Harvard, and Yale, and Brown, and Dartmouth, all of the Ivy League, but something in me wanted to get out of the Ivy League - I didn't want to hang around Harvard another three years. I think I was probably aware of the cleverness, the intellectuality, and I wasn't... I really wasn't that kind of a poet. I used to say that in the ambience at Harvard, it was maybe more important to write a scathing essay in the Partisan Review than it was to write a poem, and I didn't feel that way, and I was afraid I'd be pulled into feeling that way if I let myself stay there.  And I also felt that I wanted to get out of the East, I'd been in the East my whole life, except for Oxford and one year at California.  So I looked around. At first, they were all Eastern offers, and then, rather late along in the job hunt time, a... a friend of mine who was the son of a Dean at Michigan, went out to Michigan for Christmas, and talked to his father, talked to the department - I was looking for a job, and Michigan started to pursue me, and they offered me an assistant professorship. They invited me out... it was a big deal to hire somebody without a graduate degree... it was very... it was not done, and it's not done at Michigan and many places, and to hire someone with just books, and so on, so they made a kind of production of it. They flew me out to give a lecture, and I think it's the last time I ever wrote a lecture down and read it - I've been winging it ever since, but... I can't remember what it was about - but I came out and gave a lecture to the English Department.  And when I arrived I had lunch with the executive committee of the whole college, who were you know physicists, and logicians and so on, as well as people in the humanities, and I had dinner with the... or supper with the executive committee of the English Department - gave my lecture, and the next morning before breakfast, the chairman, who was an old autocrat, called me up and offered me the job.  And, so, I guess I flew home and talked to my wife about it, and we... I took the job. And going out to Michigan was really just what I wanted - it got me away from everything I was used to - it's a big amorphous university, with excellent faculty and some excellent students, and oh, they have 40,000 students, but that's... that's counting nursing school and law school, and med school, and everything - there were a hell of a lot in the college which is what I was teaching in.

I decided when I was 17 or something like that, that I would probably teach to support my poetry habit, and I intended it as a kind of cynical decision - this way I could have summers off maybe, I can arrange my schedule because I won't be in class more than nine hours a week, so I could write here, and correct papers there and so on. It is, by and large, an easier job, if you are going to be a writer, than a nine to five job, and I remember telling an old teacher of mine, who was a wonderful, ethical teacher, 'Oh, I'm doing it cynically, just to support my habit', which was a stupid and insensitive thing to say. I remember what he said to me, 'Teaching tends to be something in which one develops ethics by teaching if one doesn't have them to begin with'. And I loved... I loved teaching. I was petrified at first, you know. Somebody took me to a class... a professor took me to a class, and said, 'There they are'‚ and I was supposed to walk in, and there were 60 people there or something, and I was the authority. After a year or so, I felt relaxed about it, and I was a good teacher. I worked hard for my students, and I... I kept them amused and on their toes, and always had lots of questions, even with big classes. At the beginning I taught small discussion groups - there were mostly about 30 people - but eventually I did lecture courses too, and in the lecture courses I could keep things lively. I taught Yeats and Joyce a lot... there was a course which was for upper classman in  English or even incoming MFA students - an advanced English class - but I also taught an Introduction to Poetry for non-English majors, and that was my favorite  of all, and I felt that I was the sort of Billy Graham of poetry - the Evangelist - come to poetry, come to poetry. And I was resolutely non-biographical, non-historical. I would always mix up poems to talk about... during one day might be five poems and... from five different centuries, and different styles, and so on, and the idea was just to develop a taste for... what... what the hell is this stuff that I love so much? And I also think, that I do still - I did then - adore poetry, and I could transmit my enthusiasm, and I think that's maybe the most important thing I had. I said alot about the poems - I told them about tactical matters, but, the gusto with which I praised the poems that I particularly loved, I think, reached many of them, not everybody, but many of them, and I think many of them... they were non-English majors - there were a good many who switched over to an English major - and thus I ruined their lives, you know.  But, anyway, I... I felt really high when I walk into a classroom and get going. Once a year I would feel a lecture go flat and dead, and I'd just say, 'I can't do it today', and I'd walk out, because I was doing on... from the inside out, not by preparation. I prepared, but I prepared only by reading over the work that I was going to talk about - maybe 50 pages of Ulysses or something, and maybe making some marks on a page, but then I was improvising, and I learnt soon enough that improvising was what I did best - it was fun. The first 10 years, they pretty much let me have my head. I had gone there telling them I didn't want to teach creative writing, and... so they abided by that, and I taught freshman English instead.  But if you teach creative writing you don't teach freshman English because you are dealing with manuscript and so on, and after a few terms of freshman writing, which is difficult and emotional - kids are always coming to you, telling you about their suicide attempts and writing about them and so on, and their first... out of high school, maybe, and first away from home, and you are their therapist a lot of time - and I felt I could do that but it was also disturbing, so I took on a writing course, and then most of the years I was there, I taught one writing course a year. Eventually it became a course in writing poetry, for which I could admit people - I mean they could not get in without me reading their work. I taught there about 13 and a half years out of 76 years - it's not that many but it was crucial - you know... crucial time. I would put up a sign on my door in the summer, teach that course in the autumn, saying, if you'd like to get in this course, show me five poems, and then I would list the people I took. I didn't want to interview them, and be charmed or attracted or something, and that's how I met Jane Kenyon, but that's a later story... a later story. Jane was one of the students I took into a writing class in 1969, much later. I taught my first classes in 1957/58. By the spring of '58, I felt at home in the classroom. But also at Michigan, it being so big, and amorphous, I could go home to my house, and feel in another world. Students didn't come knocking on my door to speak of, and I was surrounded by other people who were not professors, and professors of English. When the professors at Dartmouth were trying to get me to go there, they told me something that made sure I would never go there. They said, 'We have no cliques here, we all get together. We are really friendly. In fact we have coffee together every morning at 10 o'clock'.  That was the professors - I didn't want to do that.

I taught maybe three days a week, or maybe two days a week, with a... with a day of office hours, and the rest of the time I stayed home and worked, and I worked on poems first thing in the day. For almost my entire life, the first part of the day has been the day for... the time of the day for poems... and I was worried about my students, but I managed to make an island 6am-8am in the morning when I wouldn't think about papers to be corrected, or students with emotional problems, or students falling behind in their work, and I could just write poems. So I would get up with black coffee and write for two hours, and then, ping, I would start thinking about the classes I was teaching and the work I had to do, and so on. I was writing little prose at the time and mostly poetry. My son was three, four years old, and when he heard me get up in the morning, of course he wanted to play, so he would come downstairs in his blue Dr Denton's and his red hair, and want to play with Daddy, and I figured out something to do. I told him, 'Oh, I'm writing poems, you know'‚ and I said, 'Well, I'll write you a poem. What do you want me to write about?'  And he was probably hungry, so he'd say something like, 'Toast', and I would write the poem:  It feels so good to be/extremely buttery -  what the toast said. And then he wanted me to draw... draw a picture of toast - well my drawing is notorious, like my singing, but I would - he didn't mind - he was four years old, and the... he would go back up to his room, clutching his poem and be... be satisfied, so I could get back to work. I did want to... I always wanted to make my living writing... at that point when I was beginning teaching, I thought I never would, but there was something in me that wanted it - to write other things as well, and one day Andrew came to me when he was four, and said that he had a wonderful idea, but it was scary. He was going to go to the lion store, and buy a lion seed and grow a lion in the pot in the windowsill, and I said, 'Thank-you', and I wrote a children's book called Andrew the Lion Farmer, about a little boy doing just that, you know, and so on. He was so proud... he was incredibly proud about that thing. And I did write occasional literary articles, and I began to write for The New York Times Book Review - lots of little casual pieces, some book reviews, and so on. Every now and then I tried a story, but it was almost entirely poetry, and my poetry began to change at that time for a number of reasons. Maybe, I had... I had been looking for change - I had been becoming dissatisfied with the kind of poetry that I was writing - even before, I mean in my last years as a junior fellow, I wrote a poem called Je Suis une Table, taking... taking it as a language mistake, like, Je suis la plume de ma tante, or something, and, in it, I inhabit a thickening - I am a table, and it means that I can't say, can't speak, can't speak what's on my mind, and I wrote it in syllabics, where you just count the number of syllables - you do not alternate louder and softer syllables the way you do in regular English meter - so it was a way of counting something, but avoiding the sound of the poetry that I had been writing, and I think that there was a sense in me that I could write only in certain ways - only in certain tones, and attitudes, and cleverness, and so on, that... therefore I felt inarticulate. There were things in me that wanted to speak, that couldn't speak. When I was writing that poem I had no such thought but I look back at it, and remember what was going on in my head at that time, I think it was.

My friend Robert Bly spent a year in Norway and discovered International Modernism. We had all grown up on English and American Modernism, on Eliot, and on Pound, and... and on the poets who had followed them, and it was... that's frequently called Modernism, but it's very different from what, a kind of expressionist use of metaphor. Georg Trackl, the German [sic] poet, killed himself during the First World War - and wrote sort Blue Rider poems - he... he was a friend of Franz Marc, I believe - and they are kind of surreal. I tend to avoid the word surrealism, because it got taken over by André Breton, and became a set of rules and so on. The greatest practitioners... there were many in... in Scandanavia who were not well known even now in translation, Harry Martinson and Gunnar Ekelöf, but there were many, many in Spain - Lorca from the '30s, but Jiménez, Sulomono [sic].  They were apparently Gongoresque - I have no Spanish - they wrote with extravagant metaphors and mysterious poems, and French symbolism in some ways gave license to it, but it was much less tidy, much less reasonable than French symbolism, or French surrealism.  And, particularly with Bly's help - with his own translations, and his also putting me to look at translations of other poets - I became aware of Neruda, and Neruda was one of those poets who translates well. A poet like Goethe can't translate at all, Pushkin can't translate, but often poets who rely on the expressive image can be more translatable.  And I began to write poems more in this style, and I began to experiment moving away from syllabics, with varieties of free verse, and my poetry in particular took on a... a sound - it was rather short lined, and the sense moved over to the end of the line, a lot - not invariably - but there was a lot of enjambment, and there was great... a great many long vowels, and often the long vowels were in assonance.  So if I could use a line like 'high tide line', I'd love it.  And for many years my... my poems, which were my own and not sounding like anybody else's, were making their own kind of noise because it was a noise that pleased me the most and shivered my timbers.

I remember the first poem I wrote where I had no idea what I was writing about but I wrote it with conviction. It was a poem called The Long River that Jane came to love. Jane was 10 years old at the time I was writing it, and I did not know her, but I had a thumping noise in my head and a lot of long vowels, and I pounded it out and it came bit by bit, and finally when I worked on it for a while, I realized what I was talking about, which was sex, and particular aspects.  But, I had earlier, in the poems that I no longer liked so much - mostly - I always seemed to need to know what I was writing about before I wrote it.  A ridiculous idea, because most of what... a poet is an engine for saying things he doesn't know he is saying, often, and if you try to control so that you know everything you are saying and you let yourself get away with it, it's... it's going to be shallow stuff finally. When the poems were... when these reasonable poems turned out to be good poems, it was because there was something in them that I was not aware of, but, or besides what I was aware of, not necessarily in opposition, but something was... something invisible was driving the engine.  Oh, well, I got to... to try to write poems, some of the time, at any rate, that had no reasonable side to them at all, that were purely the mysterious.  That's not always possible or desirable either, but I still hold to the notion that whatever I write, however sensible it may seem, and so on... if it's worth writing, there's more going on that I'm not initially aware of, and maybe ever aware of.  But many times I have looked at a poem 10 years after writing it... five years after writing it... and seen something about it that's incontrovertibly true, it's there, but I'm positive I never had a conscious notion of it, and other times... many times people point things out to me in my poems that I have to admit are there, but that I had not engineered into place on purpose.

The poems changed. I also had taken a lot of the criticism of Exiles and Marriages to heart and was writing some poems which were sort of the antitheses of them. I wrote a second book rather quickly... it came out three years after the first. My first book came out in 1955, my second in 1958. It was called The Dark Houses. It was a book of my father's death in considerable part, and it was also a book that began to reach toward the... the irrational, the almost surreal, the fantastic, but much more of that came in my third book which I believe was 1963, A Roof of Tiger Lilies.  Again there was some mixture there. But all the time I was working on the poems, everything was concentrated on the writing. When I was in the classroom, I was totally there - I made my office hours  - and I corrected it, but there was no question but that I was living to write. After the first two years of teaching, I thought, oh wow, two years of work in a row! I gotta get some time off. You know, I knew I was a little spoilt, but maybe somebody would keep on spoiling me. I applied for Guggenheim, and I didn't get it.  And oh, later the guy who ran the Guggenheim told me, 'Well we thought you'd been doing rather well'.  And I had made a little money writing, and one or two poetry readings - poetry readings were just beginning - and it was amazing when the phone rang one day, and somebody said he was an agent, and he wanted to recommend me for... represent me for poetry readings.  I didn't believe it.  And I thought it was a fad - it'll be gone in a year or two.  But there are more poetry readings every year, you know.  And so I would fly out of Detroit, and do a reading and come home, not missing classes, and get $500, so I'd saved up something like $2000, $2500, and I decided to take leave without pay from the university.  That's another attraction to the possible situation at a university - if you want to take time off, you are very replacable - you are a replacable unit.

I wanted to go back to England.  I had so many English friends, I loved Oxford, and Kathleen Raine came to visit, reading her poems at the University of Michigan, and oh, by the way, I took her to the Ford plant. Kathleen Raine was the world's greatest luddite - machines, you know - the absolute devil.  So I took her to the huge, many acre factory of the Ford plant - pound, pound, grease, grease - and she was in heaven... she was in heaven because she was in hell, she was seeing hell right full front.  And I enjoyed her a lot, and I said that we were thinking about going over to England next year, and she said, 'I know the most beautiful house in England in the most beautiful village in England, and it's for rent'. A friend of hers was Margaret Bottrall, who had been married to the crummy English poet Ronald Bottrall, one of Leavi's favorites - they were divorced. They had a house in Thaxted, a village called Thaxted, which is about 30 miles from London, 15 miles from Cambridge. I didn't want to go back to Oxford directly - it was too close - I wanted to go somewhere else, but the idea of living in the country - this was a village surrounded by sugar beets, and it was 2000 souls- quite isolated - six pubs and it was wonderful in 1959. So I, with my wife's agreement, which was wonderful, and with a new baby coming, I took leave without pay, and $2000 in my pocket, and went off to live in England for a year, to live in this village in a 15th century house... the... it was called The Priory, and it had a two storey, well, second and third storey medieval hall- with Jacobean wall paintings down one whole wall, and with you know, a newal post which was Georgian, and it also advertised itself as having central heating, which was very funny. There was a coke burner in the kitchen which gave some heat. There was a coal burner in the ping pong room- it was always too cold to play ping pong, and it fed a radiator up in the music room, upstairs, and that was the central heating. There were coal fire places in all of the rooms, so I had four or five fires going in that house half the time. My daughter Phillipa was born in Ann Arbor in June, and then in August we went over on the Liberté- oh, those first trips were always by ocean liner not by airplane - they were much cheaper, and we'd take trunks, and we went and arrived at The Priory, and my two kids and my wife all had colds, and they were exhausted and they went to bed, and I walked out the front door, and this was a great medieval street, with a whole lot of houses connecting everywhere, and a house connecting to the left of my Priory, was a pub, and I walked into it, and as I walked in a cheerful voice says, 'What'll you have?' And I was bought a pint - I thought, you know he recognizes me - he thinks that I'm somebody that I'm not... no, he could tell by the way I walked that I was a yank, you know. There were some yanks who lived in town who worked at an air base - they were the more adventurous yanks - the rest of them lived on the air base, of course, so the ones in town were fun really, but there were only two other American families there. And we got to know everybody in town, you know.  The vicar was a communist, famously a communist, and despised of his bishop- his name was Jack Putteral- Father Jack Putteral.  His father-in-law had been the original red vicar, who was red before the Soviet Union existed, and flew the red flag from the top of the church. It was called a cathedral of Essex, but it wasn't a cathedral, it was a huge medieval church which was right above us on the hill, and very beautiful, and with marvelous stone and wood carvings in it. I went to church every Sunday to hear the singing and the procession. The bishop was not only a Communist, he was so high that only dogs could hear him. He had Greek in the prayer service- the- he was much pre-prayer book- I mean, he didn't like the prayer book- it was too modern, and there were gown people swinging sensors and crosses everywhere- great processions, and then a little fifteen minute homily out of The Daily Worker- praise of some- some rich guy gave him money one time in the thirties to go to the Soviet Union and get it out of his system- he adored it, he loved all those anti- religious museums with their wonderful relics, and so on, and Jack was wonderful- he was a darling man- he was a scamp- I mean he loved getting away with things, and a messy slob. He taught violin or any other instrument to all the kids in town, except the Tories would cross the street when he came walking- I've seen it happen. He taught me bell-ringing- later I became a bell-ringer there. It was a wonderful year, and it was a wonderful year partly because we had the darling daughter. Phillipa had been born in June, and we doted on her together- my wife and I, and Andrew went at the age of, I guess he was five, he went to the village school, and came home saying things like- Coo, I ain't got me little metal bottle, and there was a curious, you know, Essex- Cockney- I ain't got me little metal bottle, and- dad, they say I'm a yank- I'm not, am I dad? I don't think he had too happy a time in school really.

Before going over to try to have enough money to live on for the year, I had written everybody I knew who might have a job to give to try to raise money.  And Richard Wilbur gave me the task of doing an edition of... of John Greenleaf Whittier for a paperback.  So I wrote an essay on  Whittier, and picked the poems - and that was 600 bucks.  And then George Plimpton, who's Paris Review was thriving, had been commissioned by another magazine to produce the kind of interviews that the Paris Review does, so he got me interviews at $400 each, with Archibald MacLeish, which I did before going to England, and with John Gielgud, who wouldn't see me, and with Henry Moore.  And Henry Moore is a wonderful sculptor, but he's a dear, gregarious man, who doesn't really like to say no very much, and so he agreed to meet me in Bishops Stortford, which was about seven miles from his house, and I found a bus which would take me to Bishops Stortford, and he picked me up and took me to tea, and we talked and then he... he decided that he would let me interview him, and so I spent several days with him. We played ping pong together and he came to... he and his wife came to dinner at our house... I just... I don't know how many days I spent with him that year, but I really liked him.  And when I left that year I said, 'If I could ever find a way to write more about you, would that be ok?', and he said, 'Yes'.  So three years later I wrote a New Yorker profile.

I wrote String Too Short to Be Saved, my first prose book, almost entirely in that house, and writing it in England, further away even than Michigan, was probably key. I did intend to do it that year... I wrote lots of poems... and poems... I wrote poems that in general I liked more than I did the earlier ones, that year in that house, and String Too Short to Be Saved. I worked on poems in the morning, and then I would go upstairs to the cold music room in the afternoon, and write the prose of String Too Short to Be Saved. And I also wrote other things and interviewed Moore.  But there was one more major event in... in that year. That year I was 39, and The Paris Review had had me interview TS Eliot a year or two earlier, and it had worked out very well. Interviewing Eliot was easy. I read everything and came up with a hundred questions or so, some of which I used, and just sat with him and talked, and he was very happy. It was after his second marriage - shortly after - and he was eloquent, and amused, and amusing, and he spoke in complete sentences, he spoke in paragraphs, like an Englishman, and there was very little that he wanted to revise from the transcript of the... of the interview. But then they wanted me to interview Ezra Pound.

Ezra Pound…  I think it was 1958 when he was released from the custody in the mental hospital in Washington, because, rather than try him as a traitor, the government had judged him insane, incapable of standing trial, because he had broadcast for Mussolini to the American troops during the Second World War.  And this was a difficult idea to… to… I loved Pound's poetry - the early stuff mostly - early Cantos too, and I learned a lot from him… I admired him very much.  But the words I'd heard out of Washington were that he was arrogant and fascistic and… The Paris Review had earlier tried to do an interview with him, and he'd said yes at first, and then he said he'd discovered that the magazine was part of the pinko usary fringe.  And that may be because the name of the publisher at that time was Jean Stein… I don't know that.  So now he was back in Italy and The Paris Review wanted me to interview him, and they wanted it like crazy, and I loved much of the work, so I decided to do it. I rented a Morris Minor station wagon, so that the baby could be on the top of her baby carriage, behind the seats, and… and we… could sit behind us, and we drove from Thaxted over to France, and through the Simplon Pass railroad train – wonderful - turn around and look at the baby as we were going through the tunnel sitting up, looking around - and my wife took the kids through the streets of Rome.  These two little red-headed babies, and they were constantly remarked upon – ‘Rosso!’ But I went to see Pound the day we got there to arrange when we'd start the interview the next day.  And he came to the door and opened it, and he was 74 then. His face was heavily wrinkled, almost like Auden's and kind of beautiful… that great hair swooping back, leonine, but he looked… he looked very old, and he carried a cane, and he said, ‘Mr Hall, you have come all the way from England, and you find me in fragments’. And it was an extraordinary time. I spent a good deal of four days with him, and I came to feel for him enormously.  He was very guilty, but he didn't get it - what he had done wrong. He insisted he was not a traitor, because you could not be a traitor without treacherous intent.  He said nothing… he was defending the real American republic against the usurpers. He said nothing anti-semitic to me. But one time he told a joke that had references to Judaism - it wasn't anti-semitic - and then his face fell, he was afraid he had been anti-semitic, he didn't know. Well, he went in and out of speech. There were times when he was eloquent and witty and building a story nicely, but then maybe in the middle of a sentence he would collapse, and close his eyes, and lie back on a little bed, and say that he was a failure. Succeeding in the interview was really important to him… that's one thing I thought of him as being so arrogant. He was desperate to do a good interview - to come off well, and so on. He was a very broken man. Shortly thereafter, he stopped talking, almost entirely, he went into the silence, and for the last 10 years of his life, he spoke very few words.  He could speak - it wasn't a physical thing - but, he was sort of entering the silence at that time, and there was a lot of silence.  But eventually over four days, there was a lot of talk, and when we saw him… I took a tape recorder on a very primitive machine… and the thing you can hear clearest on it was, ‘Turn that damn thing off! Turn that damn thing off!’ But I managed to get the interview off it, and out of memory, and so on.

Every now and then he would want to go walking with me, and show me around, and he thought he was failing at the interview, so he ought to show us all Rome. And I'd said to my wife, that… ‘You know, I think he's lonely’. I had thought I had wanted to keep my family away from him, you know, he was going to be a monster, but he was pathetic - he was sad and lonely - and, ‘I think he'd like to go out to dinner with us’.  So we took him out to dinner, and he had a wonderful time. He flirted with my wife, and, you know, just charmingly, but charmingly in… sort of in a 1910 manner.  And he took us to Crispi's which was a great pre-war restaurant, and I had my first ossobuccoo, and on the way back he bought us an ice-cream, you know, he saw a gelati man out in the street, and he said, ‘Stop here’, you know.  And he went out and bought us each one… we stood around… he had his Confuscian cape on, you know, he was looking magnificent, and he was feeling wonderful, because he'd had what he thought was a social evening with ordinary Americans. The people who came to see him in the St Elizabeths Hospital in Washington were not ordinary Americans… they were southern integrationists. There were Robert Lowell… Elizabeth Bishop came to see him, but there were a lot of cranks, and people… politically right wing who came to see him there, and he had the idea that we were ordinary Americans and that's what he needed - it was great. He thought he was a great success at having dinner, not at doing the interview. During the dinner at one time he said something… you know he left America 1910, came back in 1939 for a few months to try to prevent the Second World War - megalomania as well as everything else - and then… then was in the hoosegow [sic].  He didn't know what America… happened… happened in America over 50 years, and he was singing a song, and in the song, he… I heard him mention Mary Magdalene, and Kirby couldn't hear him well, my wife, and she had that strained look you have on your face when you are listening and pretending you are understanding, but he thought that she was offended and Ezra Pound said, ‘Baptist?’ It's 1910 America, you know, he's at the Sunday… the boy with the loud pants and the beard and the rakish one… he's at the school picnic and he's scandalizing the girls, that's how he flirts with them and so on. It was perfect. One time… oh, I was always early for everything, so I would be early walking to his apartment and I'd go into a café and have a cup of coffee, and one time when we were walking on, we went in the same café together and the waiter is… and the waiter had seen us both separately but not together… and the waiter came over, and made a sentence which ended with the word 'filio', and Pound said, 'Si, this is my son’. It was very moving, very moving, this great poet crushed, and I felt very supportive of him, and told him I thought he could do readings in the United States - I was wrong. He couldn't. He… he would have been picketed everywhere.  He wanted to get back, by this point.  But anyway, it was marvelous… I got back to Thaxted… I did do a lot of things that year, with Moore, and String Too Short to Be Saved and Ezra Pound.  Got back to Thaxted and letters started to come to me, including Late Cantos that he was working on.  He wanted me to retype them up and so on, and also things he wanted to go into the interview.  ‘Stick this somewhere’, he'd say, and he'd give me a sentence, and so on.  And I'd finally cobble together an interview, where I don't think I had him saying anything he didn't say, and then went to him, and then I never heard from him again, and I think that some paranoia had come over him, and he decided that it was a trick against him. I finally got the manuscript - he was totally into the silence - it was before he died, when his wife, with whom he was no longer living, found a copy of the interview with his corrections on it - he kept correcting my horrible spelling.  I mean,  he'd say something Italian, and I'd do it phonetically, you know - some irritated free spellings - but also at one point he had in fact said to me - I guess I was off base all the time - and then he wrote in the margin, ‘Did I really say that?’ He had to say it so overtly. There was another point when he was talking with me about the broadcasts, and the Mussolini theme, and I just kept looking at him. He kept sort of begging me to say you were fine, you were wonderful, you know, and I just wouldn't… wouldn’t say it. And he said to me, ‘Do you think they should have shot me?’ and so on, and I could say, ‘No, no’, to that, clearly.

My wife had adored that village, and the village life. She really wanted to stay, but we couldn't stay then. During that year, I came back with as much money as I left with, because I worked for the BBC a lot too.  And I did The Critics, I think I did The Critics twice.  It was... it was the radio critics, where six critics of different disciplines sat around a table, and improvised a discussion.  It was broadcast every Sunday at noon, and people would run home from church to turn it on. I think we recorded it on a Thursday before.  And I was on with Steven Porter and A Alvarez and... oh, David Sylvester, the art critic, all sorts of people I was glad to be with, and it paid very well, and they repeated it later in the week, and you got exactly double when they repeated it.  And I also did other BBC work... Third Programme work on poets, and... oh, I was an... an American voice in a dramatic production of an American poem - DG Bridson cast me in one programme. Frequently I would go up to London on Wednesday. I'd arrange my BBC dates on Wednesday, because that was the day that John Wayne, the novelist, came in from his house in Reading, and did his literary endeavours, I mean picking up books to review or whatever.  So that a whole bunch of us would gather at the Salisbury, the old pub on St Martin's Lane. It was Wednesday at the Salisbury... John was always there, Ted Hughes came by sometimes, A Alvarez, Peter Redgrove, mostly poets, um... and usually I'd manage to spend two or three hours hanging around with them, and it was fun. Some of them were old friends,  some of them were not so friendly, but it was a feature of that year.

After that first year in Thaxted which was such a full year, I came back with the manuscript of String Too Short to be Saved - all finished - and I sent it into The Viking Press, and they took it, with some enthusiasm.  But it... it's a small book - it seemed huge at the time, my first prose book - and well, limited subject... a boy spends summers on the farm with his grandfather.  When I began writing it, I sent the first chapter to The New Yorker - they did a lot of reminiscence at that time... memoir - and they sent it back with a nice letter.  And I think I sent them a second chapter, same thing, I tried a third chapter some place - got rejected.  So I decided, OK, it's not periodical stuff, I'll just make it a book. I came back with  the book, and Viking took it, and scheduled it, and made a bound galley, sent it around, and one of the people they sent it to was EB White, in Maine.  He was no longer active with The New Yorker but he was very connected with it, and he loved it.

EB White sent a copy of String Too Short to be Saved to his son-in-law, Roger Angell, who was an editor on The New Yorker and a writer for The New Yorker - still is - and Roger Angell loved it, and he showed it around, and suddenly The New Yorker wanted to print the first chapter that they had turned down years before - or two or three years before - and they wanted to do another chapter.  And they said, 'If we'd known about this earlier, we would have printed more of the book'. Well, they had known about it earlier, and Roger went and looked up... they kept all their copies of their deliberations, and two editors had read the first chapter, and they'd come close to taking it, they'd finally decided against it - it was a close thing.  And Roger said, 'Whatever you do, don't tell any writers that this happened'. I've been telling people ever since, you know! So they printed... before the book came out... they printed two chapters in The New Yorker, and in one of them... I... that book is almost entirely recollected as honestly as I can do it.  But there was one point when I was writing up in that music room, where I told a big lie - with great excitement.  My grandfather and I went up on Ragged Mountain, which rises up in back of the house, high up, to where there were low bush blueberries growing wild... wild blueberries, one day, and we picked, I don't how many quarts - enough for many pies all winter - and came down... well when we came down I had him take me on a journey to show me an abandoned railroad on the mountain.  There isn't any abandoned railroad on the mountain - but it was my perfect symbol for the... the emptying out of ... of New Hampshire - there was a railroad track, and then there was a rusted locomotive, and I, at the age of 14 or whatever, want to make it work, and get it back to  run again, but then  I know it can't, and so on.  It's probably the best writing in the piece, and it's fiction,  it's pure fiction.  So  when that came out in The New Yorker, before the book came out, I was driving up here - we used to drive from Ann Arbor every summer, with the kids to see my grandmother who was still here at the house - and I was running out of gas just down the road at Sturgess' [sic] and I pulled in to get gas, and he came out to fill up my tank and said, 'Where is that damn railroad anyway? I've lived around  here for 20 years, and I've...' And I've been hearing it ever since. I'm known as the fella who saw that railroad.  My favourite thing to say about that is that I've also met two people who have seen it, and they've been there, and they'll take me to it sometime, but not just now. But anyway, it did... it had good reviews and didn't sell very many copies... sold enough so that there was a second printing... I don't know, but what there were only about five or six thousand printed at all at first.  Then it went out of print - it sold a few copies a year for years, and then it went out of print, and after it went out of print, I decided I wanted to get somebody to reprint it.  Viking [sic] didn't want to reprint it, you know do a paperback of it, and I approached a Boston publisher -  David Godine - who brought it out, maybe that was 1978, '79, it was after I was living here, and it has sold many, many copies in paperback.  And around here, among the neighbors, people will meet me for the first time, and say, 'Oh, you're the fella wrote that book'. I've written lots of books, but the... if it's that book... that's the one everybody means, and that's the only book of mine that many of my neighbors have... have read - those who have read it. But... at any rate, it was great fun, and it... it convinced me that I could write prose. I had been writing some critical prose, some articles, book reviews, and... nothing else. After that book I wrote a short story that was published in The New Yorker, that used the characters of my family, but made up the story, a story called Christmas Snow.

I went to New York, and Mr Shawn - Shawn who was the famous Editor of The New Yorker for 30 years or so - he wanted to see me.  And he asked me if I wanted to live in New York. He was about to offer me a desk at The New Yorker - and I... I knew that... he knew I knew it, but I had two little kids and I didn't want to live in Manhattan, so I rejected it out of hand. I'm glad I did, but I wonder what my life would have been like if I'd said yes. That was the occasion, when suddenly, on the spur of the moment, I said, 'How would you like a profile of Henry Moore?' And he said, 'Just a moment...' and he went out of the room.  And he must have looked up in his Rolodex to see if somebody had dibs on Henry Moore. He came back and... and said, 'That would be fine, go right ahead'. So I took on a profile of Henry Moore and it was one of the good things - the best thing - about that second year that I took in Thaxted.  I spent a great deal of the time... of time with Henry Moore. I had a car that year and I could drive over to his wonderful house in Much Hadham surrounded by sculpture and the fields. I spent time with him as he was working - I spent a few hours with him when he was working over waxes before they were cast in bronze, and also when he was working on original maquettes. He was a wonderful man... eloquent, and everything that he said to me about sculpture - and he was happy to talk about it - I always applied to poetry.  And... you know, I've known Robert Frost and TS Eliot, and so on, but I felt I'd learnt more about poetry hanging around Henry Moore than I did from any of the old poets.  And I don't... I don't think that's surprising, I mean... when you're working by analogy to another art, you get newer ideas and so on. But I also liked him. We also travelled around England a great deal to talk to people who had known him. Oh, Sir Kenneth Clark had me down to his castle in Kent so I could interview him about Henry Moore and... so, Barbara, the sculptor, Barbara...
[Q] Hepworth
Hepworth - I saw Barbara Hepworth down in St Ives - and many, many people... probably 25, 30 people - gallery owners, museum directors, other sculptors, young painters and sculptors who didn't like him so much.  One of them said, 'If I see another one of those earth mothers, I'm going to throw up', you know.  And I wanted to hear that too, of course.  But Moore himself was the main thing, and I... I loved doing it. I didn't write it very well, and when I came back and showed a third draft of it to Shawn, The New Yorker rejected it.  But also Shawn talked to me for about an hour about what was wrong with it, not encouraging me to re-write it at all, he made it clear, but what he said was so wonderful that I went outside his office - and there were no chairs - I sat on the... on the carpet in the hallway and took out a piece of paper and wrote down everything I could remember, and I went home and I wrote a new first chapter, and I sent it to him, and he said, 'If the rest of it is like this, it's in', and I was able to write it. It was later a book, and it was a book published in England as well as in United States. Herbert Read wrote a blurb for it in England, to my astonishment, and it did pretty well. It's totally out of date now. It came out in 1966, I guess, in The New Yorker, and Henry lived many more years, and it's been out of print for a long time.  But I loved writing it and I loved hanging around him.

And on the way back in the boat that year, I did one other thing. I was working that year but it was not a good year in general for poetry. On the way back in the boat, I wrote a play which was commissioned by a professional theatre programme at the University of Michigan.  Somebody there just suggested that I try to make a play out of Robert Frost's life. Well, I had been to see Joan Littlewood's Oh! What a Lovely War, and some other cases of documentary theatre, where everything that you have a character say or do comes from some printed source, and you're... you're building a play out of published materials... so that with the... the play about Frost, I had lots and lots of table talk, lots of letters, and the poems of Frost.  And I made a little biography of Frost that played in... originally in Ann Arbor, but then went to New York where it played for four months off Broadway, and then there was a subway strike for a week and it stopped it, you know, zero attendance, and so on. Later it went on the road, with a different cast playing at colleges, but that was my nearest thing to a theatrical success.

When I went back teaching in Ann Arbor seemed pretty dull, and with Kirby not wanting to go, I said, 'I promise I'll come back in three years'.  And three years later... two more years of Ann Arbor and teaching... I guess three years of teaching, and then we came back... I did get a Guggenheim, I applied again, and I got one... and we went back and spent a year. And the first year was the best year of that marriage, and the second year was probably the worst, and I'm not going to go into it, but it was the beginning of the end, and the marriage ended when the... I left the house in 1967. The two years in Thaxted were '59/'60, and '63/'64, and the marriage hung on for another three years but it was pretty much over by then. And that was a time in my life, when, well... a marriage ended after two years. I lived only a couple of blocks away from my kids, who I saw a lot of them, but there was failure in that, but it was also true that my work was getting overlooked. I wasn't writing so much.  For five years I was single and during those years, I did not write so much, I drank a lot, had lots of girlfriends. I was pretty miserable really through much of the time, or way up and way down maybe. I did have psychotherapy with a psychoanalyst - I did... there were eight psychoanalysts in Ann Arbor, more than there were in Vienna, but only one of them would do therapy, and so I was old enough by the time I went to him - late 30s - that analysis therapy was... would analysis actually help? So I saw him a maximum of three times a week, and we sat in chairs opposite... opposite each other. He still did not talk very much... left the talking up to me. In the first six months I lectured him about psychoanalysis, figuring his education was inferior... this is a classic way of dealing... dealing with your pain, you know.  And then he, sort of, said, 'Let's not see each other for a while'.  And then a little later, I was hurting enough so I came back and began to use up the kleenex and began to find things out, but... it was invaluable to me and it allowed me eventually to love Jane and to enter into the best part of my life. Toward the end at one point, I was talking about probably some relationship or other, and I said, 'Oh, will I ever be able to love anybody?' And he said, very matter of factly, 'Oh yes, you'll be able to love, yeah'. He was talking to me by that time. For the first few years, he would hardly say anything. He had very eloquent eyebrows and when I said something there... I mean I explained my motive or something, and an eyebrow would flicker, and I know I'd just said something funny. I think what I learned from him - you know there weren't Eureka moments - I... I talked a lot to analysts, they have told me whenever anyone says, 'Eureka!' it's always false.  There were no Eureka moments, but what I learnt a lot was that I had been naming feelings crudely and mistakenly, and there that there were times when I might say, 'I love', when I mean I hate and fear. Remarkable. There was... the intensity was there, but the label for the intensity was wrong - that's one reason why a poem can tell the truth without the poet knowing it... the intensity could convey the incredibly mixed reality of the feeling, feelings are never pure, without the writer being in intellectual command of what they are. Psychoanalysis is a language art and again and again I kept trying to convince him of this. He had a wonderful ear for puns and metaphors. I would say some cliché not using it literally, just the way it's commonly used, and the eyebrow would flicker, and I'd realize that was precisely the right word, you know, and it revealed something.  And I went through... went back over lots of things, painful things in my past that were fairly hidden, and I began to change. It was enormously helpful. Unfortunately by this time, it's so expensive, and there's... there's so much anti-Freud business around, that it's hard to get a real Freudian analysis anymore, but I have known several people who have been enormously helped by them.  And of course we all know many people who have not been helped, that goes without saying.

I began to be more ignored - I had... oh, Richard Nixon one point when he lost elections, said a famous line, 'I... we peaked too soon', and so I... I think I peaked too soon with Exiles and Marriages - with that first book of poems.  And maybe I peaked also in my ambition, and cleverness, and arrogance, or something, as well as in public response. I certainly had too much praise for an inferior book, but now I would bring out books and they'd be little noticed, and little reviewed, and... well, when I look at them now in retrospect, I don't mean to say that a vast injustice was made. I think that the third book, the Roof of Tiger Lilies, where oh... The Long River and some of the other more expression... expressionist poems came out, I think that was ignored and had bad luck, but subsequent books were perhaps just not good enough. That is when, at the end of this period, oh - several things happened - one more negative thing. I had taught for about 10 years, and I had loved it, and I continued to love the classroom, I never stopped.  But the university began to change, and it began to be more oppressive as an institution. I met lots of people, it seems to me, who like their classes, but don't like the structure, the administration and so on, and they weren't particular administrators, or particular things they did, everything was numerical. They talked about students as if they were turning out, you know, Ford cars down at the Ford plant, and every decision seemed to be taken for financial reasons from the university as a whole. When I had been... first a teacher... every class was... every student body year was bigger than the last one. People were being hired all the time, few people were being fired.  Then there were more teachers than there were jobs, and the competition for those jobs, and the... the backbiting and the nastiness, not directed at me - I had tenure early - I had tenure after just a few years, was very unpleasant in the corridor. I got to stay away from the... on the English Department coffee room, and so on. I didn't want to hang around there. I always wanted to go home and get to work instead.  But the English Department meetings became kind of excruciating. I've always disliked all meetings of anything. I hate poets meetings. I hate everything... all meetings, but the English Department meetings became factionalised, and... people standing up bursting into tears... one sweet man, kinda dumb, and he... he knew literature very well, factually, and parts of it with great sensitivity, but he was naïve to the point of stupidity sometimes. He stood up, and when people were crying and yelling, and said, 'Oh let us all be good Christians together'.  You know about one-third of us were Jewish. He didn't notice apparently, you know.  He went home and had a heart attack and died. He was a sweet man, naïve... that's a bizarre story, but the other things were kind of sordid in their factionalism and so on.  So although it did not color my feeling about the classes and students, I certainly felt less happy with the institution, and at the same time I'd been there long enough so that they wanted me to be on committees more, and even to run committees, and so on, and that was unpleasant.  But I thought I would stay teaching at the University of Michigan until I retired. I didn't particularly want to go anywhere else, I didn't think anywhere else would be better, I guess, but I was... I was timid about the possibility of making a living by freelancing until a certain point.

In 1969, which was one of the... the lowest points of my life, but led to the best parts of my life, I taught a... I taught the introduction to poetry for non-English majors in the spring - there were about 140 students in it. Jane was a French major at the time, and she took that course but I didn't know it - I didn't know her. Later we established that she had once asked me a question in that class, but I didn't know who Jane Kenyon was among these 140 kids.  But that summer, she applied to take my writing course, and every year maybe 50 people would apply giving me samples of their work, and I'd take 10, 12 that seemed to have some talent and thank goodness I took her. I remember one poem in particular - and it's a poem that's in her posthumous selected poems and her forthcoming collected poems, and now it's under the title of The Needle... poem she wrote when she was about 19, and she wrote a lot after that - that weren't so good as that one - but that is one that's permanent, and it resembles later Jane in many ways.  It's not as good as the best of them, but that was the poem that maybe determined the rest of my life. She was in that class, and in that class there were lots of wonderful students and Jane did not stand out as being surely the best. Others in that class... several others, I'm thinking of four right now have published books - one or two books and so on. But most of them go on to other things. One of them, whom I still see, is a newspaper editor in Philadelphia, and another is a radio... public radio talk show host in Wisconsin, and she and I are in touch. I'm in touch with a lots of old students, even from my first years there still... but that class was the best class I ever taught... they were wonderful with each other... they were rude, they were funny, they were very fond of each other. I don't remember there being anybody who was sort of sullen and withdrawn in that class, but they used a very military vocabulary all the time on each other's work, I mean they... they wouldn't say, 'Oh, I don't think that's quite your best work'. They'd say, 'That's full of shit', and so on, and somehow it... a spirit of happiness in poetry, happiness in being young and... and talented, and happiness in being frank could all co-exist, and I loved the class - I just had a wonderful time. It met in my living room one night a week, and I would bring a case of beer, and when people had a beer, they'd generally leave a quarter or something there, and we'd sit around for three hours one night a week and there were... but, the class would always meet in a classroom at first, when those who were admitted would get together and find one night a week when we could all get together and meet in my living room, which was... everybody preferred, and after Jane's death I found a notebook that she had taken, kind of a journal... a notebook, that she must have written in after that first class. The place where she was living as an undergraduate was a co-op, a student co-op, and it was right near my house, and there was a note in her notebook: when I discovered that Donald Hall lived not two blocks from my house, I felt as I did when I discovered that Dublin was a Danish stronghold, or when I wanted to take the goldfish out of the jar, but found that the water was too cold to sustain life. I was pretty scary.  But that had to be right at the very beginning because after a class or two, I certainly wasn't scary at all to anybody.  And Jane was oh, one of the funniest and sharpest of the group but there were a lot of funny and sharp people there. I liked her a lot - she was very likeable, and... but she wasn't at that time in her life, very attractive. She became a beautiful woman really... late '30s and '40s - just amazing what happened to her.  Her face is just dazzling in the photographs I have - and she... it was true... but, oh she had short hair and she had the remnants of acne, and she... she was not a clever dresser, didn't give a damn. So I didn't look at her very much. I certainly didn't think of her as a potential girlfriend, and at that time I had lots of girlfriends - there was safety in numbers, I was scared of getting committed to anybody, and I simply didn't put her in that category. In the class, I would work with... you know I'd write all over everybody's poems - we'd talk about it - but the poets would also come... they would also come by to my office hours, and she would come by, and after that class was over... just one term, she kept coming by to my office hours, and so I would see her fairly frequently.  And I saw other people from the class, and sometimes I would see two or three of them together - we'd have coffee together or whatever. The... the class itself kept meeting without me, as a workshop outside the university, for three years after the class was over. Nothing like that ever happened before.

We started dating, sort of, about a year after the class was over, but I had seen her quite a bit.  And then she... there was a guy... she had a good many boyfriends but only one was sort of serious, and he wanted to marry her, and she was sceptical about marriage with him, but she compromised by going to live with him, and I knew about that, and I didn't see much of her while she was living with him.  But then I began to hear from mutual friends - other people in that class - that they were breaking up, and that Jane was breaking off from him, but that Jane felt miserable about it... no contradiction there. And so I worried about her... I... I cared about her... she was feeling miserable about it, and so I... I called her up and asked her to have dinner or to go to a play, or something or other, and we... we did. And this was 1970, December I think and in 1970 in Ann Arbor, around the college or in many, many places, if you went... if you had dinner with somebody, you pretty much tended to have breakfast with them too, and so we went to bed, and just, friendly, not romantic way. We were never romantic until we'd been married for five years, I think, and we saw each other about once a week, and she always spent the night.  But I had other girlfriends, and she knew I did, and I didn't know whether she did or not, but it would have been alright if she did. I suppose I still don't know, but after a few months of once a week, it...we really had a good time together, and it became twice a week. And then I had to go out to LA on a writing project, and I saw her the night before I left, and she and I wrote letters, and I wasn't doing that with any of the other girls, and I saw her on the night when I got back.  And I began to get worried that I was getting too fond of her and she of me, and we were 19 years apart in age.  Clearly we couldn't stay together, too far apart in age, and I still saw other girls occasionally, maybe out of fear by this point. But... then there was one night when we were having a nightcap before going to bed, and one of my cats came in with a flap of skin loose, and it was scary and we... we were both petrified, and took the cat to an all night veterinarian.  And the cat was sewed up, and it was no problem, and we came back, where we sat there sort of panting with adrenalin and so flowing, and I said, 'Do you think we ought to get married?' I think it was I, and we talked about it, and we sensibly decided that we shouldn't get married, forget about it, because of the 19 years difference, and according to acturial tables, she would be a widow for 25 years - ha! Well we kept on seeing each other, and once or twice again, we broached the subject of marriage, and dismissed it.  And then at Christmas, we had a terrible fight, the worst fight we ever had, and I was afraid we'd broken up... she was afraid we'd broken up, and a day later, when we got back together again, we said we'd better get married. And we were the most unromantic pair, but we really got on terribly well, we loved poetry together, we loved lots of things together, cats, among other things, but we set the date for a time when my son would be home from school, so he could be there. My daughter was still nearby and as we approached the date, both of us were getting terrified. I was breaking up with everybody who was still current with me, and we had lunch I remember the day before the wedding - we could hardly speak - we were both pale, and so on, and we had the wedding in the judge's chambers and sort of came back to the house.

The three years that we were married in Ann Arbor, a number of things happened... sort of adventures.  Actually just before we were married I tried out for a major league baseball team, and that is ridiculous. I weighed 255 pounds at the time, and I was always a terrible athlete, but a literary agent of mine, who's a baseball fan, got the notion of suiting up a number of total amateurs and visiting spring training, at the very beginning of spring training, when things were pretty loose, and writing about it. So, I was the only... the only one who really did it much, I mean I was out there man. Jane and I - not Jane and I - Jane and I...sorry, sometimes I say Jane by mistake. Jane and I went down and I put on the uniform and went out and started doing laps with the players... the first moment of spring training for the major league baseball team - the Pittsburgh Pirates - and I did one lap, and then by the time - it was merely a lap around the base pass, rather short - by the time I got to second base the second time, two young catchers who are strong and hardy types, picked me up under the elbows and carried me the rest of the way.  And a tall black pitcher, said, 'Man, you out of shape', and that was Dock Ellis who was a famous pitcher at that time, and he and I became friends.  And I did batting practice which was called BP and I did infield practice. I was sort of trying out for second base because the throw to first base is short enough so I could almost make it.  And I once hit a ball out of the infield in batting practice - in general it was ludicrous and... and fun, it was enormous fun.  The entire team would gather to see me take batting practice because it was a comedy hit of the sensation.  And I wrote about it - an essay called Fathers Playing Catch with Sons - where I remembered my father who played baseball better than I did, and his involvement with baseball, and mine, and all sorts of things... more memoir which I've done so much of.  And it was published in Playboy as a matter of fact.  And then later it was the title essay of a collection of sports essays of mine - Fathers Playing Catch with Sons - but it was great fun and I got to know ball players and then later wrote a book about Dock Ellis, so I got to hang around the major leagues more. The only way I could make the major leagues was to write about it obviously.

Another thing I did that was fun at that time was... was to ride in a hot air balloon and this was... oh there was kind of gaiety in getting married to Jane - this was part of the gaiety - a friend of mine who was a plastic surgeon had his own balloon, and there were balloon rallies in Ann Arbor every now and then, and he had a friend with a two-seater, who... or rather, it was a basket that two people could stand in... and he took me up and we went 28 miles... and Jane was in a convertible with somebody else, and they were racing around underneath trying to keep up with us.  It was... the wind was... oh the wind was 20 some miles an hour, so we went right along as... terrifying cows, and there were farmers coming out and pointing up at us and so on, and we landed, dragging in some farmers field.  And then what you did was give the farmer a $20 bill or a $50 bill to pay for the crop... somebody came and picked you up.  And the plastic surgeon friend of mine who did it was hoping I'd write a poem about it. I never really did. I mentioned it at one point.

I began really to get back to poetry, and that's the most serious thing. I had been dwindling in the amount of time I spent on it. I was flail... flailing about for style. I'd sort of exhausted the style of the short lined free verse with lots of assonance and long vowels which I mentioned earlier. I repeated that a little, I went back and wrote some metrical poems... I tried some prose poems which I don't really like very much and I published some things and so on.  But I knew I was going nowhere, and I knew that the best poem... I had not written for oh, it would be about 10 years... a poem as good as something I'd written 10 years earlier.  It's a melancholy thing - it can happen to you at any point in your life that you lose it all of a sudden, and I was depressed and chaotic and so on. But then after Jane and I married, about six months after... one day I picked up a piece of paper and began to write Kicking the Leaves, the poem, Kicking the Leaves.  Which is not like anything I had been writing.  It was a little more like much earlier stuff but stylistically very, very different. And I can put together now the different places that style came from... things I'd been reading and admiring, but not trying to equal, and it doesn't sound like any poet in particular.  But I began to write Kicking the Leaves, and I picked up a paper and continued it... it's a fairly long poem - six or seven pages - and I wrote it... I began it over a period of... of a few days, but I knew when I was writing it that something had happened, and that something was opened up. That was before moving here, but the poem, Kicking the Leaves, looks ahead to living in this place, and at that time, all we knew was that we were going to come here and camp out for a year.  But the poem knew better than I did - it really foresaw the life here - and the rest of that year and into the winter, I wrote many poems which are in a volume called Kicking the Leaves and, they came much more quickly. I would finish them, I mean I... I would say normally that I'd think a poem might be done in two or three years, sort of thing, the last year I may just change a word here and there, but I was finishing them in two months or something then, and there were a whole lot of them, and it was so exciting, so utterly thrilling to be back and to feel that I was going forward. And since then, or in more recent years, when people have reviewed my work in general, there's a kind of standard sentence, and it says that Hall started early, and published a lot, and maybe did... and if they liked my work... they'd say he did some good things, but his work really began when he married his second wife, the poet Jane Kenyon and moved to the family farm in New Hampshire. Well, it really accelerated when I got to New Hampshire, but it began after marrying Jane, and anticipating coming to New Hampshire. That was, say in the first of the three years of the marriage in... no, it wasn't, no it wasn't... it was in the... in the second year, just before we came here in fact.  But something else happened that took a long time to come to fruition, and I think this was six months after Jane and I were married, that I was suddenly seized with an absolute deluge of images and lines... that in no particular shape of form... and they were a long way from being finished poems, but I felt that I was starting a book length poem. I had admired a book length poem that a contemporary of mine wrote, Galway Kinnell - The Book of Nightmares - and I wanted to write something of that capacity, not resembling it, but of that ambition and length.  And I began to write, and that time I remember, I would be driving to the supermarket, and I would be gone a mile or two and I'd pull over to the side of the road and write, and then I'd drive another block or two, and I'd pull over and write some more. It wasn't very good, but it was dynamite. It was very strong stuff, and it took me a long, long time to be able to work on it. I did - after 60 or 70 pages or so - came this strangeway... uncontrolled, manic, not happy necessarily... not happy in content, but manic in a kinda possession. After 60 or 70 pages, it slowed down and stopped and then later Kicking the Leaves started and those poems.  And when I came here, the return to this place continued the fountain that began to erupt with Kicking the Leaves. I had written about New Hampshire so much in Michigan, in England, I thought well I am living there I won't write about it any more - I really did - crazy. I came back here and wrote about it more than ever, you know. I... after I came back I wrote Names of Horses and Ox-Cart Man, and lots and lots of New Hampshire poems. So that the book, Kicking the Leaves, which began in Ann Arbor was probably, half to two-thirds of it at any rate was begun here, but it came out in 1978 which means it was finished by '77.  And it was the summer of '75 when we moved here, and I already had some of the poems. But that was incredibly exciting and that book is the one that allowed me to begin to come back in the estimation of people, and people mostly thought it was the best thing that I had done, and probably the single book that has sold more copies, whatever... whatever that means.

We had three years together of marriage in Ann Arbor, and they went well. I mean I taught my regular... well, no I was working on a book which never worked out actually, and we went to England to... we took a trip to England together that first fall to work on that book.  And most of the time I was just teaching regular courses, and she was working, paying off her loans, and we didn't have troubles together but there were other people around, we went to parties. Neither one of us... Jane loathed parties, and I was beginning not to like parties. They had been a distraction in my earlier distracted life. But we came here in the summer to see my grandmother and my mother, and we... she took one look at this house and loved it, and the landscape, she just fell in... fell in love with the place... and didn't have much sense of the people yet, but she loved the countryside anyway. Jane had grown up in rural Ann Arbor, on a dirt road, and then the road was paved, and the houses moved out around her, and the farm across the street where she had played as a little girl ceased being a farm. She... she knew that she loved the country... living in the country, and she certainly liked solitude, and was reclusive, she adored this place. We went back to Ann Arbor without even having a thought about moving here, and then she said... we were looking at a place in the country outside Ann Arbor, and she said one day, 'It's silly to buy a country place here when there's New Hampshire'. Well how would I commute to classes, you know, but I... I knew she wasn't thinking of me commuting to classes. Her family was freelancers, and the notion of living without a salary, without regular health insurance supplied by somebody else was not terrifying to her. I had grown up in a... father with a stable job, and then I'd had stable jobs... hard for me to think of freelancing.  But I set out to find what it would cost to buy it - my grandmother was still alive by this time. The second year that we were married, she was in the old folks home because she was becoming so senile... she could no longer take care of herself or live at home. She was 95 I guess by that time, and her three daughters were going to inherit the place, and my mother had a little money, but the other two sisters had none, so there wasn't a question of me inheriting the place... I'd had to buy it.  Nobody had any idea what it would sell for, so... it had not been surveyed since 1865.  So I hired a surveyor to survey it, and then got a price from a real estate man, and they needed... the... the three daughters needed money to pay for Kate in the old folks home, and so they were going to take a mortgage, but I gave a mortgage. I found out from my lawyers I could afford it, and so on... I gave a mortgage which would later turn into a down payment.

We didn't want to sell it while Kate was alive - just out of piety - so Jane and I then had the idea... I'd written a book, a textbook which had made quite a bit of money, so that I could take a year off and we could just go somewhere for a year, and spend a year writing, just she and I.  And we had the idea we would come and camp out in this house - there was no central heat, there was wood stoves, and no insulation, but we didn't mind and we decided that for the year of 1975/76, we would take leave and camp out in this house, and then go back to Ann Arbor, and the old life.  And after we were able to buy it, maybe we'd come here in summers, and maybe I could even think of early retirement. I was 45 at the time I'm speaking of, and so we went ahead and got leave, and came here with a U-Haul carrying a television set, and a chair or two that was comfortable enough to sit in, and my grandmother took a turn for the worse and died. It's as if she knew that we were moving, or that Donny was back, and that she could let go. I was holding her hand when she died. My mother was rubbing her head and I was holding her hand while she died at 97, and we came back and my mother stayed a week or so, and packed up. We buried my grandmother, and my mother went home and Jane and I were alone in this house, and the autumn happened, and the leaves, and we went to church - three years marriage in Ann Arbour, we had never entered a church -  and down the street was the cousins' church where many cousins still went - still one there now - and we went down, and the preacher was quite wonderful.  That first sermon we heard he referred to Rilke the German poet, and that was pretty interesting, that had never happened in the South Danbury Christian Church before, and the feeling of community... some wonderful cousins and other old friends who weren't cousins.  Their attitude toward me was... oh Donny you went away and now you're back. Good. You know, it wasn't a momentous event for them, it was what any sensible person would do, you know, live here, in this house in New Hampshire. For me it was momentous - for them it was, good, you're back. The sense of community was... was beautiful, wonderful - Jane adored it - we always went to church henceforth, and the minister started giving us, oh theological texts, like The Cloud of Unknowing and so on, and we actually... she began to read the scriptures.  The church became important to us, and after a little while, probably in October, Jane announced that she would chain herself into the root cellar rather than go back to Ann Arbor.  And I really wanted to live here, I really wanted to, but I would never have had the courage or the stupidity to quit my job and move into this place. One kid was in college. One wasn't yet in college. I had a mortgage... the house was unimproved, without central heating, with... it was still a gravity well, at that time and... but I did it. I said, 'I want to do it... let's wait'. I waited until December and I wrote a letter to the Department of English saying, 'I'm resigning'. They wrote back in saying, 'We reject your resignation, you have another year's leave'. But they didn't follow me up. I never changed my mind once I had done that.

She called me Perkins when... oh, one time when we were first in New Hampshire, we were driving around in Maine and we went to a little town called Perkins Cove, and Jane was amused at the dominance of the name Perkins in the town. She used to say, 'Oh it was Perkins Drug Store and Perkins Avenue, and Dr Perkins,' and so on.  And she said, 'This Perkins must have been quite a guy', and she started calling me Perkins. It's not much of a story, but I think that... you know my students - when she was my student - didn't call me Professor Hall, it... it was 1969, and we didn't do that. I was Don. I'd told about the entry in her journal about Donald Hall before we really knew each other, but even Don was the teacher's name, I think, and, so it became sort of comfortable for her to have this pet name for me. She always called me Perkins whenever she was teasing me, or... but also in affectionate moments too, she would say, when I got extravagant she'd say, 'Perkins, dim your lights!', or, 'Somebody cover Perkins' cage', and so on. And... it was lovely. And I tried... I tried to have an equivalent name, but whatever I tried never stuck really, and she was Jane, or Janey, always.

We were so happy here... to be here... and it was terribly cold that January - the January of '76 - it was 38 below zero Fahrenheit on the... on the porch and we had no... no double windows, no insulation of any kind, and we had that wood stove.  And to make love we would just pull blankets and pillows next to the stove right there, and we would... to... to go to bed... we did have something the old people didn't have... we had electric blankets, they had hot water bottles, we had electric blankets. I would dash into the sub zero bedroom and turn on the blankets for half an hour, and then we would dash in, and Jane would just get totally under... totally under, but the blanket was pretty warm.  And I wanted to read while going to sleep so I learnt to read with a cheap paperback book that I could hold in one hand and read, and then when this hand became insufferable, I'd move to the other hand and warm up the other one, so that I could read enough to go to sleep. We had a wonderful time and we wrote.  We had to write in one room, the first... I mean, during the worst of it. I was writing a book about a baseball player named Dock Ellis, by that time. He's a pitcher for the Pittsburgh Pirates, and he's from Los Angeles, and he came up to look over the manuscript that winter, on a day when it was warm, it was about 18 below probably, warmed up from 38 below and he had never, never experienced anything like it. He spent the night in the unheated parlour, wearing a fur hat, and fur boots. He came out of the room in the morning, and said, 'I am never going to spend another night in that room', and we got through the book quickly. He flew back the same day.

Jane and I, in our happiness here, hit upon a kind of schedule of work.  After that first year when we worked in the same room... when we came back - we had to go back to Ann Arbor in the summer and move out to get here - and we had bookcases built while we were gone and her study is over the kitchen, second floor, and mine was the room that I used to sleep in when I was a kid, just behind the living room here... it was a bedroom, and it became my study, or Kendel calls it my... the poetry room - it's all poetry in it - thousands of volumes of poetry.  And I went back to work in there. I had a little wood stove because we had no central heat for 10 years, we just had more wood stoves, more... and we put in, oh, and we put in storm windows and some insulation. And we continued to go to church, we hit upon various rituals... living here alone.  We didn't talk all day, we... we both got up early and I would usually get started sort of earlier than her, and read the paper and drink black coffee and get to work writing on poetry and she would... oh eventually she walked the dog, but we didn't have the dog for a while... she would get up more slowly and get up to her study and start her fire in her... in her study and work. She was up there every day. She... I pretty much wrote every day. I would say I wrote every day, and she did not.  She went through dry periods - but she would go up there and look at her work and try every day, and sometimes she would write letters when she couldn't work on poems, but then she'd go through periods of writing a good bit. And I used to read to her every day. We'd spend about an hour I think, a day, usually, reading, and we read tons of stuff. I read the Old and New Testaments, I read Paradise Lost, and Wordsworth. We also read F Scott Fitzgerald and the translation of Bovary [sic], and we read lots of Henry James, late Henry James which he dictated apparently, actually - it's wonderful to read aloud - late, complicated long sentence Henry James - it's absolutely marvellous to read aloud, and I did the reading aloud almost entirely.  Sometimes in cars on long journeys, I would be driving, and she'd be reading, but the standard thing was... to... for me to read aloud about an hour a day, and we'd go through novel after novel. I actually read her Ulysses at one point, after we knew each other but before we were getting married or anything. She took a course of mine in Yeats and Joyce so she'd read Joyce then with a... with a bunch of people, but I sat here in this room and read it aloud to her, which was wonderful. I hadn't read it in a long time. It's tremendous to read aloud as long as nobody's listening and doesn't hear my attempts at an Irish accent it's ok. I mean I did read aloud to the kids but... you know, when I was lecturing... but if an Irish person came to the lecture hall I was deeply embarrassed, every time, but that was part of it. Also after we made one change to the house we extended the root cellar, put a ping pong table down there, and we used to go down and play ping pong, except that we didn't play games. Jane hated to lose and she was you know 5' 6" and I had much more reach, and if we had kept score, I would have won all the time, so we didn't, we just batted the ball back and forth, and had a good time. Every now and then I'd hit it so that she couldn't reach it and I'd call her Stubsy, whereupon the next ping pong ball would hit me in the groin savagely, and - without harm - but we had a lovely time. And we fought over who cooked, we... at the beginning we both loved to cook.  And we never cooked together - we took turns and so on - we were different kinds of cook, but that was fun.  And we would have a beer, glass of wine usually with it... it was very happy. Unhappiness is... I mean happiness is never unmixed but we got along very well and we quarrelled about once a year which meant that if we quarrelled it was terrible, so once a year, maybe three times a year, as much as many people do in one hour, you know and so on... it was surprising. We were both... I had been with my analyst guy... she had therapy too, and both of us, I think learned to... well I remember earlier in my life, I think that somebody I was with was mad at me. I learned that whenever you've... or was being grumpy... whenever you feel that way, the first thing to do is say, 'What am I... what am I mad at?' And she had the same sort of thing, yeah. And there would be times when we would be very silent, rather than looking for a quarrel which I think I would have done in an earlier life.

Jane was frequently depressive.  She was bipolar but infrequently manic. When she was, it was like being married to someone else. She was more... she was... tended to be on the depressive side. She... this was not diagnosed or anything for a long time, but I can't remember when it was... it was in the '80s and she began to take pills and... and some of the medications helped a lot and some did not.  And I... I think that... I was energetic and more positive and I think I probably got some sense of... oh being in control or being in charge of something by her being depressed and me being, kind of, hypermanic. At any rate we.. we both understood, and it was never a quarrel. There were several times... twice she got doctors to tell me that, yes, she was depressed but it was not my fault, and... and she was not mad at me, and she loved me, and... I knew it anyway, but she was afraid that I wouldn't. There were times when she was so depressed that I couldn't touch her - literally - I mean I couldn't rub her back or touch her hair, anything like that.  She didn't want to scream, but there were many times when she was only mildly depressed when making love cured her for a while, and I wrote somewhere or other that, you know, we made love whether we liked it or not, it helped and... we liked it anyway.

She began really to flower and ascend as a poet when she came here and... was so concentrated on it. She didn't work at anything else... she had a great garden - she was a great gardener - but the work was one thing... it was writing, and it was writing poems.  She eventually wrote some prose too and I think she would have written a lot more if she had lived, but it was amazing to see and really exciting and stimulating to see her get better, and better and better. She published her first book in 1978, when we had been here only three years, and it will be reprinted in the present collected poems, and it's good, but not nearly so good... the best of it is damn good... but the second book made an enormous leap. The second book came 1986... and eight years... it was pretty much finished earlier than that but took a while to find a publisher. The first publisher was a co-operative and she wanted to go with somebody real, and she found a very good small publisher- Graywolf - that published her subsequently and is still publishing her now. I remember one day when she brought me three poems, sort of part way through the second book, when I realized that I was married to an extraordinary poet, not just a... certainly not a talented kid, not a good poet but better than that. I remember those three poems with such affection, because it took the top of my head off. And of course, people have always asked us about competition between us.  It really wasn't much of a problem, for one thing we were different generations - she published her first book the year I published my sixth book - and whenever people compared us - they did with that book not subsequently - it was uncomfortable, and we read together sometimes when we were first married here, where people had reading series who knew us both and knew she had done good things, so they asked us both to read, but whenever we did, at the beginning, somebody would always say something that, sort of, put her down.  One idiot actually asked her if she didn't feel dwarfed... he was an English professor, needless to say. But another person introduced her as Joan Kenyon one night, you know, making it clear that he had no idea who she was. And so she decided that we couldn't read together any more, and I was sad about that, but I understood... it gave her, you know, bad feelings, and it was like a type of competition. Many years later, we were... she was... had published a couple... two or three books, and she was publishing in The New Yorker all the time, and we were invited to read a lot, but we always said we won't read together, we will read... we'll do two separate readings, so we did that. And one time we were reading at a college, and we did two separate readings, but there was a single question period for the two of us from the writing students, and she got three quarters of the questions, and then she said afterwards, she called me Perkins, she said, 'Perkins, I think we can read together now'. So for the last few years of her healthy life, we did many readings together going A, B, A, B.  We read together in New Hampshire, in Pocatello, Idaho, and in Lexington, Kentucky and in India, and so on, and it was wonderful reading together. The last time we read together was about two weeks before leukemia hit over at Bennington College, but by that time people were beginning to see it... that she was an extraordinary poet.  Some people were... she was still... her reputation was just beginning to rise, and a year before she took sick, Bill Moyers did an hour's show about the two of us, equal, 50/50, interviews with each of us separately, and each of us reading poems.  And... and working through the fields and going to church and so on together. And a lot of people found her by that program, so that... and the program... was... went national, just two or three months before she took sick, but, she got a lot of mail out of it, and she was aware when she was so sick that her reputation was rising, and her reputation after her death has grown exponentially.  But I don't feel too bad for her because she knew where it was going, or the direction it was taking, and so on.

We lived a life here without parties... there are no parties in New Hampshire, it's against the law. No dinner parties, no cocktail parties, and we had our friends, and saw people... people came to see us on our weekends. When we were first here, lots of people came up from New York and all over the place to check us out. I mean we were doing this weird thing, and they wanted to see what it was like.  So a lot of people spent the one night in their life in an unheated house, you know, and people would say, 'It's really beautiful here... it's really... what do you do?'. We didn't have any problem doing, you know... we.. we read books and we read each other, and at supper. I said we were very unromantic lovers... and after being here for a little while, there was candlelit dinners, and... and they were... we were... five years after we were married in a judge's chambers in Ann Arbor, we were married again informally by our minister in the church that we went to. He came over on the Saturday afternoon which was the actual anniversary of the wedding and brought three glasses and a half bottle of wine, and some flowers and read through the ceremony, and we had become romantic lovers after all those years. But, in order to make a living I was writing all sorts of things... poetry always came first and I never shirked the possibility of a poem to write a magazine piece, but man, did I write magazine pieces... I did everything... I've written manuscripts for publishers for money. I edited poetry for a couple of magazines, for a pittance, and I wrote, you know, book reviews for any place that would ask me, pretty much. There's a magazine called Ford Times, which is sent to owners of Ford cars... I managed to write them an article about Gertrude Stein's love for Ford cars.  All that's a matter of sort of half a day of looking through Gertrude Stein biographies and then whipping up 500 words or something like that, for $500. I wrote for Yankee Magazine, and I would... after a while, the editors began to call me, instead of me going to the editors, and I could pick and choose. I wrote alot about baseball, I wrote about New Hampshire, I wrote alot of poetry... a lot, and I got to the point where I could collect all my poetry pieces and publish a little collection of poetry essays, or I could... I collected my baseball pieces in... in one book, and collected New Hampshire pieces in others and so on, so that the trick of being a freelancer is to sell everything twice, you know. And another thing that was supporting us very much, was the poetry reading. That is a source of income for poets that was never there until 45 years ago, that is now common and I have probably made, I don't know, 25 or 30% of my income on the poetry reading.

The economics of freelancing is fascinating. I calculated at some point, that at the end of the year, that I had made my living by 300 cheques, and - but these are small checks, almost all of them, are small checks - and if you have 300 bosses you don't have any bosses.  And I loved the independence, and I would get up in the morning knowing I was going to work on poems first thing, but not knowing much else. And I wouldn't know what poems I was going to work on... I'd work on what felt like... I felt like working on in the morning. And then I might go to a children's book or do an essay for The Times Literary Supplement, or an essay for Yankee Magazine, or Ford Times, or something.  It was really exciting, and I also felt like a pirate... I felt I was... I was getting away with something by making a living as a freelancer. I think my... my new Connecticut family were all businessmen, and I may have inherited business genes because I think I handled it well, but I was very lucky with a couple of things. The book that was selling when we came here, that allowed us to take that year off, was a freshman English textbook, and I had begun that when I was first separated because my salary from the university was not so much as I owed in child support - I was behind every month - so I took a... an advance to write the freshman English textbook, and then got really interested in it and it did very well for a number of years.  It's past its time now. It was called, Writing Well, and then later I did all sorts of books... The Oxford Book of American Literary Anecdotes, that was great fun to do and so on. I did more textbooks, I did 12 children's books all told, one called Ox-Cart Man won the Caldecott Prize as the best picture book... Barbara Cooney illustrated it and she did a beautiful job, and it won that prize and it still sells a great deal. The Japanese translation sells many copies every year - still - and it's... it came out about 1980 or something, but... the American book used to sell all the time too. So I put it together all sorts of ways.  At the same time I was giving my most energetic moments to writing poetry, and Jane was putting everything into writing poetry and getting better and better, and the stimulus of her getting better and better was - if this was competitive, so be it - it made me want to get better and better too.  It was just wonderful.

Jane and I were probably, almost always the first readers of each others poems... living in this house... and we were... oh it was always very exciting to do it.  We would never write something and immediately show it to the other, which was a very bad idea. The minute somebody else talks about a poem, their voice becomes part of the poem, somehow, and I always wanted, and Jane did too, to spend quite a bit of the time with the poem alone, just looking at it everyday by myself, sort of as if it had a mind of its own, and my mind was its mind, and we didn't want any other consciousness in it.  So I'd save up a few, so would she, and one morning, she would say, 'Perkins, I left some stuff on your desk'. I'd put some stuff on her footstool, then I'd run and hide while she read it, so I wouldn't look at her face while she was reading it - it was a big deal - and Janey always said that I'd come to her with her poems, saying, 'These are going to be good', and she'd say, 'Going to be, huh?', and she also... I heard her talking about it many times, she said that she would - after I'd finished talking about a draft of hers - she would go up to her study upstairs saying, 'Perkins just doesn't get it, and then I'd do everything he said'. Well, we never really did everything the other person said. I look through her posthumous selected poems now, and I... I see words that I tried to argue her out of, and I still think I was right, but we helped each other a lot. I was... I sort of gave more praise that... than Jane did, which kind of frustrated me. She'd say, 'You've taken this as far as the mind can take it', or, 'Don't touch it', but she wouldn't say, 'This is great', which is what I wanted her to say.  But anyway we helped each other a lot. And of course, I had been her teacher, and therefore we had to get past that when we were first married, before we could really work on each other's stuff. I know when we were first married, she couldn't even write poems while I was in the house. I'd go off on a poetry reading, and I'd come back and she'd be... have been working on something.  But this was not a... this was, we got past it within the first year at any rate.  But at the beginning it was a real problem. Every... anytime I started criticising her work, I mean praising it, blaming it, whatever, I was her teacher again, and we had to get past that to be husband and wife.  And the way it happened, we didn't, you know, plan it, you can't plan these things, was that we got a third person involved.  There's a poet named Gregory Orr who came to Michigan, on a fellowship and we got along with him very well and we had a great time. And the three of us would get together with the manuscripts that each of us was writing, and then, with the third person in the room it was perfectly fine for me to talk about Jane's work, Greg was talking about it as well, and we work all together.  And it was perfectly easy... no... no problem, we got past it, and when Greg left Ann Arbor, I guess it was the same time we did - three years later - we didn't need his presence... we didn't need any third party's presence to get to work on each other's stuff.  We had gotten past that problem of the teacher coming back again.

Well we came here and we published books in the same year - 1978 - her first book of poems and my book, called, Kicking the Leaves, and our second books came out the same year. We always swore we wouldn't come out the same year, so we wouldn't be reviewed together but we always did, more or less.  It was... it was '86 maybe... I think it was '86 when her second book, which was a kind of breakthrough - The Boat of Quiet Hours - came out, at the same time as a book of mine, called The Happy Man.  And The Happy Man, the title of it, I took from some note by Tolstoy, in which he talked about the happy man, and all happiness and he's full of thoughts of suicide, and it's a book with a lot of depressing poems in, but not entirely. When I told Jane, 'I've found a title, I've found a title - I'm going to call it, The Happy Man''.  Typical of Jane, she said, 'It sounds too depressed'. And... but anyway I did call it The Happy Man. But at... there was... at this time in my life, as a writer, there was a sort of physical and psychological element than the writing that I... I have talked about in print, and that is that, when I was about 50, something like that, I became an adult onset diabetic, and my diabetes is still with me, and it's very much under control and so on, but it had the effect, gradually, in my 50s of making it impossible for me to sustain an erection.  And this was depressing, it was depressing for both of us, of course, and my poems suddenly turned kind of old and resigned, and... it was not... I was not in any deep depression, but it was difficult for both of us, and my poetry became sort of more passive, or old and so on.  And I think some of the poems are good that are in this mode, but... I finally solved the problem by having a penile implant surgery, and potency came back. I was always... always orgasmic, but I just couldn't have an erection but I got a permanent one, and it was wonderful, and Jane adored it, and said... kept saying, 'Perkins, what you did for me', and I would point out it wasn't just for her, but, at that same time, my poems got back their liveliness and energy, just because of a bit of surgery, but it's very noticeable. And it was noticeable in what a lot of people think is the best thing I ever did, which was the book length poem.

Way back, in the early '70s, when Jane and I were first married, I had had this onslaught of lines of... of poems which I thought of as being the start of a book length poem.  And gradually here over the years I began to work on that. It was hard for me to look at it... a lot of the material was very painful in the original generation, and then I began to see how to put parts of it together. It... the book that eventually... eventually I wrote is in three parts, and the first part uses most of that material that... that came up when I was driving the car and pulling over to the side of the road in Ann Arbor.  And at some point - I can't tell exactly when, it might have been 1980, 1982 - I had made that material into something like 30 sections of three pages each.  And I worked on it hard, and one afternoon I read it all to Jane, and when I finished reading it, I felt an overwhelming sense of shame.  Partly the material was shameful, but it was also that I knew it wasn't going... it wasn't working. I took it back, I couldn't look at it for six months, and then I went back to work on it, and I finished essentially the first part, and published it in The Happy Man, because at that time I didn't think I'd ever finish it. I had a vision of something much longer, but then came the operation and the access of energy, and I was able to write the whole book. I came up on schemes for the different parts - the three parts which were in balance. The... the book is modernist in its construction, in the sense that I think there is a lot of Ulysses... it's obviously not noticeable... Ulysses in it, and The Waste Land has it's structure essentially based on the modernism of Joyce and I grew up with Eliot and Joyce and so on.  So I think that The One Day - the eventual name of the book - is a book in that tradition, a very late version of it obviously, that came out in, well I guess, maybe 1988, I'm not sure about my dates right now.  But it won a bunch of prizes and a lot of people - it has probably sold less than any book of mine - it's difficult... it's a single, more or less sustained, book length poem, but it's... it continues to be praised and to be written about, and called my... my best work - certainly the most ambitious. I don't really know, of course, that it's the best. But that was a major work taking from the beginning to the end, it was about 17 years, but of course I didn't work on it all the time - I put it away - scared to look at it some of the time, but I'm so pleased with it - that one.

I went on to... to write... I more or less finished two books while she was alive, but they... they were long poems often... assemblages. There's a long one called, Baseball, which is nine parts, called, nine innings, naturally, each of nine stanzas, and each stanza of nine lines, and each line of nine syllables just a... an awkward or funny exo skeleton on which I could hang everything I ever knew... everything I‘ve ever found out about. There was also a book of pseudo translations of Horace - a first book of Odes - where I kinda invented a character I called Horace Horsecollar, who was a minor cartoon character in Disney cartoons, way, way back and Horace Horsecollar was thinking he was translating Horace but when Horace talked about Mercury, Horace Horsecollar thought he was talking about a General Motors automobile, so, but it allowed me all sorts of opportunities for...  It was another kind of exoskeleton... that... into which I could pour all sorts of concerns - political and personal concerns, and ironies.  It became the title poem or collection of a book called, The Museum of Clear Ideas - that was the Horace stuff, which included Baseball and others. Meantime the... private life went on - Jane had her struggles with depression and with occasional mania. She just sweated it out day after day. She wrote a wonderful poem... a long poem called Having it Out with Melancholy, which was her major attack on depression, and other poems included moments of ecstatic happiness - very bipolar.  And when she wrote Having it Out with Melancholy, she had to fight against her own sense of shame, of making public her mental problems, but at the same time, she knew that if she did it, it would help other people.  And I'll never forget the first time she read it aloud.  There's a Robert... old Robert Frost house, in Franconia, New Hampshire where she did a reading, and she read it, and afterwards there were 20 or 30 people lined up to talk to her who were themselves depressives or from the families of depressives and were thanking her for bringing it out, and talking about it.

There were wonderful things, like the birth of the first two grandchildren - two red-headed girls - my kids are five... five years apart in age, but their first two children were born four days apart.  Two girls who are 16 at the moment of my speaking now, and there's an... ecstatic to have grandchildren, marvellous... I can just talk about it and be totally conventional. I was just another ecstatic grandfather.  When the first was born down in Concord, New Hampshire - or actually she was the second born, but I hadn't seen the first one yet - I went to the hospital to see the baby and took photographs of course, but then I couldn't stand it to wait for one hour developing so I ran out to a camera store, bought a Polaroid and came back and took more pictures which I could hold in my hand right then.  It was lovely, and since then there have been three more grandchildren, so that there are now two 12 year olds, and a 14 year old, as well as two 16 year olds, this was all wonderful. But shortly after the first granddaughters were born, I... oh, I can't think of the first symptom... oh, I know, fatigue... I... I was... I always take one nap a day, but then I was taking two naps, three naps, four naps, and I went to my doctor. I do tend, when something weird happens, to go check it out, and I'm glad I did. My doctor suspected that I was leaking blood somewhere, and he sent me to a doctor who gave me an endoscopy, where they put a camera down your throat, they are looking for a bleeding ulcer or something - nothing there. So they went in the other direction, and I had colon cancer. I will never forget... Jane came with me... they... they give you Demerol so that somebody else has to drive you.  And I remember the doctor sitting across the desk with Jane and me, saying, 'You have colon cancer'.  That's just the sentence that reverberates in the mind.

So we set about immediately to remove it. Dartmouth-Hitchcock is a medical school hospital only an hour away from here, and I went there to have... I think it was four feet of colon removed or something like that, and some of the small intestine and it's unpleasant enough, but, I came home full or energy and I think it's survivor's mania. I was doing all sorts of things in bad judgement at that time - I was quite happy but I had no judgement at all.  And I did not have any chemo at that time, and I recovered but we were looking at the word cancer, and the possibilities of mortality more directly than we had before.  And then just a year and a half later, there's a blood test for the presence of colon cancer, that works with some people and works with me, called a CEA.  So I had this test done regularly - no symptoms - suddenly the CEA went from say, 3.7 to 34, and we knew that there was cancer someplace, and ultrasound, the CAT scan revealed a large cancer in my liver. It was technically not liver cancer, but a cancer of the liver, that was metastatic colon cancer and I saw it on ultrasound at one point... rather large... the... the woman technician running the ultrasound said, 'Oh, it looks like an hourglass', which I thought was a nice metaphor.  And we set about to remove that. Now when you have... it was in one half of the liver, visibly large, and so that the thing to do at that point is to remove half of the liver.  But in... oh, 70 or 80% of the people who have cancer in one half of the liver, it is invisibly in the other half as well, so that the survival rate for... the five year survival rate or something is rather poor and we knew this of course. I went into the hospital and [had] half my liver removed, and came out, had chemotherapy then for a while, which in my case was not very onerous - that chemo - as it is for many people.  But we were waiting to... for the cancer to come back and me to die - this was 1992 when I had the operation, April 1st, and then the chemo over the summer and the fall.  And... but we continued with our work. I worked after the first colon cancer - I dropped a long project I had, because there were other things I wanted to finish... poems and a revision of a... of an earlier prose book.  And I was certainly thinking that my time was probably short and that I had to imagine what I... what I could get done in the meantime. Jane felt that way too. After the liver... Jane kept rubbing me, massaging me, all the time - every day - and that felt very good, and so on.  But she also felt that somehow she was rubbing the cancer out... we were possessed by all this and it hovered there always.  It didn't possess us all day after a while, but we expected that at one point, my... something would... would reveal that the cancer had spread to the other half of the liver, and you can't have both halves out - there were no liver transplants at that time.  I don't think there was much for cancer anyway now, but it didn't happen that way... it happened otherwise.

The year of 1993, the year after my liver operation, was the busiest year of our marriage. It wasn't the best... probably the best year of our marriage would be the year in which we would remember the least... we'd just have the routine of working together all day. But 1993 was fine.  It began with trips to read our poems together - by this time we were reading our poems together.  And then, Bill Moyers came to the house and interviewed both of us, and that was the end of January - January 30th or something, 1993 - to... to make an hour long programme for the public broadcasting system, about us and our work and our life together. One of the themes there, was... oh, the imminence of my death, it was in the... in the content or the shape of the show, as they finally brought it out.  You know they did about 35 hours to get 56 minutes or whatever, and they... they shaped it very well.  And that year... oh, because I'd been sick the year before, I kept getting anticipatory funerals, as it were. There were tributes to me... AWP Associated Writing Programs had a big one in Norfolk where Jane and other people talked about me and so on, and then the University of Michigan, where I had taught, gave me an honorary degree.  It was all sort of - we took it lightly - these... these funerals, but they were more occasions for travel and talk with friends. In the... I guess it was the end of August... we went back to India for a year.  We had been to India for the State Department, reading poems.
[Q] For a month... for a month?
Yeah... but we had been there two years before - was it two years? - I think it was '91 and '93, the two trips to India.  And we loved India and I think Jane in particular was spectacularly popular there, with her... very... many very spiritual poems. And each time we spent about a month, and we'd spend two days in a city and then fly to another one, and talk more. We were very busy, but we had time to walk in the markets and talk to people, but mostly... we were interviewed by journalists in the morning and then would have a meeting with maybe some academics or students - ten in the morning - have a little time off and then there'd be an afternoon reading or lecture, and a dinner scheduled for eight, but really being served about ten.  And we... we loved the country... we had a great time. Earlier, the State Department had sent us to China and Japan, way back in 1986, and we had a wonderful time in... in China at that time in particular, but these trips to India were the most spectacular trips that we had.  So in that last good year - 1993 - we had a year there... we both had books out and we had a kind of mini tour together - going to various cities and reading together and doing radio work and so on - very busy... very busy time.

Well that year, that summer, my mother could no longer live at home - she had turned 90 in April - and in August it became clear that she could no longer live by herself.  So we brought her up to New Hampshire to a facility, only 10 miles away from us, and I could see her every day... and she was having her difficulty with congestive heart at the age of 90 but, it was good to be able to see her. She missed her house, but she was glad that we could visit every day really... and with her in November we saw the first broadcast of the Moyers show. We went up to the facility - an extended care facility - and sat with her and watched it, this one hour show.  And then came Christmas, and in January of 1994 we went over to Bennington College, where our dear friend Liam Rector was starting an MFA program... low residency... there were only 125 students that first time - and Jane lectured on Keats, Bishop and Akhmatova.  She had translated some of Anna Akhmatova, and she wouldn't let me come to the lectures - she was so freaked out. I was used to lecturing - I had been a teacher, and constantly on the road - but she had never lectured... she wouldn't let them be tape recorded, she wouldn't allow my presence in the room, but people said that she did very well... and people praised her work and so on... and I lectured as well. I don't think she came to those lectures, but she was allowed to - I was just lecturing on prosody.  And then we did a reading together, late in January or mid... mid January I guess of 1994, and it was the last reading we ever did, because when we came back here, Jane felt ill.  She felt as if she was coming down with something... she had bone pain, she felt out of sorts.  And she was coming on a reading with me that year, but she stayed home, and then at the end of the month, 29th, 30th, I flew down to Charleston, South Carolina to do a reading and a lecture... and talked to her, as I always did, maybe three times a day when I was on the road... and she continued to feel... I would say, 'How are you feeling?' and she didn't feel so well. And then one day, while I was on my way home, my plane was late, and I telephoned from Logan Airport - because I was going to be later than I thought - to talk with her. I asked her how she was, and she said that that morning she'd had a terrible nosebleed, and that she had driven up to the hospital to get them to stop it.  But all she could talk about at that moment on the telephone was that the car wouldn't start when she came out... that, she thought later... that was, I thought, was my problem. She went inside and they did blood work, and she told me on the telephone that - as we arranged for when I would come back - that they were doing blood work and she was waiting for it, and the oddest thing - standing there in the phone booth in Logan Airport, the sentence formed in my head: Jane has leukemia. I have never known anyone with leukemia, and I have never been around it. I'd heard about it since I was a little kid, but a nosebleed... maybe something in my mind associated bleeding and blood work with leukemia.  But anyway, I had this thought, and I had made the arrangement that I would stop off to see my mother sort of on the way home, and then I could stay home. I had thought, when I was coming earlier, that I'd go up and see my mother later.  So I walked into my mother... but on the drive from the airport to my mother's place, that sentence, Jane has leukemia, kept floating into my head and I kept pushing it away.  There was no reason to think so. When I talked with my mother, a nurse came in and told me that there was a doctor at the hospital - which was the same place Jane had gone for her blood work - who wanted to see me.  And I knew what he was going to tell me, and he told me. At that time he gave me a piece of paper that had Jane's number - Jane's blood was in such bad shape that he said she couldn't wait for me to come home... she had to get somebody to drive her up to the hospital immediately and he got a room for her.  So from my mother's side, I drove up to see Jane in the hospital and indeed she had leukemia.

Well then started the 15 months of Jane's leukemia.  And of course one of the terrors was that my own cancer would return and I wouldn't be able to take care of her, but it did not, at all. Five years after my liver operation, when the cancer had not recurred, I was considered cured, or am cured, but by that time, Jane was herself dead. She was hospitalised for a month to be put into remission by means of chemotherapy. I wanted to be with her as much as I possibly could so I rented a motel room near the hospital, it's about an hour away, so that I didn't spend so much time driving back and forth.  And Jane's mother, who had moved to New Hampshire two or three years earlier, moved into this house and took care of our animals, our beloved dog, Gus, and an old cat, while I spent every day, all day, pretty much, by Jane's bedside. And oh, her hair fell out... started to fall out so she had it shaved, and all the predictable effects of chemotherapy. At the beginning our attitude - hers and mine - about her leukemia, was certainly not that death was inevitable, it was as if, well, this is the worst challenge we've ever faced... oh boy, what a... what a tough time... but the assumption that she would come through.  But really the chances were always rather poor, as I came gradually to understand.  She had ALL - acute lymphoblastic or lymphocytic leukemia - which is the kind that kids get, and these days kids largely recover from it, but when you are... how old was she then? She was 46. When you are 46 years old and you get it, your chances are not nearly so good. There is a protocol for treatment - I think two years of treatment - lots of different chemos followed by radiation, that cures some people and so we started on that.  But then there's a complication. Every leukemia's almost different from every other leukemia, there are minute differences which can show in an electron microscope of the DNA of the cancer cells. There's something called a Philadelphia chromosome - because it was discovered in Philadelphia at some point - and it's a fragmentation in two of the strands of DNA, and no one knows why, but when the cancer cell has this fragmentation, the chances of cure by chemotherapy become nil - it's impossible. We didn't discover this, or we weren't told it - I think the pathologists were originally not certain - we didn't know it until perhaps late February or March, but that meant there was only one possibility to save Jane's life, which was a bone marrow transplant.

A bone marrow transplant means that you'd have someone else's immune system, and it's then possible that the new immune system will reject the cancer cells that survive chemotherapy. Because of the Philadelphia chromosome, her cancer cells would always survive chemotherapy - they could go away for a while - they'd be invisible. The oncologists all used a metaphor that they 'hide' and no one knows what that means.  So it's possible that somebody else's marrow, thriving in your own bones, can reject returning cancer cells and you can survive. So we set out to try to discover a matching marrow. Jane came back from the hospital in remission, slated to undergo further chemos every month, and they would be various... there would be an injection, there'd be an infusion... I think once or twice it was just pills... some of them were kind of devastating but not always. She had days, and weeks that... that weren't so bad, but again and again, something would turn up.  She would... oh, she got Herpes zoster - there were all sorts of symptoms.  Three times she became delusional - always because of the chemotherapy, not because of the original leukemia - and I would have to drive her up to emergency and she'd be back in the hospital again for another week or a day or two and so on. It was quite a siege. While this was going on then from, say March, on, we were searching for a matching marrow, and the first thing you try to do is to match it with a sibling or any close relative. Jane had a brother and he had his blood tested and it was not a match. You have to... there are... there's a quality in the blood cells called antigens.  There are six antigens and you want to match all six.  He matched, I think, in three out of six - not good enough to make... to do a transplant. Therefore we had to look for a stranger. There's a bank of registered antigens, mostly just four antigens... they have to test further, where there were, I cannot remember right now, maybe 200,000 samples.  It was very hard to find a match and the original scan of Jane's antigens and the ones in the bone marrow bank didn't turn up any exact matches at all. Friends of ours around the country went to have their blood tested to see, but the chance of anybody you know or anybody who's a neighbor, who's not a relative, matching, are very tiny, but somebody may... may match somehow. It kept failing to match. Then the blood marrow took in people whose four antigens matched four of Jane's to see if the other two might match - 10 at a time, all over the country, people went to their hospitals out of their own goodness or charity and allowed further blood testing to see if they matched. We were in and out - it was always we, totally we, always - it was our leukemia.  We were in and out of the hospital, as I say, over and over again, sometimes on schedule for infusions of chemotherapy but again and again because of dire events in her body or in her mind.  And then in August, it was a long time, came a telephone call that someone had been found who matched with five out of six antigens, and there were other qualities of the blood that seemed promising, but the hospital was willing to go ahead and give Jane the bone marrow transplant. The hospital... I say we were dealing with a hospital in Seattle, Washington, which is sort of the Mecca of bone marrow transplants.  It was a doctor named E Donnall Thomas who invented the procedure of the bone marrow transplant originally back in the '50s, I think... and originally perhaps just identical twins, but gradually it came so that they were unrelated pairs even. After he had made this discovery, and won the Nobel Prize, someone funded a hospital in Seattle - The Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center [sic] - in particular... they handle other things... but in particular to deal with leukemia, and especially to oversee bone marrow transplants. There's a kind of Sears Roebuck catalog of bone marrow hospitals and I began to read - it was alphabetical by state - so I discovered that in Boston, there were one or two hospitals that had done 25 or 30 transplants of non-related marrows, and New York there were places that had done 35 or 40, and then I discovered that out in Minnesota one hospital had done 200. Well I was reading by state, and I finally got to Washington, and here was the Hutchinson Cancer Center, which had done maybe 6, 700, at that time, of bone marrow transplants so I went to them - they had the most experience.  She was a particularly difficult case - 46 year old, well she was 47 by that time - female, with ALL and the Philadelphia chromosome.  So we went to the place that seemed to have the most experience, to be the best, and it's a very good hospital... and they were very good people. We arranged to go out in September and the anonymous donor would be operated on - her marrow harvested, as they say - and then flown to Seattle and Jane would have her transplant.  But shortly before we were ready to fly, her remission failed and leukemia returned, and they would not do the transplant with leukemia in residence.  So Jane went back into hospital for new chemo, more chemo, a kind of massive assault on her for several weeks in order to try to re-establish remission so that we could go.  And this was a time of, when we were on tenterhooks obviously.  And they did tell us that remission had occurred again and that the harvest had been put off, but was rescheduled, and we flew out to Seattle together.

Around this hospital there are a good many apartment buildings which exist for the families of bone marrow patients. The patient is in the hospital for treatment before, and immediately after, the bone marrow, but then they go home and the caregiver who, of course, was me in this case, supervises infusions, and pill taking, and trying to get the patient to swallow some nutrition. We went out there... we found our apartment to sublet for a moment and then went into the hospital. All the time that Jane was sick, I stayed by her side. I would read to her some, but she could no longer listen to Henry James. She was too sick... maybe one column by Dave Barry a day, was the most of it.  She couldn't talk that much. She was just... she was nauseated constantly and in a great deal of pain, because of the treatment to try to save her life. I read some but it was very hard for me to concentrate on my reading. I could help her a little bit... I could rub her head, or back, or I could bring her hot blankets. I could, when... I could fetch her tea maybe when... on a good day, something like that. But there was one thing that I could do and could concentrate on and that was writing. There were things I was in the middle of, there were a couple of children's books I was working on that I was able to do.  But most of what I did was to write about Jane, to write about what was happening. I wrote hundreds and hundreds of little poems about the events of the illness, sitting beside her, writing about her. Sometimes, she would say, 'What are you writing, Perkins?' when she felt well enough to talk, and I might read her something I'd been writing about... what was happening right in front of us... it was extraordinary - poetry was a companionship even at that moment. I wasn't trying to, you know, make poems out of what was happening, I was just doing what I had to do... after all, from the age of 14, this is what I did all day, was to write, and my life was nothing but her illness at this time, and therefore her illness came out in the writing.  And I was beginning what eventually became a book that I published, I guess, three years after her death, a book called Without... book of poems which is about the progress of her illness and her death and then the first year of grieving and mourning afterwards. One time when we were still in New Hampshire before we went out to Seattle, I looked out the window, and saw it was August, late August, and I saw that the leaves were beginning to turn, and I realized that I had forgotten that the leaves had come to the trees, and I thought it's a year without seasons, and it's a year without punctuations.  And I picked up a piece of paper and began to write. I wrote the... the poem, that's itself called, Without, which in the book, Without, occurs at the moment of her death. I actually mostly wrote... I wrote many drafts of it while she was alive beside me. It was about the landscape of leukemia - the barren, changeless landscape - in which you didn't... there... there were no seasons, there was nothing... 'without without no this no that no that'.  And I wrote the poem without punctuation, which is, I think the only one I have in print without punctuation, but it was imitated form... it was the lack of boundaries in this steady, pitiless landscape of leukemia. Writing about it, helped me get through the moments of her illness and she was glad that somebody was writing, she was too sick to write, she couldn't write but it helped me, as it helped me in the grieving so that I thought from time to time, what does somebody do who can't write poems? A silly and maybe arrogant thing to think of, but it was just what kept me going. While she was alive, caring for her, doing little things, kept me going, but there was no other subject. I would be with her usually beginning at about six in the morning and would come to see her while the night nurses were still on, and I'd find what her night was like, how her night had been. I'd sit beside her and drink coffee, read the paper, and stay with her all day until, usually, we watched... well when she felt well enough, we watched the PBS News program from six to seven, and then she was pretty exhausted and she wanted to sleep and I would go home about seven and then come back the next morning. Often, she would sleep then for a while and then wake up and she had some long conversations with night nurses when they were not doing their rounds, when they had some free time, I know... so she had some companionship then also. She was always free to call me and I would come over, and she did that out in Seattle, one night, she suddenly felt particularly frightened, and I came back to the hospital.

There was a day in November when the marrow arrived. I found out later who had donated it, but of course, it had been the focus of our thoughts since the previous March - this day - the magic arrived.  And that day the marrow arrived around dinner time, but they had to take it to the lab and do T-cell depletion. The T-cells are effective in rejecting mechanisms, so they depleted a number of T-cells so that her body would not reject the marrow, or the marrow reject her body immediately. My science is probably a little shaky here by this point, but it's approximate.  So I stayed that night in her room... we reeled in a bed, and I wanted to be there when the marrow was administered, and it wasn't until the morning, maybe 5.30 am or something like that, that the little bag of pinkish liquid - somebody's marrow - came back from the lab, and it was fed into her veins.  By this time her own marrow had been totally destroyed... there's a particularly aggressive chemotherapy and total body irradiation that she had gone through in... oh late October, early November, I'm not precisely sure of the dates - that left her... that stripped her body of its marrow entirely, and now there were just these few little drops - half a cup, maybe - of somebody else's marrow, that was put into her veins, through the heart catheter that she wore and that would, we hoped, possibly, take root, metaphorically, in her marrow, and grow. After the marrow was received, they of course checked her blood every day, and there's no evidence of the new marrow taking hold for a long time, and then one day, there was... they found one cell, and we knew that the... the marrow was there, and that it would presumably continue to grow. There are some would-be marrow transplants that just don't work - they... they don't take, they don't grow - you could try to find another one, but most likely, you just die. During all this time when there's no marrow and virtually no marrow, the owner's tremendously prone to infection, and there are constant antivirals and antibacterials, but any sign of infection is very likely to be irreversible. She was in a... originally in a room where she was protected from me and everybody else by a wall of plastic, so she was isolated to keep bacteria or virus from reaching her at any point - everything was sterilised. It was very isolating, and very difficult. Finally, after living through this for several weeks, they removed it, and she did not get an infection, and in fact, the marrow took hold, and she had a new marrow - a new immune system - a very compromised, and fledgling immune system, but there was the possibility of hope of enduring life.

It was a few weeks after the transplant, with Jane's blood counts getting better, that we left the hospital and went back to the apartment right next to the hospital.  And I took care of her - I am technophobic, I don't have a computer, and I had to learn how to program pumps to infuse Jane with antivirals, but also hydration, and TPN, which is intravenous feeding - all sorts of things. I had two different pumps I had to learn and I was petrified to go to pump class which the caregiver does, to learn how to do it, and it was just touching buttons, of course. A couple of weeks later I could have taught pump class - it was all right, you do what you have to do. There were also as many as 57 pills in a day, and when she was nauseated it was difficult.  And I had to try to get as many calories into her as possible. One of the results of the chemo and radiation is to destroy the cells of the mouth, actually the alimentary canal, but the mouth has more nerve endings in it, so that sore mouth is one of the big pains - extremely sore mouth, and very difficult to swallow things, to take things down.  But she... she began to take a little, mostly liquid... fortified Ensure Plus, and so on, but I would keep a record. I had to keep records of exactly what she ate: one slice of bread, a teaspoon of mayonnaise... a tablespoon of mayonnaise, and so on, and we would have to go back to the clinic regularly. I'd of course rented a car, and I had a... a sticker on it, so that I could park anywhere, and I could park right down to the elevator and take her up. There were also... hospitalisation again for her. I guess twice after the transplant - once for about two weeks, and once more briefly. The briefer time was the last time, and it was terrible but Jane didn't remember it, so it wasn't so terrible - it was bad for me - that was a psychotic episode.  Back at the apartment, she began to have very irrational notions - obsessive notions. I was troubled with vertigo at that time, and, at one point I was having vertigo as I'd had it many times in front of her, but she decided it was a heart attack and I was dying.  And the nurse from the clinic called, and she answered it and she said, 'Don is dying', and so... young man from Emergency came, and I said, 'Give me an EKG - my... my wife's had a bone marrow transplant - she thinks I'm dying'.  And he did, and it reassured her. But a day or so later, she'd lost the ability to speak and to walk and to... oh, control her bowels, and she had to go into the hospital, and she was crazy - she was psychotic - it was the result entirely of some combination of drugs.  They couldn't be sure quite what, but she decided that she didn't have leukemia, that she was faking, that she was malingering, and that Blue Cross at the hospital would sue us and take away our house, and she said, she lay awake all night, thinking this, and she said, 'I am a wicked person'.  She was utterly miserable, but she had no memory of it afterwards. A couple of anti-psychotic drugs, maybe two or three hours and she was all right. They took her off all drugs and then put her back gradually on, and there were no more psychotic episodes or delirium or delusion, which she had had earlier.

She began to feel a little better.  We walked or went outside and walked, but we walked, you know, 30 or 50 paces or something like that, and she was going to be ready to come home. It's about 100 days after the transplant - I believe that's it - and that's the most dangerous point, and by this point, she had the beginnings of an immune system - somebody else's immune system - and we were able to fly back in February having arrived in October. We landed at the Manchester New Hampshire airport, and my two kids were there, and some of their kids, 10.30 at night or something like that - the kids carrying placards, 'Welcome back Jane'.  And it was a magnificent moment. We had hope. We knew that the leukemia could return and might well return because of the Philadelphia chromosome in particular, but of... we were hopeful by this point. We came back, and the dog, who had not seen Jane for so many months, could not believe his nostrils.  He sniffed and sniffed and looked at her and sniffed, and finally began to believe and he began to sing - I compare him to a contratenor - some sort of wonderful, crazy song coming from him and leaping. He was quite an old dog by that point, but he was very, very happy. We came in here... my son Andrew drove us back from the airport and Jane didn't want to go to bed yet - it was too thrilling to be home. She lay on the sofa and the dog examined her from head to toe and kept singing. They were terribly fond of each other, this dog and she. He lived for five years after Jane died, and finally died.  But it was wonderful to be back, and we had of course, soon, to go up to the hospital and get blood work all the time. She began to be a little better, a little stronger, not enough to work yet, but it became possible to... to think of it, ahead of time.  And there was one wonderful day in March. It began as a wonderful day when we went walking the dog together, and probably walked a hundred yards... the dog... when we were well, she would walk the dog in the morning and I would walk him in the afternoon, and every now and then, when the days got longer and warmer, we would walk him together, and he just adored that - the two of us together - he was very happy.  We walked him up and down, and we came back here and then Jane was feeling well enough, so she thought of travelling oh, 20 miles away to see my aunt and uncle, whom we were fond of, and close to, but whom we had not seen for many, many months.  She felt able to do that, she lay down a bit after the walk and then we drove over and saw them, and it was amazing, and optimistic.  We were... and on the way back she began to have terrible pains in her stomach, and in fact, she was having a gall bladder attack.  And the gall bladder attack was a side effect of the chemotherapy also, because she'd had intravenous feeding for many months and it is very fatty, and in some people - we didn't know this - but in some people that leads to gall bladder trouble. She had to go back in the hospital for weeks.  She had to have the gall bladder out, and that set her way back.  We came home, and she began, a little bit... to feel better, not as well as she had before the gall bladder, but began to climb out a little bit.  And then came a time in April when she felt particularly ill... bone pain, which... not really bone pain, I suppose... I don't know what it has to do, but it was associated with the bones for her, and she... she felt that she was back sliding a bit.  But she was stubborn and wouldn't give into it. That lasted for a few days, and we had blood work again, and we went up for blood work at the hospital.  They took a long time to report.  When they came back to us, they said that the chief oncologist and her assistant wanted to see us in a little consultation room.  And amazingly I didn't realize what this meant.  But what it meant was that the doctor, Lisa Mills, the chief oncologist, said, 'The leukemia's back - there's nothing we can do'. And Jane died 11 days later. It had suddenly come back. She couldn't have any more chemotherapy - she could literally have had some chemo that would have extended her life by two weeks or so, but it was irreparable by this point - she was going to die.  And I wept, and Jane was pretty dry eyed. I asked questions; Had it to do with her gall bladder? Was there anything new happening happening? You know, what the kind of silly thing one does. She just said one thing, 'Can I die at home?'.  And the doctor said, 'I don't see why not'.  And we drove home and went to bed, and there was no point in trying anymore.

We had been frank all along - we were never euphemistic with each other. Out in Seattle, when she was in particular pain, Janey would say, 'Am I going to live Perkins?' Meaning, or am I going through all this for nothing? I would never say, 'Yes, you are going to live'. Because I knew I didn't know and I knew she knew I didn't know, and I'd say, 'That's what we're doing, that's what we're doing. That's why you're going through this horror, to try to live'. But there were things we didn't talk about, that... well, for instance she told me where she wanted her papers to go, and she didn't have to tell me that earlier, but now she did. We had one important task. While we were in Seattle, her publisher had suggested that her next book be a New and Selected Poems. And it sounded like a wonderful idea as a way to get back to poetry, to writing poetry, to edit a New... New and Selected Poems. Well now we had, we thought, maybe, as long as a month.  It was only 11 days. We didn't know how... how long her mind would hold up.  So the day after we found out, the day we found out I just took the phone off the hook and we lay and hugged each other, and didn't talk very much. The next day we worked on assembling that book - the posthumous New and Selected Poems - Otherwise.  And we would go over her old books and I would remember which poems she still liked and which she didn't like so much, and didn't want to read, so I could propose a selection, and she mostly agreed. Sometimes she wanted one out, and I'd read it out to her, and she would say that, 'Well maybe that was alright', and so on.  And we went through that first day.  We worked a couple of hours on it before she was totally exhausted, but we got through a good deal of the... of the old work, and the new poems - the poems that is that had not been published in book form - the ones that she had written and finished after her last published book.  And then we stopped that day to start again the next day.  And the next day she felt really tired, and I said, 'Well, let's postpone it, let's do it later', and she said, 'No, we've got do it now', and she was right. We did it, we really... I think, pretty much finished the selection that day for her posthumous book, and it was something positive to do in the face of this horror of course.

When we were making up the content of the posthumous book, Otherwise [sic], I kept trying to think of contingencies. There were two women with whom Jane worked on her poems - Alice Mattison and Joyce Peseroff - her two closest friends, and they would meet in workshop three or four times a year. Of course they hadn't during the leukemia. But it occurred to me that Jane might have cut out poems that they particularly preferred, and she liked the idea of them being involved with it.  So I suggested to Jane that she let Alice and Joyce each choose one poem to add to what Jane had chosen.  And she liked that idea.  And also she had written one poem while she was sick, but she hadn't finished it. She'd drafted it only a few times. It was called, The Sick Wife. And I knew she would have improved it. She knew she would have improved it. And I said, 'If I find a way to print that as an unfinished poem, would that be ok?', and she said, 'Yes'. And it... it was... I did find a way. I wrote an afterword, which was partly about assembling it on her deathbed, and I could then build it in to that afterword, print it right after the afterword.  And actually it's one of her popular poems - it's been reprinted a lot. And then we had other plans - we planned her funeral.  She picked out the psalms and the hymns for her funeral, and we also wrote her obituary - that is I drafted it, and Kendel typed it up and we read it over, and she made some changes... probably about three drafts on the obituary. There was one thing that kind of tickled me.  A few years earlier Jane had received a Guggenheim fellowship. It was a high moment. She had many honors and prizes but that was the one that she cared about the most - the distinction - and she wanted that in the obituary.  So as I wrote it, I put it as a kind of climactic last sentence of the first paragraph, forgetting the manner of newspapers... build from top down.  So that when The New York Times printed that obituary, they needed a line so they cut out the line about the Guggenheim.  But I didn't have the brains to realize that... the fact that Jane was Poet Laureate of New Hampshire, an honour which didn't matter to her at all, that it would take the attention of newspapers.  And when the obituary... well the Concord Monitor... the local paper, ran it the top of page one, the Sunday - she died on a Saturday - on the Sunday after her death, with a great big color picture of Jane, and a story about her life, and another story about her work, and they mentioned it... but when the obituary turned up in The Globe, and The Times, and so on, they... when, in a Philadelphia paper, some paper in California, some in Texas, it was always: New Hampshire Poet Laureate Dies.  That was what drew their attention and I wanted everybody to know... I wanted all the attention possible to her.  But we worked on the obituary together, and it was the last piece of writing we worked on together - so strange. When we finished, maybe on the third day, we finished the obituary, Janey said, 'Wasn't that fun - to work together?' And she wasn't just talking about working on an obituary together, but we had been working together for 25 years on... on her poems, first as teacher and student, and Otherwise.

People kept visiting... dear friends, Alice and Joyce, my children, came visiting to say goodbye, and gradually she deteriorated.  Her powers of speech were affected. She was telling me one morning, fourth day, or fifth day, 'I want... I want...' and then she couldn't say what she wanted, and she said... what was it she said? It was food... it was... cabbage...
[Q] Peas?
... no, it was some food...
[Q] Spinach?
... spinach, that's right, thank you. 'I want... I want spinach'. She got... it wasn't spinach, but that's what her voice said, and therefore, I think, not because of an incapacity of her vocal cords, but because of the wearying of the mind, she spoke less and less. When somebody came to visit, I always left them alone with her for a while. I let in, you know, only the closest people. She didn't much want to see people, but she understood people wanted to see her. And Liam and Tree came up - Liam Rector is a poet and dear friend of both of ours, and he was married to Tree Swenson who was a book designer, and who actually had designed the covers on Jane's three books from the Graywolf Press. The only reason Jane wanted her book to be published by Graywolf Press was that Tree Swenson was designing them - she was a very good designer.  And Tree came up and Liam, late on. The cancer cells in her blood stream were knocking out the oxygen, so that her brain was becoming starved of oxygen and she could think less, and speak less, and come up with words less, so that the conversations were quite difficult.  But when Liam and Tree came up, we knew that there would be a 'Selected Poems', posthumously, and we knew that Tree would be the designer for it, and Tree asked her if she had any notions about the design of the book.  And Jane was in bed then, not getting up except for a commode next to the bed, and she remembered that there was a... an image... a painting... of a painting, that she thought of, but she couldn't remember the artist. It was from a book called The Impressionist Garden, that someone had sent us out in Seattle at Christmas, and I don't know who sent it. Many people sent us presents, or sent her presents out there, but this room... the living room was full of stuff from Seattle, that hadn't been put away, just unpacked out of boxes, and she remembered that that book was in this room.  So I put her in the wheelchair from the bedroom... we wheeled her out here - it was her last time in the bedroom - and she pointed to the book, correct book and she couldn't use her hands, but I leafed through the book for her, and I remembered looking through that book with her in Seattle, and there was a particular painting that she'd struck at, and she'd said maybe she could use that for the cover of a book.  But I didn't remember which painting, and I flipped over the pages, and she pointed to one, and it's a... it's a illustrate... it's a painting by Caillebotte, who didn't... there are very few canvases of Caillebotte that exist, but they are very beautiful, and this was one of a kitchen garden, and lovely.  And so Tree took that book home and copied the cover, and used it for the cover of Otherwise, when it eventually came out... just a year later it came out. In fact, Tree went back from that last visit with Jane and worked feverishly to try to design the cover, so that she could show it to Jane if Jane lived another week or something.  But Tree was able to bring it to the funeral... Jane never saw it. But Jane had a hand in designing the last cover of her last book. When Liam and Tree left after, you know, a frustrating 15 or 20 minutes with Jane, they went down and walked down by the pond for an hour or two before going home, and I discovered later that my son Andrew had done the same thing.  He'd had his few minutes with her, and then he'd gone down and just walked and walked, probably others did. Her friend Caroline Finkelstein saw her for a while... Jane could hardly speak, and on the way back to Caroline's house - she was driving 128 miles an hour or something in rage and frustration - and got a speeding ticket.

We had visiting nurses and a nurse's helper who would come and wash her, and... there was no point now to use any of her regular medicines - but anti-pain medicines. I don't think she was in a great deal of pain then - over 15 months I'd learned to gauge her pain... the doctors always asked her on a scale from one to ten and so on, and I think I could usually tell, and it wasn't high up now.  But they put a morphine bolus attached to her leg so that whenever she groaned or made a noise that sounded painful, I would touch the morphine bolus and I stayed with her... stayed with her. I slept beside her at night in the bed and sat beside her all day and every now and then she'd be thirsty, or even at the beginning she was hungry, occasionally. Ironically, she would have a cracker, or certainly some sip of water to be... feel more comfortable, but we didn't have any nutritious drinks at this point.  And she diminished, she dwindled, she went out, dimming like a bulb, the rheostat dimming it bit by bit.  And there was one night when - I think it was a Wednesday night... she died on Saturday - when she kept getting out of bed. She would start to urinate and try to get alongside to the commode, and that would wake me up, and I'd get up and help her on to the commode and change the bed and put her back in.  And that morning I got up while she was asleep beside me in bed and I went out to the kitchen to feed the dog and cat... put the dog out. When I came back, she was in another chair across the room - she had somehow waked up, gone across the room, and I was terrified that she would... I... I panicked. It's the only time I panicked during those last terrible days. I was afraid that she would fall and break a limb, and have useless pain.  And I called the oncologist and said, 'We have to put Jane in hospital. I can't take care of her'. And she said, 'Alright I'll get a bed, you get the ambulance'. And I came to Jane and said, 'We've got to put you in the hospital, I'm afraid you'll fall'. And she said... her eyes filled with tears, and she said, 'Do we have to?' And I immediately went back and called the oncologist, and said, 'No, she's going to stay here. That's where she wants to be'. She desperately wanted to die in our bed. And from that time on, I don't think she ever got out of bed again. We had pads and diapers and... and so on, for her, and we said few things. By this point... earlier we'd been able to talk freely for several days, and talked about everything, talked about the past. She cried only twice... one time she said death was easy, but it was the separation, and she burst into tears. And another time I talked about travels we had made together, and I talked about making love on this bed, and her voice came out crying, 'No more fucking, no more fucking', which I found very touching but I should not have referred to it really. At any rate, at the end there, there was very little and the morning before she died, the Friday morning, I left her in the room, to go out and I think mail letters or something, and I said, 'I'm... I'm going out to put these in the box', and she said, 'OK'... last... famous last words - the last words that she ever spoke. Her oncologist, who you know, was useless at this point, but was a very good and tender woman, came and saw us twice during that week, including the last night before she died. Jane was already into the brain stem breathing, which I'd heard before when my grandmother died... three short breaths, a pause and a long one, then a pause and three short ones - and that went on for two hours or so. And that night she was clearly going to die very soon - I mean with hours. I tried mostly not to pet her or kiss her. I did say, 'I love you'. I couldn't help it, but I didn't... she'd written a poem about being with her father when her father died, and how you had to leave them alone. You had to let them go, and not hold on to them, so I tried not to. But that night at about eight o'clock, I kissed her, and the last act between us was that her lips puckered to kiss me back. Maybe that's autonomic, but, I don't know. So I slept beside her all night, but I slept in little snatches, you know, I'd... I'd sleep half an hour and wake up to hear that she was still breathing, and in the morning I got up, sat beside her, was sitting beside her when the breathing got... it moved from the... that brain stem breathing to just quick, rapid pants, and that was the last stage I knew... there was oxygen was simply not getting to the brain stem anymore.  And then there was the last breath, and I heard it, and I sort of knew it was the last breath, and I pulled down her eyelids. Her eyes had stayed open for days. She was not seeing anything, but she was hearing up to a point. Then I had to call the visiting nurse. The visiting nurse had to certify death before the funeral parlour could pick her up. It was a Saturday morning and there was... the visiting nurse was out on tour, outside beeper range, so it was four hours or so before she came to certify death. I got to sit with her body. I was glad I did.

People came and took her out on a gurney to the truck and I shut the dog into the... my study so he wouldn't see her go.  But I saw her go. She died on... 7.57 am on Saturday morning April 22nd, and the funeral was on April 26th, and I busied myself, of course, with arrangements for that, and it was a... a busy time. I'd take her clothes up, I delivered the obituary and the materials for the funeral. A local funeral parlour who had buried my grandfather, my grandmother, and my mother, now tended to Jane. And the funeral itself was on a beautiful day. It was April 26th, which can be rainy and ugly. It was a bright... bright, breezy day, and the funeral was at... I can't remember whether it was at two or at three in the afternoon... but the little church that we went to would seat about 80, but it held about 250 that day - people were standing everywhere. Poets came from all over, flew up, drove up, and so on, and the neighbors. There were two classes of people there - the poets and the neighbors - and it was wonderful to see everybody.  And Jane's oncologist from Seattle flew all the way from Seattle to come to that... took three days off from work which she had to repay to somebody else and so on.  But that was a... I mean, she did that for my sake, of course. It was a comfort for me to have her there.  And the funeral... Liam Rector read two of Jane's poems - I couldn't do it. We sat up front, and afterwards we took her body down to the Proctor Cemetery, which is four miles from this house in Andover. Jane and I had bought a plot there many years before when we were both perfectly well because we were so wedded to this place, we loved it so much, we loved where we were living. We knew we would never go anywhere else. So it was a... it's a morbid thing to buy your plot when you are both well, but it was a happy thing. We were pleased - we chose the actual place. So we... the funeral procession wended its way down there... there were people outside the church... there were a total of 300 people there, they had loudspeakers set outside the church, and about 300 came to the internment also.  Whereas some of the women from the church, in particular the neighbors, came into this house and set out the punch and the coffee, and the cakes and all the funeral things - we all came back - everybody was invited to come back here afterwards. We stood around the grave and the minister spoke but practically nobody could hear her, and Robert Bly had come from Minnesota for the funeral, and he struck up Amazing Grace, and we... we had sung Amazing Grace during the service, but he struck it up, and everybody who could hear and who knew the words or could hum to the tune, sang it along.  And then we all stood there and no one knew what to do - it was up to me. I finally said - I don't remember saying it but I'm told I said, 'We have to go now dear', and addressed... addressing the grave. We came back here, and I sort of party hopped for a couple of hours, from group to group. It was a beautiful day. I had to put the dog into a dog run outside because he was going crazy, and he barked all the time.  But there were people in the field all around the house, on all three sides of the house that aren't mountain, and I got to talk to just about everybody.  And I can say I enjoyed the funeral... I enjoyed the attention to Jane, and I kept on enjoying it afterwards.

Letters started to come... I had 1500 letters about Jane's death - many from people who had never met her, and... or people who heard her read once, and so on.  And I answered them all, just about all at any rate, everything that had a return address I got an answer from. I got... and then within a... a few weeks, there were four ceremonies in India honoring Jane, where people who had met her there would talk about it and they would play part of the Moyers television tape of Jane and they would read her poems aloud. I did not go to any of them of course, but I heard reports from all of them. And then in the first year there were other memorial occasions for Jane, in New York, and in Boston, and in Minneapolis where her publisher was.  Where else? I think there were other places too, but I cherished all this attention to her. It was a great help to me. It helped me to write letters, to talk about her, thank people for paying attention.  And there were several funds that were set up to honor her for scholarships and prizes and... and things. This was part of my... the way I survived... dealing with that, but the other, and the major way that I survived that first year was by writing Without.

I had already written, of course, a good deal about her illness, and about three or four weeks after she died I... her... her flowers, her beloved flowers were starting to come up... end of April, beginning of May, daffodils and so on, and I wrote a poem called Weeds and Peonies, which eventually I printed last in Without, that was about her loss. I went back and worked over the poems that I had already started. I discarded most of what I had written, I wrote more. And then a few weeks after Weeds and Peonies, I found out that Maggie Fisher was pregnant. Maggie Fisher was a nurse of ours out in Seattle who had just married a second time and had never had children, and I found out she was pregnant.  And the first thought... this is... everyone who loses someone close does this... oh I must tell... can't do it. Well, I wrote her a letter. I wrote her a letter in the form of a poem... the poem I'd been working over for 50 years, and when I wrote... when I was writing the first letter... I mean each of the letters was gone over a hundred times, but I would write her a letter, and I realized I was going to write her more letters.  So that the second half of Without is a series of letters to her for the first year.  And in that first year when I wrote to her, I addressed her as you. I felt... I did not feel her spiritual presence or a spooky presence but that was the only way I would address her. Thereafter, it became Jane... it... she became Jane or her, it was a greater distance. Poems didn't stop, but they changed their nature. When I was writing Without, I was sort of saving my life, and people have said, how can you... how could you bear to write them or how could you bear to read them aloud? It was happy for me to write those letters... it was... to write those poems in the form of letters... it was the only time I was happy in the day. I could work on them about two hours in a day, and then I'd have to be miserable for the next 22 hours, but, I knew that the following day, I'd get back to work on them again. There's one point in one of the letters when I tell Gus the dog, 'We're going to the desk... poetry man is suiting up'. I felt... it was as if I was doing something about her death to record my feelings about it, and of course also my memories of things we had done - our marriage and so on - writing the kind of letter you might write somebody, telling her about her friends, what they were up to, what was going on. It felt natural. I knew it was poems, and I tried to make them as good poems as I could. I wasn't writing just for my sake, you know, I was writing for poetry's sake too, so that I wrote them over and over again. I revised them endlessly, and I knew that I wanted to make them good poems - why not? I mean I always wanted to make good poems and I knew that I had to do it to occupy myself in order, as it were, to forget the misery, I had to write about the misery, and it worked. I also knew that if it worked... if it were... if they were good poems, they would help other people, but I cannot say that I did it for altruistic reasons... I was aware that altruism was a by-product of my necessity, and I knew it partly because Jane and I had used poems when somebody died. There's a magnificent 17th century poem called The Exequy that I would read aloud to Jane whenever someone dear to us died... a beautiful poem written by the poet Henry King when his wife died actually.  And there were wonderful poems by Thomas Hardy written after the death of his first wife. His marriage and Emma's marriage were not like our marriage, but they were beautiful poems of lamentation - a sort of too late lamentation on his part - but also many poets.  There's an English poet, Douglas Dunn, wrote some excellent poems when his wife died, and there's an American poet named Jack Gilbert... but there are many poets, poems, over the centuries... poems of elegy, and they were often... when there were wives that died, that I happened to read to her when we were both well and happy. But we felt what you had there... what can... what can grief... what can assuage grief? People will tell you all sorts of things...she's in a better place or you know, whatever, it's better her suffering is over. None of that helps in any way. What helps is a hug and a tear - a kind of companionship in grief - a sense of co-feeling and that is what we had from the poems, and that is what some other people have had from Without, as well. I get many letters from people who have lost a spouse, lost a child, lost a parent, who have found Without helpful to them, sad but helpful because you're sad together, with someone... with someone else.  And this is something that I guess I've always known that poetry did, but I never know it... knew it so intimately and poignantly as when I lost my wife.

When I was writing these poems I was trying to make good poems and I was working on them. I was also very aware... I was really on one subject only... I couldn't think of anything else, and I was also aware that it would be very easy for me to make terrific mistakes... to be really stupid, trying to write these poems because of the absolute intensity and extremity of my feelings. So I went out very deliberately to consult others. I've always used other readers, I... Jane was my principal other reader for a long time, but I always had other friends - old friends from college or sometimes young people I met when I was doing poetry readings whom I took to - who turned out to be good readers, and helpful, who would be willing to criticise your work, help you out. When I had a recognisable book of Without - the first draft of the book as a whole - I sent it to 10 people. I picked 10 people who had helped me in the past and they were very quick to... to answer... nobody shirked, and I got a lot of very helpful comments from people.  You don't take what... you know, everything that everybody says, but people say things that strike you - it's something you should have seen yourself - and all sorts of people helped me out with that.  I remember Galway Kinnell helping me with one particular word. It wasn't only one word but I remember one that he did. I remember a big change that somebody did who didn't make any other changes. I had written the parts about the illness... the first part had been... I do this and Jane does that, I do this and Jane... and she suggested trying 'He', instead of 'I'. It was just a forest of these capital letter 'I's' in it, and it really worked... it really helped. So for a second draft - when I responded to all the comments of 10 people - I tried 'He' and then I found 10 different people. There had been many people who had helped me over the years and I went to some who hadn't for a long time, but I went to 10 different people who had not seen it before, so that they would not be... look at it thinking of it as a change, but for the first time.  And nobody objected to 'He'.  People... a couple of people thought that was a good strategy. I didn't know really until I got that back, but it has remained that, and after I had gone through the comments from the second 10 people and spent another six months or so working on the manuscript of the book, I sent it to 10 people again, but I had mixed, sort of, the best readers from the first 20. I've never been so methodical with anything, but I knew that this time I really needed a lot of help, and I got a lot of help from people. After the first printing in hardcover, I changed two or three things for the next printing, and every printing I changed another word or two... I kept finding more things to do, but... there were some changes I'm very glad I made but they... they weren't really major changes in anything... I've kept tinkering with it.

When Without came out, there was a great deal of attention. I did a book tour, I was on a lot of radio programs and I did eight media events in Portland one day. There was a lot of response to it, and the book sold very well. I always knew that some people would be offended by it, because of its nakedness. In my work as a writer from, you know, 50 years, I have gradually become more naked, and by this time, at the time of Without, I simply would... would say anything I felt appropriate... I wasn't worried about other people's... I wasn't worried about people being scandalised.  And I said some things in Without that were very personal about Jane, as well as about me, and I knew some people would be outraged and some people were. No one actually said so in a book review... it would have felt too mean probably, but I got feedback from various people, and I don't care... I say, 'Go ahead and feel that way... do it'. I'm going to do it as I see it, as I want it, and I will be as naked as I choose.

Of course by the time Without came out, I had already begun many more poems.  And the... the next book - the last book I've published at this moment - was called The Painted Bed. And about the first half of it is more poems... further poems of grief about Jane, and they are a little more distant. I began to write... I wrote a series of 10 of these poems in rhymed metrical stanza, for which Thomas Hardy's poem was my model. I love Hardy - I've always loved Hardy - but I had never gone to him as a kind of model until this moment, and I did it. For that section of the book I quoted a little Hardy, just to say I know, I know, I know what I'm doing. And they're not poems that, you know, could pass for Hardy - the language is 20th century poetry... but 21st I guess, too... but I knew that the... the refrain, the... some... some of Hardy's awkwardness, I copied in there too, and did... did other things. I was pleased with them, and I had not written much of any metrical poetry, except maybe for epigrams - comical things - for a long, long time, but it came back.  And one thing that's interesting to me, just in the craft of poetry, was that they were a little less difficult to write than free verse.  That is, I would finish them often in 50 drafts, or 60 drafts, whereas the free verse poems I was writing at the same time would be more apt to go a 100 drafts. It's... it's easy to understand if you think about it. Once you have the sense of what a metrical poem is... a meter and... and you really know the craft, you don't entirely lose it, and when you're beginning a poem that's in stanzas, once you've established a stanza, you know a lot about the next stanza and the next one if there's a third... you know how many syllables you're going to have and you know where they're going to rhyme and so on. With free verse you have to improvise toward a sense of fixity, that no word could be other than it is, or in another place, but you have to make it up new, every time you do it. Whereas with metrical verse, there is... there is something you know ahead of time before you find the words, that the words simply fix, so that's clear enough I suppose. And I'm still occasionally writing some metrical poems now.

The first maybe five or six years after Jane's death, I wrote about virtually nothing except... except well... her death, my grief, and my response to... to her death, and my missing her.  But I was... I was very disturbed otherwise, except for the two hours of working with Without, and so on, I left... led a kind of restless life.  And I starting dating again, and it was a sort of gerontological repeat of the years in Ann Arbor between marriages, before I married Jane, when I chased a lot of women, and... old or not... many of them... they were good happy times, but they all came to some disaster or other.  And I did want for many years not to have one girlfriend but to have more than one - safety in numbers. There were several women I... with women I would say I would let them know they... they were not the only one, or they were not going to be the only one, and some of them rather sensibly rejected me in that case... they didn't want to be.  But I was again at the place of safety in numbers. I fell in love and committed myself, and look what happened. I don't know if that's the only reason, but it... plausible one at any rate. And that has stopped now - I am able to love someone and feel steady - I'm not so restless or crazy as I was. I went through... it's often said that the... the dead one takes on, sorry... the survivor - the living one - takes on characteristics of the dead, and this happened several ways... trivial ways. Jane had always known all the birds, and checked them out, and I thought the birds were perfectly fine.  We had a feeder but I didn't know one from another and I found myself outside under the... under the feeder with a little Peterson checking on birds were, and I thought I'm doing it because Jane can't do it any more.  And also she had seasonal affective disorder - when it got dark in November, December, it was depressing for her. And I always told her, 'Oh, it's cosy'.  I mean I tried to persuade her that the... that the early dark was nice - she wasn't buying any - and then the first autumn after Jane's death, the early dark just depressed me like crazy.  But I really didn't start going nuts, and I don't mean schizophrenic, but pretty disturbed, till about a year after her death. I was sort of so concentrated on grief and writing Without, that there was no room for anything else, but then I went manic for a while... I just didn't sleep much... I finished a reading one night in Franklin, New Hampshire, and I had to get to New Haven, Connecticut the next day which is about four hours, and I just decided after the reading: Oh, I'll drive down now. So I arrived in Connecticut at two in the morning or something like that, and I'd sleep two or three hours and wake up and feel bright... I went to my college reunion and realized, boy I have energy... I have more energy now than I've ever had in my life.  Sleep two or three hours and be wow all time and so on.  And I became much more gross and overt in chasing women, including young women whom I would not have been bold enough to chase otherwise. I was manic, and... classically manic in my approaching women, in my sleeplessness and so on, and again, Jane was bipolar - she was manic depressive - and I was following the characteristic. You don't do that by will somehow, it's... it's a structure that imposes itself on you.  And then that summer, that was the first summer... the second summer after her death - 15 or 18 months after her death - I plunged into a kind of depression that I'd never known anything about.  And at the beginning, it had a characteristic that was, oh, especially difficult - I felt violent. I had images of... at a... at a poetry reading I wanted to have a machine gun and shoot my whole audience. I had images of it, and I was tortured by these images of it, driving home from the reading, I just had these visual images of killing the audience, and felt it. It was self-directed also... I had plenty of dreams about suicide, and daydreams of suicide, but this notion, for going out toward others... I never picked up a gun. I never did anything about it... I don't think I was in danger of doing anything about it, but I was upset.  And I called Jane's old psychiatrist who was sort of semi-retired by this point, and he immediately came to me and he prescribed something that took away the... the rage or the images of murder. It went away - very quick acting - it went away, it left me depressed but not violent.  And that... those feelings of violence turn up in some poems... in especially one called Kill the Day, at the beginning of The Painted Bed - that last book - and they were real. I remember having such feelings while Jane was dying. While Jane was dying the Oklahoma government building blew up with lots of deaths, a terrorist act, and I remember thinking, good, and that summer - the summer of the rage - TWA 800 went down off Long Island, and I thought, good.  Again, thoughts I was not used to having. But these were all reactions of grief, reactions of death, and they came into extreme bi-polarity for a while.  And I took chemicals for several years, I know they... they helped with the feelings of rage - it was perfectly clear - and probably in other ways as well, but it's now more than three years since I stopped entirely, and I feel quite stable these days.  But I... and I... the bi-polarity has stopped... it was, oh, situational... not something inherited and biochemical.

I'm able now to... to work. I worked very hard for 17 months in a row on a book that is about to come out as I speak, which is a prose book about Jane, our marriage and her death. I think virtually the last time I will write about her... she will doubtless turn up in poems, but I think I'm through it finally. I gave myself to this prose, and I think it's a good book... I worked on it very hard and with great, oh, enthusiasm, excitement. At some point, early in the composition of it, I realized I had the structure and the tone - I knew I could do it - and then it was just a matter of re-writing, and re-writing endlessly so that every page had 25 versions or something... just a prose book.  But it... during that time I stopped writing poems. Almost all my life I had worked on poems and children's books and articles and book reviews, you know, all in the same day, but at this point I was just tinkering with some old poems that I was trying to improve... I got out of the habit.  And when that book was finished I started very few poems for a year or so, and just lately, some poems have been beginning. I'm working on a Selected Poems now and still tinkering with... with old ones, trying to improve them, but I've also... beginning new poems... some which may finish in time to be in a new Selected Poems, maybe some not. I'm also working on other prose. I do not work nearly so many hours a day as I did when I was younger, and when Jane was alive. When we went freelance and I came here, I worked all the time, obviously, and published four books a year, and six books a year, and I said... thought... first thought was... I'm doing this to support us, so that we can live here together, and Jane can write too.  And then my second thought was... don't be silly, it's just an excuse, you just want to write all day long, you like it. And after Jane's death, I stopped writing so much. I no longer write children's books... I've tried but they just don't happen, and I've stopped writing most of my magazine writing, so maybe I was right the first time.  But it's also true of course that I'm 76 years old now and, oh, when I stand up from a chair, I know it, and when I walk any further than the mailbox, my leg hurts, and so on. I'm an old man, told that... and probably a decrease in energy there.  But I continue to write - old poets never stop, they just get worse and worse. I know that, but I'm trying to not get worse and worse, but I am writing less and less, well... it goes up and down a bit... but I‘m... I'm not writing in great quantity now, and I don't expect to.  But then it was just... just two years ago I was working so day and night on the book that is about to come out, The Best Day, The Worst Day - the prose book about Jane - so maybe something like that will take me over again. I can hope so.

White Apples.  My father died when he was 52, I was 27, and a couple of weeks after he died I had a dream and it stayed with me. I think I lay awake. This is the poem:
when my father had been dead a week
I woke
with his voice in my ear
I sat up in bed
and held my breath
and stared at the pale closed door
 
white apples and the taste of stone
 
if he called again
I would put on my coat and galoshes

Mount Kearsarge.  This is a hill that is visible from the front of my house, our house - both Jane and I wrote about it a great deal. This poem I wrote before I knew Jane, and before I knew I would be able to live in this New Hampshire house. I had spent my summers here as a kid, and I loved it, but when I came back in the summer to see my grandmother, pretty much knowing that I could never live here - I felt angry. This is a poem from that time:
Great blue mountain! Ghost.
I look at you
from the porch of the farmhouse
where I watched you all summer
as a boy. Steep sides, narrow flat
patch on top –
you are clear to me
like the memory of one day.
Blue! Blue!
The top of the mountain floats
in haze.
I will not rock on this porch
when I am old. I turn my back on you,
Kearsarge, I close
my eyes, and you rise inside me,
blue ghost.

The Man in the Dead Machine.  One time I was at a bad patch in my life. I was driving alone on the New York thruway and I had a sudden visual image. Poems begin for me with words almost always - a phrase or two, something memorable, something that won't go away - but twice that I can think of in my life, probably more often than that, I've had an intense visual image, no words connected with it that was like a waking dream and it has been the start of a poem when I have tried to describe it. I was driving on the thruway feeling depressed and I had this image of a... of an airplane, a World War Two airplane crashed in the jungle with vines growing over it, and then the image zoomed down to the cockpit, where there was a skeleton inside.  And the moment I completed this momentary vision - which didn't block the road, I wasn't hallucinating - I pulled over to the side of the road and wrote a prose description of what I'd seen. It was scary and it took me a year or so before I could begin to work on it, and I've made changes in it since, but for a long time it was my favourite among the poems that I had done.

High on a slope in New Guinea
the Grumman Hellcat
lodges among bright vines
as thick as arms. In nineteen-forty-three
the clenched hand of a pilot
glided it here
where no one has ever been.
 
In the cockpit the helmeted
skeleton sits
upright, held
by dry sinews at neck
and shoulder, and by webbing
that straps the pelvic cross
to the cracked
leather of the seat, and the breastbone
to the canvas cover
of the parachute.
 
Or say that the shrapnel
missed me, I flew
back to the carrier, and every morning
take the train, my pale
hands on a black case, and sit
upright, held
by the firm webbing.

My Son, My Executioner. I was 25 years old when my first son was born - it was out in California - I was on a fellowship for a year to work on poems. And even before he was born, I began to have the notion of this poem, and then I wrote it rather quickly... a matter of weeks, not months.  But actually it had an extra stanza for about 20 years, and so on. All my poems have different periods of execution.
My son, my executioner,
                I take you in my arms,
quiet and small and just astir
                and whom my body warms.
 
Sweet death, small son,
                our instrument of immortality,
your cries and hungers
                document our bodily decay.
 
We twenty-five and twenty-two
                who seemed to live forever,
observe enduring life in you
                and start to die together.

Christmas Eve in Whitneyville. Whitneyville was the name of the section of Hamden, Connecticut, where my father grew up as a kid, and where he is buried. He died when he was 52.  He died on December 22nd, and on Christmas Eve we buried him.

December, and the closing of the year;
The momentary carollers complete
Their Christmas Eves, and quickly disappear
Into their houses on each lighted street.
 
Each car is put away in each garage;
Each husband home from work, to celebrate
Has closed his house around him like a cage,
And wedged the tree until the tree stood straight.
 
Tonight you lie in Whitneyville again,
Near where you lived, and near the woods or farms
Which Eli Whitney settled with the men
Who worked at mass-producing firearms.
 
The main street, which was nothing after all
Except a school, a stable and two stores,
Was improvised and individual,
Picking its way alone, among the wars.
 
Now Whitneyville is like the other places,
Ranch houses stretching flat beyond the square,
Same stores and movie, same composite faces
Speaking the language of the public air.
 
Old houses of brown shingle still surround
This graveyard where you wept when you were ten
And helped to set a coffin in the ground.
You left a friend from school behind you then,
 
And now return, a man of fifty-two.
Talk to the boy. Tell him about the years
When Whitneyville quadrupled, and how you
And all his friends went on to make careers,
 
Had cars as long as hayracks, boarded planes
For Rome or Paris where the place was slow
And took the time to think how yearly gains,
Profit and volume made the business grow.
 
“The things I had to miss," you said last week,
“Or thought I had to, take my breath away."
You propped yourself on pillows, where your cheek
Was hollow, stubbled lightly with new gray.
 
This love is jail; another sets up free.
Tonight the houses and their noise distort
The thin rewards of solidarity.
The houses lean together for support.
 
The noises fail, and lights go on upstairs.
The men and women are undressing now
To go to sleep. They put their clothes on chairs
To take them up again. I think of how,
 
All over Whitneyville, when midnight comes,
They lie together and are quieted,
To sleep as children sleep, who suck their thumbs,
Cramped in the narrow rumple of each bed.
 
They will not have unpleasant thoughts tonight.
They make their houses jails, and they will take
No risk of freedom for the appetite,
Or knowledge of it, when they are awake.
 
The lights go out and it is Christmas Day.
The stones are white, the grass is black and deep.
I will go back and leave you here to stay
Where the dark houses harden into sleep.

The Day I Was Older is a poem I wrote when I became as old as my father was when my father died. It began, oh, the summer before... he was 52 years and two weeks... and it began the summer before my 52nd birthday, and I didn't know I was doing it. I began to write a series of poems, each of which had a kind of strain of morbidity to it which was not quite my usual morbidity, and I realized finally that all of these poems were coming because of my anticipation of being the age my father was when he died. For people whose parent of the same sex has died relatively early, there's always a spooky thing as you approach that time. It may seem as if it... it may seem as if it's impious to live longer than your parent or that you're bound to die yourself. At any rate I came out with the poem in five small parts, with separate titles that connect ultimately, I believe. The poem is The Day I Was Older. The first section is called The Clock.

The Clock 
The clock on the parlor wall. Stout as a mariner’s clock,
disperses the day. All night it tolls the half hour
and the hour’s number with resolute measure,
approaching the poles and crossing the equator
over fathoms of sleep. Warm
in the dark next to your breathing,
below the thousand favoured stars, I feel
horns of gray water heave
underneath us, and the ship’s pistons
pound as the voyage continues over the limited sea.
 
The News
After tending the fire, making coffee, and pouring milk
for cats, I sit in a blue chair each morning,
reading obituaries in the Boston Globe
for the mean age; today there is MANUFACTURER CONCORD 53,
EX-CONGRESSMAN SAUGUS 80 – and I read
that Emily Farr is dead, after a long illness in Oregon.
Once in the old house we talked for an hour, while a coal fire
brightened in November twilight and wavered
our shadows high on the wall
until our eyes fixed on each other. Thirty years ago.

The Pond
We lie by the pond on a late August afternoon
as a breeze from low hills in the west stiffens water
and agitates birch leaves yellowing above us.
You set down your book and lift your eyes to white trunks tilting from shore.
A mink scuds through ferns; an acorn tumbles.
Soon we will turn to our daily business.
You do not know that I am watching, taking pleasure
in your breasts that rise and fall as you breathe.
Then I see mourners gathered by an open grave.
 
The Day
Last night at suppertime I outlived my father, enduring
the year, month, day, hour and moment
when he lay back on a hospital bed in the guest room
among cylinders of oxygen – mouth open, nostrils and pale
blue lips fixed unquivering. Father of my name,
father of long fingers, I remember your dark hair
and your face almost unwrinkled. Now I have waked
more mornings to frost whitening the grass,
read the newspaper more times, and stood more times,
my hand on a doorknob without opening the door.
 
The Cup
From the Studebaker’s backseat, on our Sunday drives,
I watched her earrings sway. Then I walked uphill
beside an old man carrying buckets
under birches on an August day. Striding at noontime,
I looked at wheat and at river cities. In the crib
my daughter sighed opening her eyes. I kissed the cheek
of my father dying. By the pond an acorn fell.
You listening here, you reading these words as I write them,
I offer this cup to you: Though we drink
from this cup every day, we will never drink it dry.

Kicking The Leaves. This is a poem I wrote in Michigan, just before Jane and I moved to... to the house in New Hampshire. And I knew we were going to come and camp out at any rate, and the poem really seems to know that I am going to be moving in here and living here. It's a kind of farewell to the old life, looking forward to the new.
Kicking the leaves, October, as we walk home together
from the game, in Ann Arbor,
on a day the color of soot, rain in the air;
I kick at the leaves of maples,
reds of seventy different shades, yellows
like old paper; and poplar leaves, fragile and pale;
and elm leaves, flags of a doomed race.
I kick at the leaves, making a sound I remember
as the leaves swirl upward from my boot,
and flutter; and I remember
Octobers walking to school in Connecticut,
wearing corduroy trousers that swished
with a sound like leaves; and a Sunday buying
a cup of cider at a roadside stand
on a dirt road in New Hampshire; and kicking the leaves,
autumn 1955 in Massachusetts, knowing
my father would die when the leaves were gone.
 
Each fall in New Hampshire, on the farm
where my mother grew up, a girl in the country,
my grandfather and grandmother
finished the autumn work, taking the last vegetables in
from the cold fields, canning, storing roots and apples
in the cellar under the kitchen. Then my grandfather
raked leaves against the house
as the final chore of autumn.
One November I drove up from college to see them.
We pulled big rakes, as we did when we hayed in summer,
pulling the leaves against the granite foundations
around the house, on every side of the house,
and then, to keep them in place, we cut spruce boughs
and laid them across the leaves,
green on red, until the house
was tucked up, ready for snow
that would freeze the leaves in tight, like a stiff skirt.
Then we puffed through the shed door,
taking off boots and overcoats, slapping our hands,
and sat in the kitchen, rocking, and drank
black coffee my grandmother made,
three of us sitting together, silent, in gray November.
 
One Saturday when I was little, before the war,
my father came home at noon from his half day at the office
and wore his Bates sweater, black on red,
with the crossed hockey sticks on it, and raked beside me
in the back yard, and tumbled in the leaves with me,
laughing, and carried me, laughing, my hair full of leaves,
to the kitchen window
where my mother could see us, and smile, and motion
to set me down, afraid I would fall and be hurt.
 
Kicking the leaves today, as we walk home together
from the game, among crowds of people
with their bright pennants, as many and bright as leaves,
my daughter’s hair is the red-yellow color
of birch leaves, and she is tall like a birch,
growing up, fifteen, growing older; and my son
flamboyant as maple, twenty,
visits from college, and walks ahead of us, his step
springing, impatient to travel
the woods of the earth. Now I watch them
from a pile of leaves beside this clapboard house
in Ann Arbor, across from the school
where they learned to read,
as their shapes grow small with distance, waving,
and I know that I
diminish, not them, as I go first
into the leaves, taking
the way they will follow, Octobers and years from now.
 
This year the poems came back, when the leaves fell.
Kicking the leaves, I heard the leaves tell stories,
remembering and therefore looking ahead, and building
the house of dying. I looked up into the maples
and found them, the vowels of bright desire.
I thought they had gone forever
while the bird sang I love you I love you
and shook its black head
from side to side, and its red eye with no lid,
through years of winter, cold
as the taste of chickenwire, the music of cinderblock.
 
Kicking the leaves, I uncover the lids of graves.
My grandfather died at seventy-seven, in March
when the sap was running; and I remember my father
twenty years ago,
coughing himself to death at fifty-two in the house
in the suburbs. Oh, how we flung
leaves in the air! How they tumbled and fluttered around us,
like slowly cascading water, when we walked together
in Hamden, before the war, when Johnson’s Pond
had not surrendered to the houses, the two of us
hand in hand, and in the wet air the smell of leaves
burning;
and in six years I will be fifty-two.
 
Now I fall, now I leap and fall
to feel the leaves crush under my body, to feel my body
buoyant in the ocean of leaves, the night of them,
night heaving with death and leaves, rocking like the ocean.
Oh, this delicious falling into the arms of leaves,
into the soft laps of leaves!
Face down, I swim into the leaves, feathery,
breathing the acrid odor of maple, swooping
in long glides to the bottom of October –
where the farm lies curled against winter, and soup steams
the breath of onion and carrot
onto damp curtains and windows; and past the windows
I see the tall bare maple trunks and branches, the oak
with its few brown feathery remnant leaves,
and the spruce trees, holding their green.
Now I leap and fall, exultant, recovering
from death, on account of death, in accord with the dead,
the smell and taste of leaves again,
and the pleasure, the only long pleasure, of taking a place
in the story of leaves.

When we moved back to New Hampshire to live in this old farmhouse, we were the first people ever to live here to have an automobile. My grandparents had had a horse and buggy. No one... people visiting brought automobiles, but we lived here day and night with an old Plymouth Six, and of course I thought about the old horses that I had known here as a kid, and I missed them, but it wasn't only the horses that I was missing.
Names of Horses 
All winter your brute shoulders strained against collars, padding
and steerhide over the ash hames, to haul
sledges of cordwood for drying through spring and summer,
for the Glenwood stove next winter, and for the simmering range.
 
In April you pulled cartloads of manure to spread on the fields,
dark manure of Holsteins, and knobs of your own clustered with oats.
All summer you mowed the grass in meadow and hayfield, the mowing
                    machine
clacketing beside you, while the sun walked high in the morning;
 
and after noon’s heat, you pulled a clawed rake through the same acres,
gathering stacks, and dragged the wagon from stack to stack,
and the built hayrack back, up hill to the chaffy barn,
three loads of hay a day, hanging wide from the hayrack.
 
Sundays you trotted the two miles to church with the light load
of a leather quartertop buggy, and grazed in the sound of hymns.
Generation on generation, your neck rubbed the window sill
of the stall, smoothing the wood as the sea smooths glass.
 
When you were old and lame, when your shoulders hurt bending to graze,
one October the man who fed you and kept you, and harnessed you every
                    morning,
led you through corn stubble to sandy ground above Eagle Pond,
and dug a hole beside you where you stood shuddering in your skin,
 
and lay the shotgun’s muzzle in the boneless hollow behind your ear,
and fired the slug into your brain, and felled you into your grave,
shoveling sand to cover you, setting goldenrod upright above you,
where by next summer a dent in the ground made your monument.
 
For a hundred and fifty years, in the pasture of dead horses,
roots of pine trees pushed through the pale curves of your ribs,
yellow blossoms flourished above you in autumn, and in winter
frost heaved your bones in the ground – old toilers, soil makers:
 
O Roger, Mackerel, Riley, Ned, Nellie, Chester, Lady Ghost.

Gold
Pale gold of the walls, gold
of the centers of daisies, yellow roses
pressing from a clear bowl. All day
we lay on the bed, my hand
stroking the deep
gold of your thighs and your back.
We slept and woke
entering the golden room together,
lay down in it breathing
quickly, then
slowly again,
caressing and dozing, your hand sleepily
touching my hair now.
We made in those days
tiny identical rooms inside our bodies
which the men who uncover our graves
will find in a thousand years.

Summer Kitchen. This is a poem I wrote after the death of my wife, Jane Kenyon... not immediately after, some years later.
Summer Kitchen 
In June's high light, she stood at the sink
With a glass of wine,
And listened for the bobolink, 
And crushed garlic, in late sunshine.

 I watched her cooking from my chair.
She pressed her lips
together, reached for kitchenware,
And tasted sauce from her fingertips.
 
"It's ready now. Come on," she said,
"You light the candle."
We ate, and talked, and went to bed,
And slept. It was a miracle.

Affirmation 
To grow old is to lose everything.
Aging, everybody knows it.
Even when we are young,
we glimpse it sometimes, and nod our heads
when a grandfather dies.
Then we row for years on the midsummer
pond, ignorant and content. But a marriage,
that began without harm, scatters
into debris on the shore,
and a friend from school drops
cold on a rocky strand.
If a new love carries us
past middle age, our wife will die
at her strongest and most beautiful.
New women come and go. All go.
The pretty lover who announces
that she is temporary
is temporary. The bold woman,
middle-aged against our old age,
sinks under an anxiety she cannot withstand.
Another friend of decades estranges himself
in words that pollute thirty years.
Let us stifle under mud at the pond's edge
and affirm that it is fitting
and delicious to lose everything.

Her Garden. Jane was a great gardener, and this is another poem lamenting her.
 I let her garden go.
                let it go, let it go
    How can I watch the hummingbird
           Hover to sip
           With its beak's tip
The purple bee balm — whirring as we heard
           It years ago?
 
        The weeds rise rank and thick
                let it go, let it go
    Where annuals grew and burdock grows,
           Where standing she
           At once could see
The peony, the lily, and the rose
           Rise over brick
 
        She'd laid in patterns. Moss
                let it go, let it go
    Turns the bricks green, softening them
           By the gray rocks
           Where hollyhocks
That lofted while she lived, stem by tall stem,
           blossom with loss.

Distressed Haiku
In a week or ten days
the snow and ice
will melt from Cemetery Road.
 
I'm coming! Don't move!
 
You think that their
dying is the worst
thing that could happen.
 
Then they stay dead.
 
Will Hall ever write
lines that do anything
but whine and complain?
 
The mouse rips
the throat of the lion
The Boston Red Sox win
a hundred straight games.
 
and the dead return.
 

Ox-Cart Man.  This is a poem that came from a story that an old New Hampshire farmer told me. And after I had written the poem, I later made it into a children's book - different words, somewhat different characters, but this was the original Ox-Cart Man.
In October of the year,
he counts potatoes, dug from the brown field,
counting the seed, counting
the cellar's portion out,
and bags the rest on the cart's floor.
 
He packs wool sheared in April, honey
in combs, linen, leather
tanned from deer hide, and vinegar in a barrel
hooped by hand at the forge's fire.
 
He walks by his ox's head, ten days
to Portsmouth market, and sells potatoes,
and the bag that carried potatoes,
flaxseed, birch brooms, maple syrup, goose
feathers, yarn.
 
When the cart is empty, he sells the cart.
When the cart is sold, he sells the ox,
harness and yolk, and walks
home, his pockets heavy
with the year's coin for salt and taxes,
 
and at home by fire's light in November cold
stitches new harness
for next year's ox in the barn,
and carves the yolk, and saws planks
building the cart again.

Without. This is a poem that I began to write during Jane's leukemia, in the present tense, describing the landscape of leukemia we were living through. But when I came to assemble the book of poems about her death, Without, it became obvious that it would be best at the moment of her death, and I put it in the past tense, and changed a word or two here and there.
Without
we lived in a small island stone nation
without color under gray clouds and wind
distant the unlimited ocean acute
lymphoblastic leukemia without seagulls
or palm trees without vegetation
or animal life only barnacles and lead
colored moss that darkened when months did
 
hours days weeks months weeks days hours
the year endured without punctuation
February without ice winter sleet
snow melted recovered but nothing
without thaw although cold streams hurtled
no snowdrop or crocus rose no yellow
no red leaves of maple without October
 
no spring no summer no autumn no winter
no rain no peony thunder no woodthrush
the book was a thousand pages without commas
without mice oak leaves windstorms
no castles no plazas no flags no parrots
without carnival or the procession of relics
intolerable without brackets or colons
 
silence without color sound without smell
without apples without pork to rupture gnash
unpunctuated without churches uninterrupted
no orioles ginger noses no opera no
without fingers daffodils cheekbones
the body was a nation a tribe dug into stone
assaulted white blood broken to shards
 
provinces invaded bombed shot shelled
artillery sniper fire helicopter gunship
grenade burning murder landmine starvation
the ceasefire lasted forty-eight hours
then a shell exploded in a market
pain vomit neuropathy morphine nightmare
confusion the rack terror
 
vincristine ara-c cytoxan vp-16
loss of memory loss of language losses
pneumocystis carinii pneumonia bactrim
foamless unmitigated sea without sea
delirium whipmarks of petechiae
multiple blisters of herpes zoster
and how are you doing today I am doing
 
one afternoon say the sun came out
moss took on greenishness leaves fell
the market opened a loaf of bread a sparrow
a bony dog wandered back sniffing a lath
it might be possible to take up a pencil
unwritten stanzas taken up and touched
beautiful terrible sentences unuttered
 
the sea unrelenting wave grey the sea
flotsam without islands broken crates
block after block the same house the mall
no cathedral no hobo jungle the same women
and men they longed to drink hayfields no
without dog or semicolon or village square
without monkey or lily without garlic
