eo.wilson

EO Wilson (1929-2021) was an American biologist, researcher (sociobiology, biodiversity), theorist (consilience, biophilia), naturalist (conservationist) and author (two Pulitzer Prizes). His biological specialty was myrmecology, the study of ants.

Every kid has a bug period. I had mine. I just never grew out of mine. Somehow I stayed with it. And I found no greater joy when I was about nine or ten years old than collecting spiders and ants and especially butterflies. I began actually when I lived in Washington DC, our nation's capital for two years. Although a southerner, I'd come up there because my father was a federal employee and after two years we went back down to the home town of Mobile, Alabama. And in Washington I came up with a real interest in animals because our apartment was within walking distance of the national zoo, which is a wonderland for a kid... free, wander through there any time you want.
I was a trolley ride from the US National Museum of Natural History, one of the great museums in the world. And it was a paradise. I spent time collecting insects and then going over and looking at them in the museum, and imagining what it must be like to be in Arthur Conan Doyle's lost world while I was in the zoo. Then I also spent a lot of time wandering around a park called Rock Creek Park, that winds all around the zoo. That was my equivalent of a wilderness when I was a little kid. And so I guess by the time I was ready to go back to Mobile, and then encounter a sub-tropical fauna butterfly species that are found only in the warm, temperate... very warm temperate or sub-tropical [inaudible] occurring there, which didn't occur in Washington, and the great, much greater diversity of plants and animals, many of them not well-studied... I guess by that time I would have thought it odd that anybody would want to be anything else but an entomologist or at least a naturalist, a biologist.
Actually, I became an entomologist instead of a specialist on something else like birds because I was, and am, handicapped. When I was a kid, still before we went to Washington at the age of seven, I was in a military academy. All real southerners want to put their kids in the military academy, or at least they did in the '30s. That was a southern tradition. The highest one could aspire to was West Point or the Naval Academy and have a son in the peace time or war time, an officer in the armed services. And those two academies were tough places, but in any case, about that time I spent a summer in a place called Paradise Beach. I spent all my time fishing. I guess I was about seven years old. And one day I pulled up what's called a pinfish. These are fish with needle-like spines in the dorsal fin. One of them got me in the eye. And that resulted in a traumatic cataract. I didn't even tell anybody about the excruciating pain because I was afraid they might stop me from fishing. But later when I only had vision in one eye, I discovered as all true naturalists do, when I began trying to study birds, you've got to go through your Roger Tory Peterson stage with field guides and look at birds if you're going to be a real naturalist some time in your teens. And I discovered that I was a lousy birdwatcher, partly because of my vision. And you know, I couldn't see them. You can't judge distance very well.
Furthermore, I also have a condition where I don't hear the upper registers very well. So I couldn't hear them, I couldn't spot them, how was I going to be a halfway decent ornithologist if I...? I just loved insects anyway, so I decided that, at about the age of 16, that I was going to be an entomologist. And I was so dedicated to it that even though I never really got a very good background in the school systems of Alabama, in mathematics or physics or chemistry, my interest in the background I'd built up in natural history propelled me right on through to the Harvard graduate school and then quickly a post-doctoral fellowship in Harvard's society of fellows which gave me three years of completely free and fully supported research.
I want to emphasise one thing, and then another. And the one thing is to be a successful scientist you need to do what you like to do. If you don't like mathematics, don't give up. That doesn't forestall your being a scientist at all. Because I have, at best, average mathematical ability, it comes hard to me. And if you really don't have a taste for laboratory work, white coat, experiments, measuring, and so on, and a lot of very promising scientists do not have a taste to be an experimental scientist, don't worry about it.

I want to emphasise one thing, and then another. And the one thing is to be a successful scientist you need to do what you like to do. If you don't like mathematics, don't give up. That doesn't forestall your being a scientist at all. Because I have, at best, average mathematical ability, it comes hard to me. And if you really don't have a taste for laboratory work, white coat, experiments, measuring, and so on, and a lot of very promising scientists do not have a taste to be an experimental scientist, don't worry about it. If you do have a taste for mathematics or physics or chemistry or getting in a lab right away and titrating and watching cultures grow... go that way, wonderful, great career ahead. But if on the other hand you prefer the outdoors, if natural history is what you really would like to do, the world awaits you. And more so now than ever. Never mind that science has as its primary language mathematics. It has other languages as well, and it has a requirement overall for gifts often lacking in those who are enamoured of mathematical analysis and laboratory work. Namely, intuition, the ability to recognise patterns. And above all, a lifeline... a lifetime devotion to fine detail of the wonders of the natural world. I'd like to say that if you want to do... be an entomologist or work on nematode worms... nematode worms are little miracles of themselves. Do you want to go down to the level of bacteria? A rotting pine stump in the woods is a universe. You can spend a lifetime in a Magellanic voyage around that one pine stump and just spew out one important scientific discovery after another. Let the others, and I'm speaking to future naturalists and those who are thinking of... students who are thinking of going into natural history, let the others worry about partial differential equations and titration. You go that route because that provides unique knowledge, unique experience, and furthermore, a large part of science of the 21st century is going to be synthesis. We are entering an age of synthesis. Of the analysis of complex systems. And that's going to require enormous amounts of detail and attention to detail and the way things fit together.

One of the formative experiences of my life, actually I think I had a whole series of them, particularly since I was active in natural history from childhood onwards, so I had a lot of opportunity to see a lot and experience a lot in nature that probably is not easily available to an average young person in the United States, and certainly in Europe. It was a grand tour of the United States that I took in the summer of 1952 with Thomas Eisner, my close friend, and a great entomologist. And we were quite young at that time. And we decided the very thing to do was to get a car, fortunately Tom had one, and to simply travel all around the United States and visit practically every kind of habitat and see the world from the eyes of insect collectors. And there was a grand collecting adventure, sort of a miniature equivalent of travelling across Africa looking for all sorts of insects. I was particularly looking for ants and Tom was looking for some neuroptrous insects and others, and generally speaking Tom was just exploring at the beginning of his own career on chemical communication and chemical ecology, for which he was to be one of the founders.
Well, it was quite an adventure because we travelled 12,000 miles, we travelled on nothing, almost no money. We had a car, that is Tom had a car which he named 'Charrúa 2' after the Amerindians of Uruguay. It's where he had grown up in Montevideo. And that car today, if you took it out on the road, would probably result in a five year prison sentence just for having it on the road, it was coming apart. It required oil changes, it appeared to me, every time we took another bend in the road. It was just a constant headache. But the thing got us all the way around the United States. Some of the great national parks, some of the great southern habitats through the Louisiana Swamps, into the mountains of Appalachia and so on. It was a great trip.
And we soon divided labour. One had to cook and one had to clean the dishes. And I discovered one of Tom's weaknesses. That is he rather liked cooking, at least he didn't mind cooking. And the other thing I observed was that cooking took longer than cleaning dishes. And I'm an A type personality, I think he is too, but I'm a real A type personality. So I wanted to spend as little time connected with the meal as possible on this trip. Therefore I gladly relinquished the cooking to him. There were meals at which I came to regret that, but it was all right anyway. And because I could do the slapdash job of cleaning, and that way we managed to get along for this whole trip.
I guess there were a couple of memorable experiences from my point of view. One of them was when we stopped in... at one locality crossing the upper peninsula of Michigan, I encountered the worst swarm of biting flies I have ever encountered in my life. And believe me, I've been around. I've been in places in the tropics, you know, where they are legendary. Things that bite and suck blood from you. But here in Upper Michigan, in probably June, we encountered the following within just a couple of hours in our little camp site. We were inundated by black flies, this was black fly season. Very annoying insects. Also called buffalo gnats. We had swarms and swarms of Ceratopogonidae midges, also known as no-see-ums because they can go right through a screen they're so small, and they're hard to see, but you sure can feel them while they're sucking your blood. We had those all over the place. And then we had, of course, mosquitoes in great abundance, probably a couple of species, hitting us in the woods, hitting us in the fields, you know, each species adapted to a different environment to go after us. And then there were the greenheads, or the horseflies. Big buzzing flies that if you were incautious enough to let one alight on you, even on thin shirtsleeves and get their daggers into you, you suffered from that. Although there is no greater pleasure on God's green earth, I think, than letting one of these voracious and evil flies light on you, and squashing it. Well, never mind.

But, in addition, there was a member of a family of flies known to be bloodsuckers. I can't remember the name of it. They rarely are encountered. But bless my soul they were out in abundance, competing for space on you with the mosquitoes, black flies. Well as I said, I've been in the swamps of New Guinea, I have rode through mangroves in Cuba and the Florida Quays and on and on around the world, but I've never encountered anything quite like that. And it just stuck in my memory.
Well, the other thing I remember very well was one day toward the end of our journey, we were somewhere in the south, maybe it was Mississippi, at one of these roadside stands, engaging in a rare luxury of pulling out one of our last dimes to buy a Coke, you know, each Coca-Cola. We slept by the... everywhere, right on the ground, incidently, by the side of the road, that's how we got around and didn't have to pay any money. But there we were and there was a typical American family with... and Tom and I were busy at... it was at night, it was light, and I was collecting insects. That's how you collect insects, to substantial degree in travelling, you go to lights at night and a lot of these flying insects are collected in. They were collected and for about the hundredth time on our trip one of the small kids in this group, a little boy, came up and he asked me what I was doing. And with his parents listening and so on. And I was sort of tired and irritable.
And there was a big green katydid there. And I knew that katydids were probably very edible, if not palatable. After all, you know, they're closely related to the locust of biblical fame, on which you could live, with honey, which are the secretions of another insect, you know, in the wilderness, in the Sinai. And so I don't know what possessed me but I reached up and took that big green katydid and said, we're collecting these in order to eat them. I chomped down on it, you know, and chewed a little bit and swallowed a little bit and threw the rest of the carcass away. And got the desired, shocked effect and cessation of further questions.
And only later did I realise, I remembered, that these Tettigoniidaen katydids were among the vectors... or the carriers... intermediate hosts of acanthocephalan worms which are a particularly unpleasant intestinal parasite. Fortunately I didn't get any of that in that one reckless gesture of what... of what... rejection of American society for a few seconds anyway.

My first scientific discovery was made when I was 13, but I didn't realise it was a scientific discovery until maybe five years later. And that was the discovery of the first imported red fire ants in the United States. These insects came from, we now know, along the Argentine/Brazilian border, and when introduced by shipping in the port of Mobile, Alabama, in the American South, then quickly spread through the South where today they range from North Carolina to Texas and are among the principle insect pest of the Southern United States.
I happened to be living in our family home which our family had occupied since the 1840s, a few blocks from the Mobile shipyards. As a 13 year old, collecting butterflies and this and that, I decided I was going to make a survey of all of the ants right around my house, including a vacant lot, turning old whiskey bottles over and rocks, and breaking up pieces of rotting wood and so on, something I do today. You know, I never really change my ways of doing field work. But one of the ants that I discovered in the course of this was a mound of imported fire ants. There was no question about it, I made thorough studies of it, and in fact it was only five years later that I was now fully aware, and I began to help local naturalists and others find and identify the imported red fire ant. And I was hired at 19, I was a senior in college then, by the State of Alabama, to make the first survey. So I knew that I had gotten the first record of that, in the United States.
One of the most aesthetically pleasing experiences of my field work was in 1953 when I made my first trip to the tropics, from Harvard University. I undertook studies of ants in Cuba, searching up and down for patches of forest that left remaining of the original Cuban cover. Extremely little is left, and what is left is mostly in the mountains. Some 40 years before that, one of my predecessors at Harvard, a man named William Mann, had gone down as a student himself and in the course of his studies in mountains in Central Cuba, east of Cienfuegos, had come upon a metallic green ant. You know, shiny metallic green ant. That is metalescent, not metal obviously. That was green, you know, it reflects green light. And he described how he had been up in the mountain forest and he'd pulled a rock over and it had split and there was a cavity in the middle of that rock filled with these metallic green ants. And he named them later as a new species, Macromischa wheeleri, after his professor William Morten Wheeler, who was my predecessor as curator of insects here at Harvard, that is by one generation, he was one... two generations before me of curators.
So when in Cuba, I was so enchanted by that story of the metallic green ants, teaspoonful as he put it, in the middle of a soft rock, that I went to the locality with a group of others, Mina Carlota in the mountains, and I started looking. And I looked, and I searched and I searched, and then I was halfway up a slope, and I pulled over a soft rock and it broke in two, and there was a cavity, and there was a teaspoonful of Macromischa wheeleri. Fascinating place, Cuba, for the ants. It's not what you usually think of when you think of Cuba. But there are a whole array of native ants which are variously metallic, metalescent blue, blue... metallic blue reflection. Green. And I found one, I hadn't... I wasn't the first to discover it, but I was one of the first to see it alive in the field, and therefore could see the original colours, that was metalescent gold. A gold ant. You could see them foraging in the sunlight, you know, in the shrubs. One of these days when Cuba, shall we say a little freer of access, I'd like to go back and repeat those experiences.

I'm often asked what it is that I see in ants. How could I maintain a lifetime passion for these little insects? And the answer is very easy. They really represent a world of their own. You know, they are possibly... and their social behaviour as close as we will ever see to what higher social organisation might look like on another planet.
They're that different, you know. They communicate entirely by smell and taste, almost entirely. Media that we just don't comprehend at all because we're audio-visual. They're chemical. So we have to study them in a very roundabout way to understand what they're saying to each other. And they have extremely complicated societies with caste systems and complex communication to organise the defence of their nest and the gathering of food out in the foraging fields and so on. You could spend a whole lifetime on one species and there are some 10,000 species known.

For some 20 years my very close colleague, Bert Hölldobler, and I worked here at Harvard on part of the huge variety of ants, doing basic studies on the communication and caste systems and general behaviour of one fascinating species after another which we collected in the field and kept here in the lab. We just had a zoo, a bestiary of some of the strangest ants in the world, some of the least studied. And we also studied them together on a couple of brief field trips in the tropics when we gathered these up.
It was a wonderful 20 years before Bert finally decided, or he was lured back, shall I say, to Germany, his native country, with a professorship and a million dollar grant from... at the University of Würzburg. And so he went back and started his own institute with a lot more money and a lot more assistance to help him, that he ever could have gotten in this country. At Harvard or anywhere else. So as he was preparing to leave we started talking about maybe summing up what we had done together, working on ants, we'd turned out large numbers of papers. Some he'd... a large number he turned out on his own, on his own research, the same for me, and just on myself. But quite a few we'd worked on together. And we talked about ants day in, day out, for a large part of that time. And so we agreed we'd write a book. First we thought we would write a little book about, you know, what we'd done together, the best kind of research that we did. And then one day, because I'm prone to do... make ridiculous decisions like this, I said, look Bert, here we are, 1988, you and I together know almost everything that's known about ants for all time. We've gathered all this material, we have all this library, we've been involved in almost all the basic research, doing it, assisting it, advising it and so on.
This was a unique moment in time. When again might two people, or even three or four, be able to put together everything known about a group like the ants? Furthermore it would be less likely as you go through time because of course the knowledge of groups like this keeps going up like this and makes it harder and harder to cover everything. So we said, good, before you take... before he takes off for Germany, we will do this. And we set out and wrote a book about everything known about ants. We went through thousands of books and articles. Of course a lot of it came out of our heads. And finally came up with The Ants. That's the book.

When this book came out in 1990 it weighed seven and a half pounds. And I like to refer to it as a magnum opus. A magnum opus being defined as a work so heavy that when dropped from a three story building it can kill a man. Well at any rate, it certainly made the field accessible to a younger generation of researchers who were coming on. And I'd like to think has greatly stimulated research in many, many of those areas.
And it had the unique distinction in 1991 of receiving the non-fiction Pulitzer Prize which is the only time, I think ever... it's one of the very few times that any book on science or about science has gotten a Pulitzer. And this was the only time that it was... when a book written primarily for scientists and naturalists, primarily, not for the broad audience, received that distinction. So it was well done and I think that had we tried to come together even two or three years afterwards to write that book it would have been too late. It was... just things had gone too far, we'd forgotten too much. So it was certainly a great moment to bring together 20 years of close collaboration. It's a rare opportunity, I think, to be able to work closely with someone as gifted as Bert Hölldobler and whose talents and interest and training was so complimentary to mine. He'd been trained in... very substantially in the German tradition of experimental work.  He'd done lots of field work himself. But he had this distinctive Germanic analytic techniques which was brought to bear.  And of course I had the natural history, the ecology background, evolutionary biology. So we brought those things together, it worked out very well. 

The first time that Bert Hölldobler and I went into the field and did serious fieldwork together... before that time we'd mostly worked in the lab, was 1985. And we went down to the field station of the Organisation for Tropical Studies at La Selva in Costa Rica. And for every field station there is what I like to call a golden interval. And that is it comes after the station is established and after enough facilities have been built to make it comfortable. So you're not sleeping in a hammock and beating off mosquitoes and eating mush for, you know, your meal. It becomes reasonably comfortable facilities. But not so far along that it's lost its virginal character, which as you know, for whatever group, the butterflies haven't been well studied yet, the frogs are only partly known, the botany is being explored back home, people are beginning to come in. And we hit it at a time when almost nothing had been done on the ants. So we had about a week together. And it was splendid because this has an extremely rich fauna there, there are over 50 species in one genus that I specialise on, the genus Pheidole. 50. That's more species by a factor of about ten than you have in all the Eastern United States in that one locality. And then genus, after genus. You know, all kinds of wonderful ants. Most of which had never been studied. So he and I were like a couple of kids, you know, turned loose in the woods for the first time. Scrambling along the trail and shouting back and forth to one another. And I could say, 'Bert, here's a colony of Prionopelta'. And he would say, 'Quick, come here, I think I've got a Eurhopalothrix' and so on. And all of these things then we would then look at and we'd take back to the lab. Not a lab exactly, it was sort of just a little work station in one of the cabins. And we had the instruments to do simple experiments on division of labour, on pheromones, on basic behaviour, on what they ate and so on. And when we came back with our data and our specimens and so on we quickly proceeded to publish five refereed papers, and they were good papers too. They were very original and in almost each case the first observations of a real scientific nature on an entire group of ants that, you know, had never before been studied. So that's a kind of rich experience that one can have. If you take a group that hasn't been exhaustively studied, and that's almost every group in the world with the possible exception maybe of birds, and you know where to go and you hit... do the field work just right, it's an exhilarating experience.

The truly grand experience of my career as a young scientist came in 1954 and '55 when I was given complete support by Harvard's Society of Fellows, travel, whatever money I needed to pull it off, to travel through archipelagos in the South Pacific and Australia just for the study of ants. And so for many of these islands I was the first ever to go in as a specialist on ants. And it was King Midas' riches in terms of what I could discover and collect and learn. And so I arrived in New Caledonia and started working there, and in Fiji, and then on up to the New Hebrides, now the Republic of Vanuatu to the north. Remote areas in the minds of most people in America and Europe, but a paradise of natural history. At the time that I was there, and of course completely open in terms of what could be discovered when you take a group like the ants and study them. And it was... then I went on to Australia and on up to New Guinea, and spent a lot of time in New Guinea. And it was an unusual period. The Americans, as they always do, after winning the Second World War in this particular case, didn't stay around. They picked up everything, lock stock and barrel, and went back home. Leaving large numbers of grateful planters and others through the jungles of these... of New Guinea and elsewhere who upon hearing, and this was scarcely nine years after the end of the Second World War, who upon hearing that a young American... and they've almost never saw Americans, young ones, there were no tourist centres, I mean, it was unheard of... was in the vicinity, would send for me and ask me to be a guest at their plantation with offers to be taken out to the rainforest and assisted and so on.
So I just floated from one place to the other, a freeloader, and in fact I had to be very careful to avoid offending various people here and there in the outback by not going and spending some time with them. And one of my hosts was in the New Hebrides, the Ratard family. French planters, and that very sparsely inhabited great island of Espiritu Santo, which was where a large American base was located, and it was the site for James Michener's South Pacific. I mean, that's where he got all his inspiration. So... and the Ratard family in fact played a role in his book. Fictional role, it was interesting for example at dinner to hear the stories about the Americans there and James Michener and where 'Bloody Mary' was, or was still at that time. I could have visited many of these characters in South Pacific. So it's that kind of an adventure.
In New Guinea I undertook a long, hard trek with a patrol officer through the Saruwaged Mountains of the Huon Peninsula. That's a little horn-shaped peninsula north east of New Guinea. And together we climbed with a large group of bearers and a couple of guards and so on... we climbed those mountains and walked along the rims visiting villages while I scooped up ants everywhere. I got back to Lae which was at the base of that peninsula, thrilled at this kind of adventure, and I was just the right age for that. I was 24... 25 years old. And I kept looking from Lae which is, you know, administrative center for that whole end of New Guinea... I looked up at the spine of the Saruwaged that extended to the north, and it was west of where I had gone. And it turns out that up to the time I was there in 1955, some 12 people had climbed, you know, non-natives, had climbed to the top of the Eastern end of the Saruwaged. Up over 12,000 feet. They're really tough conditions. And no one had ever climbed to the middle of the Saruwaged. No European. And there they were... you know... you could stand in Lae and look at this purple mountain range, and it looked like you could just walk there that afternoon. So I said, gee, this is the chance to have one of the great adventures of my life, I'm going to be the first to make it to the center of the Saruwaged. And I'm going to do a transect, studying... collecting different organisms, in this case not just ants but frogs and so on.
So to make a long story short, I made my way up with a... in a 1929 two cockpit biplane, the only remaining airplane of the Crowley Airlines operating in that district... up to a Lutheran mission which was halfway up there. Got some bearers and walked on up to the top of the Saruwaged. It took five days to make it up there, but I got to the crest and it was a thrilling experience. So by the time I finished that and my satchels and bags and boxes were so heavily loaded, and I was engaged to a lovely young woman back in Boston, I was ready to come home.

You have to know about the diseases. If there is malaria in the area then you must take precautions with prophylactics and mosquito netting and so on. If there is Leishmaniasis, this dreadful little protozoan-called ulcerating disease, then you've got to be careful with the little white flies that carry that and so on. But there are plenty of areas, particularly in the Amazon, the Orinoco Basin for example, where none of these diseases occur, particularly in the uninhabited areas. There are others where they do occur and you just have to take that precaution.
But once you've taken that precaution or you're in essentially a disease-free area, then none of the dangers, or exceedingly few I should say, that is popularly associated with the jungle, are to be found. And in fact, when I go into a rainforest, I feel completely at home. Completely safe there. And it is not the green hell of legend by any means. It's cooler than outside. When you step out of a rainforest in midday, you know, into an area that's been clear like the camp site or just beyond, say a cleared field and the like... like stepping into a furnace, you just want to get back into the rainforest. Temperatures rarely reach 90 degrees, even at midday, and it cools down sometimes into the upper 70s. So it's warm. Sometimes it's hot but it's really quite comfortable. And then you're in a wonderland.
I mean, surely it is a paradise for any naturalist. A mature rainforest is an area that's easy to walk around in... relatively easy because the canopy above you catches so much of the sunlight that the heavily shaded, even sometimes dark understory is relatively open, so you can walk around. And the diversity is fantastic. That... the experience of a naturalist in the rainforest, even one where you spend a long time looking and studying, seems full of unending novelty. So many people have commented on that. If you... no matter how long you've been there, you look up one day and there is a bird perched on a branch, you know, out of maybe 600 that occur in the area you've never seen before. There's a butterfly floating by, and that... well, a species you've never seen. That might be the only time you'll ever see it, you know. And so on. Many of the creatures that you see if you're on the floor, if you don't get up into the canopy itself, and that's not easy to do, but if you stay on the floor, which I usually do with working on ants, then a lot of the novelty is coming to you from that canopy. It'll be a hummingbird, for example, that startles you by zooming down from the canopy and whirring a foot or two in front of your face, you know, giving you a close look, and then back up into the emporium and out of sight forever.
It can be a huge walking stick, literally could be that long for example, that falls out in front of you and clumps down on the ground and starts to crawl away. You know, may have fallen from 70 feet up. And so on. So if only I could also have an air-conditioned apartment and the occasional dining out in a halfway decent restaurant I could stay in a rainforest for the rest of my life.

Evolutionary biology, which is a fancy name for scientific natural history, is... has some of the most wonderful and admirable people working in it that can be imagined. Because people come into it from very diverse backgrounds with different talents, different passions. I mean, the passion about natural history but they'll be passionate about a different group of animals or some other environment than the one you work in and so on. And certainly one of the most interesting friends that I've ever had is Bernd Heinrich. Born in Germany like so many Germans of his generation, including Bert Hölldobler, too young to have fought and died in the Second World War. They came through as children, they came through hard times. And had to help their families scrounge for food at the end of... during and after... at the end of the war, even as only children. They became very self-reliant. And this is strongly visible in the steeliness of their character as mature men.
Well, Bernd Heinrich is a great naturalist. He's one of these unsung naturalists who publishes marvellous pieces of work based on a keen eye and an experimenter's high talent. Drawing from natural history. Making conclusions from things that he sees in the field and then checking them out with experiments and repeated observations. But he's also a world class athlete. One of the great ultramarathoners of the world with many national and age group and even world records to his credit. You know, a 100 miles, the longest distance run for his age group or for all Americans or something like that, for 24 hours, I think it was 154 miles he was able to run. This kind of a person. A body looks like it's made out of wires and aluminium tubes.
And since I was an amateur runner I... dare I call myself that? I was a dedicated jogger and wannabe runner in my 40s, when I first encountered Bernd. And so this was one source of our friendship. But it was sort of like the... an all-star of the national basketball league being a friendly... a friend, you know, of the local duff in the city block. In fact, I first... was the first to encourage Bernd, an extremely shy and modest guy, who doesn't mention these things normally. People have to tell stories on him and then you can get it out of him. I take credit for having encouraged him to run in the Boston Marathon which is the most famous world marathon outside the Olympics. And he ran that marathon. He came here. You know, I told him... I said, Bernd, I'm a statistics duff on distance running. I... if I can't break records I can analyse them. And I said, I've checked your run out in Berkeley, your times and so on, you've told me about them. And jacked it up in terms of my calculations and the statistics tables, and I think you could probably run a marathon under three... under 2:20. 2:30. 2:30. And Bernd came and on that he decided to enter the Boston Marathon. And he happened to reach his 40th birthday just about on the day. I mean, it was April 19. That day or the day before. So he qualified for the masters class and he won it, which is extraordinary. But maybe not so extraordinary for a guy who was setting records in ultramarathons all around that time. It's notable that this athletic ability allowed him to, when he was studying the flight patterns and orientation of bumblebees, he's the only biologist I think I ever knew who actually did, got his data and checked it by running with the bumblebees as they flew back and forth between their home and wherever they were going.

The downside of working in the tropics is to see the devastation occurring close up and first-hand. When I first started going to the tropics, the West Indies and Mexico, in 1953, I was exhilarated by the prospects of visiting these rich... biologically rich places. But then I was shocked to see how little was left. A typical situation was one when you're travelling in a country like Southern Mexico, to have to travel very far to get anywhere near an intact piece of rainforest. And then typically you have to get out of your vehicle and cross an extensive cane field or cow pasture or wade across a stream and climb up a steep slope to get into the forest. And that's true in many parts of the world, probably most parts of the world. And it's becoming more true as we go along. It was only later with this in my mind that I became engaged... aware and engaged in the devastation, particularly of the tropical rainforest. And by the late 1970s we had the first measurements on just how fast they were going. By that time, about half of the tropical rainforest of the world had been destroyed. That's consequential because most experts on biodiversity agree that more than half of the plant and animal species in the world are found in those forests, even though today they only cover 6%, approximately, of the land surface of the world.
The removal rate, as it finally turned out from careful surveys, in the late '70s, and it's still the case, is roughly 1% per year. That's very fast destruction. Where at the present time the amount of remaining rainforest here, there, a bit, you know, a chunk in Borneo, a lot in the Amazon, Orinoco, little pieces in New Caledonia or in Madagascar and so on. All of that together has about the same aggregate area as the lower 48 states of the United States. And it's being removed at the rate of about the area of the state of Florida every year. So it's going fast. And knowing this in the back of my mind, from I guess my early 30s when I stopped making trips to the tropics for various reasons, I was now a faculty member at Harvard and I had a family, so it's not so easy to take off for a long journey into the right places, I started having a recurring dream which... it's an anxiety dream. I mean, most dreams are anxiety dreams and we form them around our current basic anxieties. And the dream was this. I would end up in the dream on an island in the South Pacific.

In the dream I realised that I didn't have much time left. The plane was due to leave that day or the next day. So if I was going to explore this unknown island I'd better get busy. And then I would find myself hiking, or taking an automobile, to what appeared to be the edge of rainforest on a distant hill. And I would get up to it in the dream, all prepared to work and find all these marvellous native species and so on of ants, and arriving at... I would find, no, it was just a row... a single row of trees, like a windbreak, and on the other side more fields. And then I would wake up. And I said to myself in the course of all this, you know, it was a symbolism in my mind of what had happened. To these places I loved so much. So I kept wondering, and in my dreams as it repeated itself, I gradually became aware of what these islands... exactly what they were. It was the Wallis and Futuna group, a little known archipelago between New Caledonia and Fiji. Never been studied for ants and it's just the kind of place, you know, you'd want to go to be the first. So I said to myself in my waking moments, if I can't get to Wallis and Futuna myself, I'll send a student.
So I managed to get an undergraduate who was going to Australia shortly, and who'd been trained, you know, working on ants. And I asked him if he would take a detour to the Wallis and Futuna Islands, they're under French control I believe. And he said, 'Oh yes'. And quite an adventure for him. And he did, and he collected thoroughly, and then when he came back with the specimens we actually did a monograph on the ants of Wallis and Futuna. The dream did not stop. But now I was not on the Wallis and Futuna, I was back on New Caledonia in my dream and I couldn't get rid of that by going to New Caledonia... sending somebody to New Caledonia. It was only after a long time that the dream faded. Unfortunately, the reality of the destruction of biodiversity in the natural environment that inspired the dream did not fade.

The final products of science, what we produce and what we can prove, from a mathematical theorem to a well-researched analysed and probabilistically correct hypothesis, is without emotion and without value in itself. That is what all scientists try to achieve because, after all, an important scientific discovery is forever. So that's what you aim for. Original discovery, objective, correct findings, are coin of the realm of science. So that's what you're after. But the scientist is a mess of emotions. The scientist... the creative scientist, is... mind is aswirl all the time with ideas of... crazy ideas of reminiscing, of dreaming of doing this, of doing that, coming up with connections, most of them all are no good. And furthermore, heavily emotional about it. You know, the excitement of maybe hitting on some notion that could be followed up.
So it's why I like to say that the complete scientist... the ideal scientist, thinks like a poet. And the thought... the creative processes are not alot different from a person in the creative arts. Dreaming of choreography, dreaming of the novel, and so on. You're thinking of a narrative, you're thinking of a process that may exist. You have a hint from one or two facts that something like that might be going on, and you dream about it in a chaotic... often chaotic manner. So the ideal scientist thinks like a poet, works like a bookkeeper, and that's the difference, because you know, you can't just put your dreams down. You're not a novelist or poet. You have to fasten on to an observation of a phenomenon, a connection between two phenomena. The presence of something that hadn't been found before. Fasten on to it and prove it in a... through repeated experiments, through photographs, or demonstrations, through specimens. In a way that others can come along and check it, follow exactly in your footsteps. And that is the work of a bookkeeper. And then, to be ideal you have to write like a journalist. You have to write it so it's clear. Of course very... most scientists fall down on that category. And when you write about it there's a little section in scientific papers called the discussion section. You can go back to being a poet, that's something the public doesn't realise. You can start in your introduction by saying, this is why I find this important. It's why I was excited and brought to it... or me and, I and my colleagues... and we undertook to make this study. That's your introduction.
And then you go in a typical scientific paper, as standard... there's no way of improving this in my opinion... to methods, instrumentation, what you did, what the experiments you did. And now you just absolutely bore everybody to death because you've got to list all of the steps, step by step in exact technical language. And that's why it gets jargony, but it sometimes has to be done that way. And then you have after materials and methods, you have your results. And this has to be as dry as a tax accountant's report, you know. Then you have discussion. Now you're able to say, after you've drawn the conclusion from your results, you say now this is very interesting, if this holds up because of the following implications and we will find many fruitful endeavours to follow upon such and such if in addition we discover that so and so. So that is essentially the way a scientist works, but the important thing to bear in mind is that they have not been seared into emotional immobility. Only a psychopath could be a scientist without passion and human emotion. And psychopaths almost never succeed as scientists.
