eric.kandel

Eric Kandel (b. 1929) is an American neuropsychiatrist. He was a recipient of the 2000 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his research on the physiological basis of memory storage in neurons. He shared the prize with Arvid Carlsson and Paul Greengard.    Kandel, who had studied psychoanalysis, wanted to understand how memory works. His mentor, Harry Grundfest, said, 'If you want to understand the brain you're going to have to take a reductionist approach, one cell at a time.' Kandel then studied the neural system of the sea slug Aplysia californica, which has large nerve cells amenable to experimental manipulation and is a member of the simplest group of animals known to be capable of learning.    Kandel is a professor of biochemistry and biophysics at the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia University. He is also Senior Investigator in the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. He was the founding director of the Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, which is now the Department of Neuroscience at Columbia University. Kandel's popularized account chronicling his life and research, 'In Search of Memory: The Emergence of a New Science of Mind', was awarded the 2006 Los Angeles Times Book Award for Science and Technology.

Memory has always fascinated me. Most of us can remember our first days in high school, our first date, our first kiss. [Memory] makes a major impact on our lives, and it’s really the mental process that carries us from one event to another. And although it’s hard to ascribe our later intellectual development to the early events of our life, I can’t help thinking that one of the reasons I worked on memory is because of my early life experience. One of the great aphorisms of post-holocaust Jewry is never forget, to remember all the time to fight against racism and hatred. And certainly my early experiences in Vienna have had a lasting impact on my life.
I was born in Vienna on November 7th, 1929 to Hermann and Charlotte Kandel, two wonderful people who actually were born in Poland. My mother was born in Kolomyia from middle class, quite cultured family. My father came from Olesko from a rather poor family. They both came to Vienna at very early age, before the First World War broke out.
My father, in fact, fought in the First World War, in the Austro-Hungarian army, as soon as he graduated from high school. My mother graduated from high school, actually had one year of college. My father, as soon as he graduated from high school, started to go into business by himself. My parents met [and married] in 1923. My brother, Lewis, was born [in 1924] and I was born five years later in 1929.
My father owned a small toy store that my mother [also] worked in on a Kutschkermarkt. This was a market that sold foods of various kinds, but in the back of it was stores, and my father had a small store that still exists there. And he made a reasonable living, even though we were never wealthy. And we had a very small but nice apartment in Severingasse. And since both my parents worked in the store, we always had a housekeeper, maid, sort of taking care of us.

I went to an elementary school on a Schulgasse, and I followed the steps that my brother had preceded me in, with the same teachers. And he was an extraordinary student. In my early years, all I heard was how great Lewis was. He learned how to play the piano from a girl that he knew. He was knowledgeable in Latin but I was just beginning to learn how to read and write. He went to a very well-known gymnasium, an academic gymnasium, and he was the outstanding student there. I still meet people who remember him. So wherever I went, that was Ludwig Kandel’s little brother; it was not an enviable position.
My brother was also technically quite gifted. So he developed a shortwave radio set. And we were listening together when Hitler marched into Austria, and then into Vienna, in March of 1938. Now this had sort of an interesting prelude.

Austria itself, after the First World War, was essentially emasculated. It had been a large empire which, you know, extended to what are now parts of Russia - in fact the Crimea belonged to Austria - parts of Italy belonged to Austria. Czechoslovakia, parts of Yugoslavia. It was enormous; over 50 million people, and all this was taken away. What was kept was the German-speaking core, about six-and-a-half million people. And from 1932 to 1938 Austria was a dictatorship. It was run on the model of Mussolini, sort of a Catholic dictatorship, with close ties to the Church. The first leader was a guy called Dollfuss, and he outlawed all parties except his own. So the Nazi Party, the Communist Party, the Socialist Party, they were all outlawed. And as a result, the Nazis rose up and shot him - assassinated him a year or so after he took office.
The killers were found, and order was restored, and Schuschnigg took over. But Hitler continued to put pressure on Austria to make the Nazi Party legal, and Schuschnigg at first didn’t want to give in. They met in Berchtesgaden, and Hitler said he wanted the Nazi Party to be legal. He wanted to have two members of the cabinet be Nazis. Schuschnigg gave in on that, and thought this would be the end of it. But Hitler kept on putting pressure on him. And Schuschnigg decided, we’re going to have a plebiscite. We’re going to decide with a vote whether or not the Austrian people want to stay independent, ja, yes, or join with Germany, nein.
And there were propaganda statements written on the street in white paint. It looked for sure as if the vote would be yes, we would stay independent. And Hitler saw that, and marched in on the 13th of March. I’ll never forget that. Lewis and I were listening, with our headsets, and we could hear: Die Fahne hoch! Die Reihen fest geschlossen! SA marschiert mit ruhig festem Schritt. This Nazi marching song. When he came into Vienna, 200,000 people, the largest ever assembled in Vienna, met at Heldenplatz and cheered him as a great victor. Now these were people that two days before that appeared to be opposed to him. All of a sudden they flipped.
Hitler himself was surprised. He thought that he would create a protectorate, you know, a special state that Germany had ties with. But they were so welcoming that he just annexed it. He made it part of Germany. At last, the German-speaking people are united.

This unification brought with it the most immediate and radical outburst of anti-Semitism one could imagine. Carl Zuckmayer, whom I would later write about in my honors dissertation at Harvard, was a progressive dramatist who had lived in Germany prior to Hitler coming to power, left Germany when Hitler came to power, and came to Vienna.
He said, I’ve lived through some of the most horrible experiences of my time. I saw gassings at the front in the First World War, I saw Hitler’s Munich Putsch in 1923. I saw Hitler come to power in Berlin in 1932. Nothing was comparable to the outbursts of viciousness and anti-Semitic anger than when Hitler came into Vienna. It was as if hell had opened up its gates and spewed out all of its anger and fury. Jews were forced to scrub the streets to get rid of these propaganda statements. My father was one of the people trapped in this way. They were beaten up, it was horrible.
The next day, I met a classmate of mine who said, ‘Kandel, my father said I’m never to speak to you again.’ Within weeks, another Jewish girl and I, the only Jews in our class, were kicked out, we were sent to a special school only for Jewish children, which was on the outskirts of town. And we stayed there until we left for the United States.

Now my mother was a very prescient woman. In those several days between Schuschnigg announcing the plebiscite and Hitler marching in, she sensed it might not go right. And she went to the American embassy and she found out how does one get to the United States. She had a brother in the United States, Berman, who had become a very successful accountant. He’d come ten years earlier, 1927 or something like that - ’28. And she found that she needed to get an affidavit from him. He guaranteed that he would support us in case my father couldn’t get a job. And he organized, and he sent that affidavit, and we were in position to leave.
But there was a quota. So the sequence in which people would come was specified, and the quota for people coming from Eastern Europe, from Poland, was very small. America did not want to bring in many Eastern European people. So it took a long time for our number to come up. And there also was a further sequence of how members of the family could come. So the parents of the person sending the affidavit, my grandparents, my maternal grandparents with whom we were very close, came first. My brother and I, because we were children, came next, and my parents came last.

Before we left, we had a horrendous event, and that is on November 9th 1938, all hell broke out in Vienna with Kristallnacht. There was a Jewish boy called Grynszpan, lived in Paris, must have been 19 or 20 years old, whose parents, foreign Jews living in Germany, had been picked up by the Nazis, and dumped over the Polish border. Without any questions asked, they just picked them up, dropped them over. No place to go.
Grynszpan was so enraged by this, he went into the German embassy and, thinking he shot the ambassador, he shot one of the other people working there. And that set off a rampage in which every single synagogue in Austria and Germany was destroyed, with rare exception. Jewish people were driven out of their homes. I remember it vividly, because this was the 9th of November. The 7th of November was my birthday, and I’d gotten a number of presents from my parents, including a car that I was longing to have. It was remotely controlled, so I could drive it around our little apartment, and I did this with great joy for a couple of days.
And then they came, they said… two guys came into our house, they banged on the door. Marched into the apartment, told us to pack up a few things that we would go and live with somebody else for a few days, and then come back.
And so I just… my mother said, just take a few things. I took a few clothing things. My brother, of course infinitely more intelligent, took his stamp collection. Everything that was... his coin collection, everything that was worthwhile. I did not think of taking any of my toys. Also I was so nervous, I didn’t think of almost anything. We went to another family that we had never met before. Much more affluent than us, but they were quite gracious. But they were as uncomfortable having us as we were uncomfortable being there. We stayed with them for about a week. When we came back, the apartment was not recognizable.
Everything of value was gone, including my toy car, my mother’s fur coats, everything. Fortunately my father who’d been rounded up and we hadn’t seen for a week came back. He had been rounded up, put together with men in an armory, but because he had fought in the First World War, he was released. But his store was taken away from him. What I did not know then and I found out many years later that, from that moment on, my father was absolutely destitute. He had absolutely no financial resources.
He went to the Kultusgemeinde der Stadt Wien, social service agency to which every Jewish family belonged, and he had been a member in good standing since he married, and they supported him until the time he left.

In March, end of March, beginning of April, our number came up. My grandparents left in February. We left at the beginning of April. And in order to get…
[Q] That was you and Lewis?
Lewis and [I] left in… that’s right. Lewis and [I] left in April. And I remember this vividly as yesterday, going to the train station to take a train to Antwerp… I’m sorry, to Brussels, where my aunt and uncle, who were from Vienna but much more affluent than us, had escaped to. They had a small apartment there, and we stayed with them for a day or two until we were ready to leave to Antwerp from where the ship left.
As we got onto the train, my parents, particularly my mother, had such confidence. I was never in any way frightened. I had the feeling everything would work out all right. I would soon see her. On the train officers came through, and asked whether we had any jewelry with us. I knew that they were going to come through, I’d been told that, and had a small ring that my parents had given me, with my initials on it and I had hidden it in my pocket. And when they came through, I did not reveal this, but I was terrified. I was sure they would somehow realize that I was hiding something, but fortunately they didn’t. So I quaked quietly, and survived.
We then took the SS Geroldstein, and I still have the list of all the passengers in that ship in this room. And it was like a nine-day voyage to the United States. And I remember I quite enjoyed the trip, but my brother was terribly seasick, was below deck most of the time. And when we came here, we were met both by - we arrived in Hoboken - we were met both by my grandparents, and by my uncle and aunt. And my grandparents had a small apartment on 1119 Coney Island Avenue and we stayed with them. And when my parents came they also joined us in that apartment.

So my aunt Paula, Berman’s wife, registered me in Public School 217, quite nice public school, not far from my house. And I was there, this was sort of April until June, and began to learn English there, but I was deeply uncomfortable. And that is although, you know, I had no reason to believe this, it looked to me like everyone in the class was not Jewish, because in America it’s difficult to tell Jews from non-Jews. Many Jews have blond hair and blue eyes. And I began to feel uncomfortable there; I thought the same thing would happen to me as happened in Vienna.
My grandfather, I don’t think, sensed this, but he and I always had a very good relationship. And he had gotten to know Mr Braverman, the principal of the Yeshivah Flatbush, a very good Hebrew parochial school two blocks away from my house. And he always wanted me to have more of a Hebrew education, and he volunteered to tutor me in Hebrew if I was willing to work with him, so I could take the entrance exam, and maybe get a scholarship for the Yeshivah Flatbush. I had no interest in learning Hebrew, I had no interest in going to the Yeshivah Flatbush, but I was dying to get out of 217, so he tutored me and I got in to the Yeshivah Flatbush.
[Q] Did you know English when you came up?
Did I know any Hebrew beforehand?
[Q] English.
I picked up English so rapidly. I… I don’t remember having any difficulty with it, but you know, kids pick up English on the street and I think by the time I spoke to the Yeshivah… I went to the Yeshivah, I already spoke English quite well. I hadn’t… didn’t know a word before I came here, but my brother spoke some English, and of course my uncle and aunt spoke English. I don’t remember the sequence and if it was seamless.

The Yeshivah was quite a nice experience. I learned a lot of Hebrew. By the time I graduated I could speak Hebrew almost as well as I could speak English and I made some good friends. A guy called Ernie Bogen who introduced me to jazz.
Evelyn Rinehart. I had a transient love experience with a maid in Vienna that of course never got anywhere, but with Evelyn Rinehart I had a very peculiar experience. She was a very attractive woman, about two or three seats away from me, and I would just stare at her for, you know, periods on end and she after a while told some mutual friends that I should cut it out, and I did. And we periodically spoke, we never dated. And that was the end of it.
But many years later, when I went back to the Yeshiva on a visit, when a film about me was being made, I wanted to get a sense of whether my classmates remembered their experience the way I remembered mine. And I called her, and she didn’t even remember who I was. So this is my first American love experience. A complete disaster.

The Yeshivah Flatbush did not have a high school in those days. It had a night school that carried you forward a little bit so you had to go to regular high school, and Erasmus Hall High School was in my neighborhood. A wonderful high school. And I convinced my parents after a while that going to day school and going to night school was more than I could handle. And Erasmus was one of those great liberating experiences, for me just absolutely transformative.
For the first time I felt free of Lewis. Lewis was extraordinary in this period. So when we came to America, Lewis went to the high school for specialty trades. He was a brilliant student, so he could learn a trade and earn some money and he learned printing, and he worked in a printer’s shop. And then he was drafted into the Second World War, and he fought in the army. And the refugees who served in the army loved the experience. They were made citizens right away, they got the GI Bill of Rights, so he stayed in the reserve, and later used the GI Bill of Rights to go to graduate school to study German literature.
I found myself at Erasmus. I found myself free of him. I found that I was good at sports, I was a good runner - one thing Jews learned in Vienna was how to run! And I became, more through I think my charm than my skill, co-captain of the Erasmus Hall track team with my friend Ronald Berman who had less charm, but infinitely more skill. He was an extraordinary runner. And we won a number of relays, one-mile relays. The Seton Hall Relays, the Penn Relays. He won the city championship in the half mile, I placed fifth. This was right across the street from here in the armory.

I had girlfriends. I did very well in school and I was particularly good in history. And I caught the attention of a history teacher whose class I never had, but he substituted sometimes, and for a while he acted as chairman of the history department, by the name of John Campana. When I was graduating, he asked me where I was planning to go to college. And I said I was planning to go to Brooklyn College. That’s where my brother initially went, before he went to Brown to graduate school.
And I said it’s a very good school, and I was planning to go to Brooklyn College. He said, ‘Have you ever thought of Harvard?’ I said, ‘No’. He said, ‘Why don’t you apply to Harvard?’ So I discussed it with my parents, my father said, ‘Look, we just put out some money to apply to Brooklyn College, we really don’t have a lot of money. You should go to Brooklyn College.’ So I said this to Mr Campana, and he gave me the money to apply to Harvard, and I got into Harvard. So did Ronnie Berman. So the two of us were the only ones accepted.

In Erasmus I blossomed intellectually. I was very good in history, and I wrote essays, and my teachers asked me to read the essays out loud on a number of occasions. And I also became a sports editor for The Dutchman, the school newspaper. Now it turns out that my predecessor, as the sports editor of The Dutchman, was Myron Kandel, unrelated. And he and I both thought that maybe we’d make journalism a career.
I also wrote a column called ‘Breaking the Tape with Eric Kandel’ for Gotham Sports, this was a newspaper weekly, in which I described what was happening in track. And Myron went on to have a very distinguished career in journalism, and I for various reasons dropped out.

I should tell you a bit about my parents in this time, because it was really quite remarkable. So here’s my father, a person with limited education, who ran a very nice toy store, and found that when he came to the United States, the kinds of toys he specialized in were of no interest to people. He actually had collaborated with a woman, and they developed Puppenschachtel.  They developed doll boxes in which you got the complete works. You got the doll, you got clothing to change the doll, a bed for it to sleep, and this all came. And she made it for him, and he sold it.
Came to the United States, none of that was of any interest to somebody, so he began to sell haberdashery from door to door, carrying a suitcase. And he did this for several years, and he made enough money to rent a store on 411 Church Avenue. After a while, we rented the apartment above it, so we could live in the same building, which was very nice for my mother who worked… she could go upstairs, fix lunch, blah, blah, blah. Worked very well. And ultimately he was able to buy the building he was in, and they supported us through, you know, high school, college, and actually supported me in medical school. So in Erasmus I really found myself, and then it opened up Harvard for me.

And going to Harvard was the most amazing experience. It was like the Promised Land. Soon after I got there I said, ‘I want to spend the rest of my life at a university’. Just absolutely fabulous. Not just the faculty, the physical plant at Harvard is very beautiful. Harvard Yard where one lives as a freshman is quite spectacular. But the people you interact with, your classmates, are so interesting. Different walks of life. A number of them came from very good prep schools: Andover, Exeter, Groton. I mean, they were way ahead of us. Now most of us from public schools caught up within a year, but the beginning, you know, they had read everything, they knew everything. So that was just a wonderful experience.
And I decided early on that my track career, which probably helped me get into Harvard, was not going to do much for me in the long run because I was very poor compared to the really great runners. So I dropped out and I focused on the things that interested me, which were books and girls. And I formed some wonderful friendships in college that had a big influence on my later life. I also took wonderful courses, and I had a terrific major. I wanted to understand what had happened to me. How could people listen to Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven one day, and beat up the Jews the next? I mean, what’s the whole purpose of civilization? So I majored in a field called History and Literature, which is a very special field. At Harvard in every major you can go for honors, which is you write a dissertation, and you can get honors if the dissertation is accepted. But that’s in your senior year. In History and Literature, you’re signed up for honors as soon as you join, the second year. And that meant you had a tutor working with you and my tutor was a guy called Robert Cross, a fabulous guy, very good historian, who later became President of Hunter College, President of Swarthmore. Really wonderful guy. And we had a very good relationship, I learned a lot from him. And I wrote my honors dissertation on the response to National Socialism of three German writers: Zuckmayer, Carossa, and Jung. And they had different positions in the political spectrum. So Zuckmayer was a liberal, he left Nazi Germany, went to Austria then came to the United States. Jung was a proto Nazi. He had fought in the First World War. He thought wars are rejuvenating, they really build manhood and he was quite enthusiastic about going to war again, and although he thought Hitler was vulgar, he by and large believed the racist dogma that he promulgated. And Carossa was typical of many intellectuals. He was wishy-washy. He underwent what he called the inner emigration - his spirits were elsewhere, but his body remained in Germany.

In my junior year, I fell in love with a woman who was from Vienna, Anna Kris. And she made a major, major impact on my life. She introduced me to her parents, Marianne and Ernst Kris. And they were members of the Freud circle. Marianne Kris was Anna Freud’s closest friend. She had been in analysis with Sigmund Freud and Ernst Kris was an analyst. [He became an analyst] after he married Marianne and got interested in analysis, but before that he had been a major art historian. And he was the teacher of Gombrich. And we got to know each other, and I got very close to him, and he said, ‘You want to understand what happened in Austria and Germany, you’re not going to do it through intellectual history. You want to understand motivation, the human mind, how people can act brutally. The only one way to do it is to study the mind, that’s through psychoanalysis.’ So I began to read Freud, and listen some more to him, and I became convinced this is the way to go.
So on short notice, I only had sort of a gut course in the natural sciences, I think as a sophomore, never taken any science courses. I went to summer school between my junior and senior year, at 1588 Mass Avenue, in a phenomenal house. In that house I shared the house with Bob Spitzer who [later became] head of [DSM-III], a major revolution in American psychiatry; Bob Goldberger who became provost of Columbia University; Henry Nunberg who was the son of a very famous analyst. I’m leaving somebody… and Jimmy Schwartz became a very close collaborator and friend of mine. Fabulous people, I learned a great deal from them. And they were all taking summer courses, and I took chemistry, unbelievably boring. And in my senior year I took physics and biology, and then the following summer I took organic chemistry, but I was accepted in medical school on the basis of just one course I’d taken over the summer, because my other record was good. I was accepted to NYU medical school. So I went to medical school with no particular interest in science.

In medical school I didn’t enjoy the first few years very much. But I loved the clinical years. And I spent the summers working at psychiatric hospitals. I spent one summer at McLean Hospital, another one at Central Islip. And I was training to become, you know, a psychoanalyst, a psychiatrist. And then I decided in my senior year… there’s a six-month period in which you can do whatever you want, elective period. Most of the people were doing practical things, radiology, you know, something leading to the clinical experience. Dermatology. I decided that even a psychoanalyst should know something about the brain. Now this was not just out of the blue. I was reading the psychoanalytical literature and there were two people, a guy called Mortimer Ostow and a guy called Larry Kubie who were interested in the brain, they were both trained neurologists before they became psychoanalysts, and they both trod a bridge between brain and psychoanalysis. And I found their writing fascinating. For example, Larry Kubie was very much taken with Penfield’s work, in which he’s stimulating the cerebral cortex while operating for scar tissue, to remove [the scars] that caused epilepsy, and he would stimulate certain areas in the medial temporal lobe; he would elicit memory-like phenomena. Kubie thought this was fantastic. Unconscious mental processes. So he went up to Montreal with a tape recorder and tape-recorded some of this thing. Really quite fascinating. So I thought, you know, I should spend some time at a neurobiology lab.
So I spoke to Ostow about this, and he said there’s only one guy, Harry Grundfest. He really is interested in the mind. Now, when he said there’s only one guy, he meant that literally because at NYU there was nobody working on the brain. It isn’t like now, you walk down Broadway and four out of five people you bump into are neurobiologists. Very few people working on the brain in those days. So I went to see Harry Grundfest, and he said, ’What are you interested in?’ And I said, ‘I’d like to know where in the brain the ego, the id and the superego is located.’ And he looked at me as if I was meshuga. He said, 'What are you talking about? You know, we don’t know whether these concepts have any meaning whatsoever. We have not the foggiest notion where they are in the brain. If you want to study the brain, you have to study it one cell at a time.'

Now I must tell you, when I was thinking about this recently, I realized that almost every move I made in the Grundfest lab had a permanent effect on me. I mean, I really in many ways have spent the rest of my life studying nerve cells one cell at a time. It didn't immediately start that way, but I ended up that way. He suggested I work with Dominick Purpura who was a young faculty person. This was at Columbia, Harry Grundfest was at Columbia. [Dominick] was in a neurosurgery department. He wanted to be a neurosurgeon, but he decided maybe he would do full time research. He had done research when he was at Harvard Medical School, and he liked research more than clinical practice.
And he was looking at the interactions between serotonin and LSD, and there was indirect evidence that they were supposed to oppose one another. And he and I did experiments, I mean he told me what to do. We did experiments. I was watching him, and we showed they were actually synergistic, and we brought very good evidence that they were synergistic.
And then because of Harry's interest, he got interested in the properties of the dendrites. And they developed a technique for studying it called the direct cortical response in which they would record from an area of the cortex and stimulate nearby with the assumption that since they're dealing [with] the surface of the cortex and the dendrites go up, they were stimulating afferent pathways that synapsed directly on the dendrites. And they saw evoked responses that were graded, and they thought that they were providing – and I was there – evidence for that fact that dendrites give rise to graded responses.
Even I felt a little bit skeptical about the methodology we were using, and so did Dom who was much more sophisticated, obviously, than I was. And even Harry. Especially Harry. But they thought recording from single cells in the cerebral cortex was beyond methodological capability at that time. But I had a fantastic experience there. I'd broken up with Anna earlier in medical school. In by senior year of medical school I'd met Denise, the woman I would ultimately marry, and we had already, by the time I was taking this elective, pretty much decided we would get married.
We had dinner together one night, and I said to her, 'You know, I could really see doing this for the rest of my life. But you don't have any money and I don't have any money, we want to get married, want to have kids. I've got to go into private practice.' And she said, 'Money is of no significance whatsoever.' These are words she's never repeated afterwards, but they really were very inspiring at the moment. And I decided I would go ahead with this.

When I graduated medical school, which was soon after my experience, my first experience with Harry Grundfest, Denise and I were married on June 10th 1956. We had a small wedding at Denise's mother's house. Denise's father had died the year before. Denise was not only perhaps the most beautiful woman I've ever gone out with, but certainly the most marvelous woman I've ever gone out with. Extremely intelligent, marvelous taste, and very generous. And I immediately liked her very much. She just would surround herself with beauty.
And she sensed after a while that we should get married. And I was reluctant. And she said, 'What are you so reluctant about? We really like one another.' And I said, you know, 'I don't know. You know, my parents fight with one another, I'm not sure I'm ready to get married.' And she said, 'Well, of course, you know, we're going to fight with one another. The issue is not whether people fight with one another, strong-minded people will have disagreements. The issue is how you resolve that.' And we see we resolve those things perfectly well.
So I decided really in a leap of faith, the wisest leap of faith ever made, to get married, and Denise has changed my life at many critical points when decisions had to be made. She absolutely helped me with the right decision. You know, doing science. Later on when I finished my residency, I realized that it's going to be hard to combine psychoanalysis with brain science, and she encouraged me to devote myself completely to brain science.
And then, one year later I was offered the chairmanship of a department of psychiatry at Harvard. I could barely read and write and I was being offered the chair of a department. I would have killed for that job ten years earlier. Denise said, 'What? Throw your career away? It's absurd. You should continue to do science.' And this is what she's urged in me all the time. And she learned from her mother, sort of exquisite taste about arranging a house. Her mother collected Art Nouveau furniture, and she actually gave us a beautiful table when we got married. And we've surrounded our house with vases, with furniture, that's just a delight to look at. And I just feel privileged to be with her. In addition, she's a fantastically creative person.

When I met her, she was a graduate student of sociology, so I should point out, she was born in France. When Germans invaded Paris, her father was rounded up, and he was sent to a detention camp. He was a foreign-born engineer, and her mother helped him escape, and they went to the south of France, and Denise’s mother thought she would have to devote a lot of time to sort of protecting him. So she was able to arrange through a physician that they got to know to have Denise boarded at a convent in the town of Cahors in the South of France. And for two years she was in that convent. And not once did the nuns put any pressure on her to convert.
In fact, there was a fascinating story. Denise’s mother and father once were extremely nervous, you know, because she couldn’t take confession, and she couldn’t take the wafer at Mass on Sunday, that maybe it would emerge one day that she was Jewish, although no one except the head of the convent knew that, the mother superior. So they decided that maybe she should convert. So they were about 50km away from Cahors. Sara, Denise’s mother, travelled to Cahors, went to the convent, went to the big door that opened the convent, and couldn’t get herself to knock on it. Turned around, went back, sure that her husband would be furious. And Iser, her husband, said, ‘I’m so relieved. The moment you left I had enormous regrets.’
Denise stayed successfully there. And it’s interesting - we visited subsequently - there is an escape hatch she was taught to go to in case the Germans ever came looking for her. So they protected her in every possible way. Denise’s brother could not stay at the convent, but one of the nuns arranged for him to stay with a baker in town who loved him, took care of him, for those two years. After the war, they all got together, went back to Paris, and they decided about 1948/49 to leave for the United States.  And that is for two reasons. One is they were afraid that Russia might invade the rest of Europe. And two, they wanted their children, not that they were religious, but they wanted their children to marry Jews, and they thought that was more likely in the United States. And they were 50% successful. Denise married me. Jean-Claude married Marcy Bystryn who’s a wonderful woman, happens not to be Jewish, but their children were raised Jewish.
Denise went to Lycée Français for one year, and that allowed her to be admitted as a junior to Bryn Mawr. As a junior at Bryn Mawr she majored in Sociology, and she did graduate work at Columbia, and ultimately got a PhD working on how medical students choose their career. And ultimately she got interested in adolescent development, and went on to study drug abuse, and has made major contributions in that area.
And being married to her is the greatest privilege of my life. So I’ve been very lucky both on a professional and a personal front. And we’ve had two fantastic kids. Paul, who was born - they were both born at Harvard - Paul was born while I was a resident, and Minouche was born soon after we came back from Paris in 1964.

So Grundfest very generously volunteered to nominate me for the National Institute[s] of Health. So when I was graduating medical school, which was in 1956, all physicians were drafted. But the percentage, less than 1% that was selected for the NIH, could use that as substitute, two years of [service] as the Public Health Service as an alternative - they actually had a uniform - for serving in the conventional armed forces. So he nominated me, and I was accepted in Wade Marshall’s lab after I finished my internship. So between ’56 and ’57 I took an internship at Montefiore. And I again had several months [of elective period] and I came back, and Grundfest suggested, ‘Look, why don’t you work with Stanley Crain?’  And the reason he suggested that was because we had a long conversation one day about dendrites, and after that conversation, Grundfest gave me a series of papers that Stephen Kuffler had written about the crayfish stretch receptor in which the stretch receptor really was a series of dendrites that inserted into the muscle. If you pulled on a muscle you excited the dendrites. So he was looking at the dendrites, recording intracellularly from these cells, and studying the dendrites directly. And I said, ‘Wow, this is the way it should be done.’ So Grundfest saw that I was really becoming interested in sort of a reductionist approach, simple systems. So he said, ‘Look, you enjoy the [Kuffler] papers so much. Why don’t you work with Stanley Crain? He’s bringing a reductionist approach to bear on the study of the nervous system.’ And Stanley Crain was amazing. Stanley Crain had collaborated with Edith Peterson who was here at Columbia, a pioneer. She developed tissue culture system for the nervous system. First one to do that. [Stanley] had spinal root ganglion culture, and he recorded from single individual cells in culture. And I saw him do this. He showed me how to make electrodes, how to fill them with potassium chloride, and he encouraged me to setup the crayfish giant axon system from scratch, to learn how to do dissection, so I could visualize it. To learn how to make the electrodes, hook them up to amplifiers, to oscilloscopes. I learned how to really do an electrophysiological experiment, and we would connect the oscilloscope to a loud speaker, so when you had an action potential it would either [go] boom, boom, boom, like a gun going off. Now I don’t like guns going off, but the excitement of hearing that sound is fabulous. So I put an electrode in the cell, I heard my own intracellular recordings, boom, it was really inspiring. This was the most routine experiment, it was nothing novel about it, I was repeating something that, you know, anyone could do, but I found it very exhilarating. And it committed me to this kind of an approach in the nervous system.

So when a year later I came to the NIH [National Institutes of Health], I had this idea in mind. And Wade Marshall, the guy who recruited me, was a very interesting guy. He had been in the ‘30s an absolute giant. He probably would have gotten the Nobel Prize if he had continued working. He was a graduate student with Ralph Gerard and recorded from the surface of the cortex with evoked response electrode, with gross electrodes, and he saw that if you stimulated the surface of the body, you got in a certain area of the brain, evoked responses. And there seemed to be a bit of a map, topographical representation. So he thought he would go to Hopkins where Phillip Bard was studying somatic sensation, and collaborate with him. And they published a famous series of papers – Marshall, Woolsey and Bard – in which they mapped the body representation on the brain. Classic studies. It then went on with somebody specializing in the ear, to do the representation of the cochlea onto the brain, and then the retina, with Talbot. Fabulous papers.
Phillip Bard was asked to give the Harvey Lecture [at the] Harvey Society in New York, and those papers were published and he published under his own name, the data that he collected together with other people, including data from Marshall. So Marshall’s papers, some of Marshall’s figures, first appeared in Bard’s paper, the Harvey Lecture. Wade went off his rocker and threatened to kill Bard. He really had a psychotic episode. Bard was a big man, took the gun away from him, helped him get hospitalized, and he was hospitalized for several years. When he got out, he was recruited first to the naval medical center, and then to the NIH where Seymour Kety, who was head of a large laboratory, made him head of a sub-branch, the Laboratory of Neurophysiology, both for NINDS and for NIMH both for neurology and for mental health. And there he ran a moderate-sized laboratory, actually one set-up. And he was interested in spreading cortical depression, sort of a migraine-like phenomenon that propagates over the cerebral cortex. And I helped him with that, and Jack Brindley, who joined the lab at the same time, also helped him with that and we collaborated together. We actually published a paper together on that.
And then he let Jack and me do whatever we wanted to. So I thought, you know, what’s the problem I should work on? And I thought the key problem in psychoanalysis is memory. We are who we are because of what we learn and we remember. And psychoanalysis is an attempt to create a comfortable environment so you can relive traumatic memories from early life in a protective environment. So I thought I would like to learn how memory works and like to do it on a cellular level.
Brenda Milner had just collaborated with Scoville who had removed the hippocampus on both sides, and together they had showed [that the] hippocampus was absolutely essential for memory storage. And I thought I would apply single cell techniques to the hippocampus. Jack Brindley had zero interest in that. So we agreed five days a week we’d split the lab two-and-a-half days for him, two-and-a-half days for me. I would help him. He was interested in potassium fluxes. He had been drafted while he was a graduate student at Hopkins, and his thesis was on potassium fluxes, he wanted to continue that, and he would help me with intracellular recordings.

I’d learned from Paul MacLean how to [remove] the cerebral cortex, so that I could expose the hippocampus [lying below it]. It’s a beautiful dissection. You look into the ventricle, and you see that the white matter is on top rather than being at the bottom. So you see the alveus which are the myelinated axons shining like a jewel in the ventricle. And I had just learned the dissection I was getting going, I really was not off the ground, when a third guy comes into the lab, Alden Spencer. And we’re terribly afraid he’s going to ask for equal time and we’d have no time to do anything. So each of us tried to convince him to join our project. So I show Alden the dissection, thinking that would win him over, and he loved it. And he decided he wanted to work on this, and we worked together. It turned out that Alden was very psychosomatic, and radioactive potassium was not something that attracted him at all. And this was the beginning, not only of a wonderful collaboration, but of a wonderful friendship.
While he was alive, there was no other scientist around who influenced me more than he did. And he and I decided together to attempt intracellular recordings from hippocampal neurons. We developed a very nice technique for reducing pulsations in the hippocampus, and within a few weeks we had our first intracellular recordings. It was unbelievable. The boom, boom, boom of the action potentials. Here we were recording single cells in the area concerned with memory. We were thrilled. We got several more recordings, people around us were ecstatic. Marshall… There was a guy called K Frank, I didn’t mention him. K Frank was an extraordinarily gifted electrophysiologist working on the spinal cord doing intracellular recordings. [John] Eccles was the guy who pioneered this, but Frank was right next to him. And so I knew I could learn a lot from him as a fall back. Frank thought this was a little bit chancy, hippocampus, but he didn’t discourage me from doing it. And I knew that if there were technical problems, he could bail us out. He was ecstatic. Walter Freygang was ecstatic. I was asked to give a seminar, filled the room. People thought this was great. Typical NIH experience. Two incompetent guys who don’t know a goddamned thing, the environment brings them up, and look what they accomplish.

Alden and I studied it quite thoroughly over a three-year period. I thought it was only going to be a two-year period. I was supposed to start my residency at Harvard in 1959, but I called up Dr Ewalt who was the chairman of the department and said, ‘I’m in the midst of wonderful set of experiments, I’ll never do anything comparable like this in science again, I wonder whether you can give me a year’s extension?’ He said take as long as you want. So instead of leaving in ’59 I left in ’60. So ’57 to ’60 I worked there, almost all that time Alden was there. And we recorded intracellularly from these cells. We described their properties, the action potentials, the resting potentials. Synaptic inputs into it, very powerful recurrent collaterals. They tended to fire in bursts, and we described the bursting activity. We also pioneered… we were not the first ones to do it, but very early ones. We had a bridge circuit so we could not only record, we could stimulate the individual cells. And then we found amazingly little spikelets that we could indirectly ascribe to coming from dendrites. So while everyone was thinking the dendrites gave rise to graded properties, we showed that the dendrites gave rise to little spikes that propagated to the initial segment where the big spike was initiated, and boom. So we had a lot of little insights in this thing, and we were very thrilled, and we published four papers back-to-back in the Journal of Neurophysiology. It was a big deal.
But we turned to each other, and we said, what the hell did we learn about memory? Not a goddamned thing. Memory is not a property of individual cells. These cells had some differences from motor neurons which is a prototype cell that had been studied well, the spinal cord motor neuron. It had some distinctive properties, this recurrent inhibition, the spikes in the dendrites, but that didn’t tell us anything about memory storage. Memory, we realized, it’s obvious, is a property of a neural circuit that is modified as a result of sensory input coming in. So we tried to see whether we could get sensory input in the hippocampus, we tried light, we tried touch, we tried pain, nothing worked. We didn’t realize that [the hippocampus represents space and that] space represents multiple modalities, and so we decided we needed to take another approach, and we discussed repeatedly, over days, what approaches we would take.

Alden [Spencer] was a mammalian chauvinist. He would never leave the mammalian nervous system, so he kept on looking for a simple system within the mammalian brain. And he ultimately focused in on the spinal cord. There were various things you could study [such as] reflex habituation, [dishabituation] etc. And he thought he would study that.
I was influenced by Grundfest and the crayfish and, you know, squid, and what [could be learned] from them. I was looking for an even simpler system. I wanted a radical reductionist approach to learning. Now many people thought this was crazy in those days because they thought even though reductionist approach worked in many areas of biology, it wouldn’t work for behavior that’s uniquely, you know, a mammalian, human phenomenon. I thought, that’s silly. In all the anthologies described you can see very interesting forms of learning and memory in simple animals. Not only that, at Harvard I’d read some Skinner and I now read up more on this. People had described simple learning paradigms, habituation, sensitization, classical conditioning that you could see in all animals. So I began to look for a simple system, and one thing about NIH [National Institutes of Health], everybody comes through. It was the mecca of neuroscience in those days.
So I went to seminars about worms, about flies, about all kinds of animals. And what caught my attention was the marine snail Aplysia. Now what’s so wonderful about the marine snail Aplysia? It met all the criteria that I thought were important. It had a limited number of nerve cells, the whole nervous system was only 20,000 nerve cells. Your brain and mine is a million million nerve cells. Number one. Number two, the cells, many of them were gigantic. Before I became presbyopic, I could see them with my naked eye. One of the cells is a millimeter in diameter.
Moreover, Arvanitaki had already described it, but it became clear to me this was very likely. Many of these cells are uniquely identifiable so you could return to the same cell time and time again, so it seemed to me this was an ideal thing to work.

Only two people in the world were working on this at that time. Angélique Arvanitaki Chalazonitis in Marseille, and Ladislav Tauc in Paris. Denise is French, so far so good. They both came through, we both had them for dinner, and both seemed very interesting, and Denise said going to Marseille is like going to Albany. So we went to Paris, and I worked with Ladislav Tauc.
But before I could start with Ladislav Tauc, I had to take my residency. I had promised Ewalt that after a year. So 1960 I [would be] at Harvard, at the Mass Mental Health Centre, doing psychiatry. So this was a fascinating experience. I still had the idea that I would become a psychoanalyst, and this was a very analytically-oriented place, and I was thinking maybe I would combine psychoanalysis with brain science. And soon after I arrived there, in fact the first day, I walked into Ewalt's office, and he had been so gracious to me, and I said, 'I wonder Dr Ewalt whether I could have some space so I could set up a lab so in my spare time I could do some research'. I should tell you that when I was a resident, residents worked from nine to five, and every fifth or sixth weekend. So there was a lot of spare time. And he banged on the table and said, 'Who the hell do you think you are? Look at these 20 people who arrived the same time you did, what makes you think you're any better than they are?' I said, 'Dr Ewalt, I have absolutely no reason to believe I'm any better than they are clinically, but I have had some research training, and I would not like to lose out on that while I'm here'. He said, 'Get out to the wards and see patients'. I was so pissed off I was ready to quit. I called up Jerry Lettvin who was then at the Veteran's Hospital, he said, 'Come over here, it's a much more pleasant environment'. So I seriously considered doing that, but I was too much of a Harvard snob to give up a Harvard education, and I thought sooner or later I would win out. I went over to the medical school, to my delight I found that Steve Kuffler had moved to Harvard. And he brought with him Hubel and Wiesel. And after a while they recruited Furshpan and Potter and Kravitz. And wonderful to interact with them. But also somebody new slightly, Elwood Henneman was there. And Henneman offered me a lab. So I started to set up a lab over there.

What was I going to do? Well, I had one idea that came to me from Sandy Palay, a great anatomist whom I befriended at the NIH [National Institutes of Health]. I had somehow been interested in… because I was a psychiatrist, in neuroendocrine cells, I thought they might be more important for psychiatric problems. And people knew that there were cells in the hypothalamus that released hormones, but one didn't really know whether they had properties of nerve cells, but I now knew what the properties of nerve cells were and I knew how to record from single cells. And he told me the goldfish is ideal for that. If you open up the skull, you see the hypothalamus, and you can see the area. Not only that, you can stimulate the pituitary backwards so you can identify these cells.
So I got some goldfish, little pond, and I was able during my residency to record intracellularly from these cells, completely unoriginal. I repeated what I'd done before, but listen, it's a good way to while away one's time. And I published a very nice paper on that.

Things were by and large moving well, and then I got into difficulty with Denise. While I was a resident, we had our first child, Paul. I was thrilled. First child a boy, no less. And I continued what I was doing, you know, working many evenings, and some weekends. And Denise after a while got furious. She showed up at the lab carrying Paul and she said, 'Who the hell do you think you are? You're just completely neglecting the two of us', and she screamed at me terribly. And I realized she was right and I, you know, pulled back, you know, acted more reasonably, straightened things out.
And after two years, having essentially completed my residency, I left to work with Ladislav Tauc and began work on Aplysia. And I knew I would come back to Mass Mental Health Center, and Ewalt in the meantime had completely changed his mind about me. After the first several months he actually approached me and offered me space in the Mass Mental Health Center, saying, 'I've spoken to Kuffler and I've spoken to Henneman they think you're a very worthwhile person. I'd like to…' And he gave me a state line. Unbelievable, a resident, a state line. And this had a big impact, not only on me, but I was with a spectacular group of house officers. Tony Kris, Anna's brother, the son of a famous analyst, and who ultimately also became a very good analyst. Ernie Hartmann, also the son of a famous analyst and Paul Wender, [another] outstanding [person]. And they saw that people who did research were treated in a very privileged way, and many of them later went to the NIH, many of them I've [interacted] with. I'm not sure this was the only motivation, but they saw research was valued. And so with that I, you know, headed over to France and spent a wonderful year. Actually, the year was not spent in Paris, much of the year spent in Paris. The Aplysia actually come to Arcachon, which is a marine base like Woods Hole. So we spent two seasons in… The season for Aplysia is September to November. So we spent two seasons in Arcachon, and the year in between in Paris. And in Paris I worked on land snails. And we had a terrific time over there.
 

So the two years that I spent at Harvard in my psychiatric residency, between leaving the NIH [National Institutes of Health] and joining Ladislav Tauc in Paris, were extremely influential on many levels. To begin with, I learned a lot of psychiatry. In particular, I learned about the strengths and weaknesses of psychoanalytical approaches to it. I realized how unempirical psychiatry was and how no attempt was made to relate psychoanalytical thinking to brain science. This also was the period in which we had our first child, so it was really wonderful from that point of view. From a scientific point of view, it gave me a chance to set up my first lab, and to run experiments on the hypothalamic neurons, the neuroendocrine cells. And also it gave me a wonderful opportunity to interact with the Kuffler group.
Now one of the things that struck me about the Kuffler group that knew really an enormous amount about neurobiology, is the wonderful synthesis that Steve was able to achieve by bringing together the anatomy of the nervous system with the biochemistry of the nervous system, with the physiology of the nervous system. But one thing that really intimidated them, if I can use that word, was behavior. They thought that, number one, they didn't understand behavior, number two, they thought that brain science was not ready to tackle problems related to behavior.
And I in my naiveté thought what's so scary about behavior? If you can sit with a patient with schizophrenia, you going to be worried about the behavior of a snail or a fly or a mouse? So I had a somewhat different attitude than they did, really out of naiveté. And one thing that struck me throughout this period is that I made a number of decisions, which in retrospect seemed quite reasonable, based on rather naïve extrapolation of what could work, rather than confident deep knowledge about the subject matter. So I decided I would work on Aplysia because I realized that memory does not reside in single nerve cells, the unique properties of single nerve cells. You needed a neural circuit. So the question is: how do you then go about using Aplysia to do that?

I began to think of, you know, the need to work out a neural circuit, but also to ask the question, what might change in a neural circuit? And I began to read about ideas that people had about what could be the mechanisms of learning and memory that didn't reside in the cells per se.
Now, the first person to really think deeply about it was Ramón y Cajal who suggested the idea that learning involves changes in synaptic strength. This was elaborated later on by a guy who had a big influence on me called Jerzy Konorski, student of Pavlov, who developed the distinction between excitability and plasticity. He said when you stimulate nerve cells, they undergo two kinds of changes: transient changes in excitability, and more persistent changes in synaptic strength core plasticity. And people began to ask, well what sort of plastic changes are particularly effective? Well, one might just be activity, per se. Use, per se. And Eccles explored that and came to the conclusion that it was not very effective. And several other people, Delisle Burns also, came to that conclusion. So I began to wonder, what is it that might produce plastic changes that would be effective and could mediate learning?
The one possibility, what Ross Adie suggested, it's not in the synapses, it's in the extracellular field, but that seemed too weird for me. And it struck me that maybe it lies in the learning situation itself. Maybe learning uses, you know, different patterns of stimulation. So I read Kimble's revision of Hilgard and Marquis' classic text on conditioning and learning. I read some of Skinner's work. And I realized that simple forms of learning, like habituation, sensitization classical conditioning, involved different patterns of stimulation. Habituation involved repeated stimulation of one pathway. Sensitization involves the effect of one pathway on another. Classical conditioning involves contingent interaction between two pathways. And I said, my gosh, maybe that it's not use, but it's specific patterns of stimulation.
And what these psychologists, [Ivan] Pavlov and [Edward] Thorndike described, really stimulus paradigms for producing a behavior change. Well, those stimulus paradigms could be used as patterns of stimulation applied to nerves converging on single nerve cells. So I developed the idea, which I called analogues of learning in which you could record from a single cell, and stimulate a pathway repeatedly to simulate habituation. You could then stimulate a pathway occasionally, stimulate another pathway very strongly, and see whether or not you could simulate sensitization. And finally you could do the most magical experiment of all: pair them, boom boom, boom boom. See whether you can get classical conditioning.
And I wrote a grant to the NIH in 1962 to apply to work in Ladislav Tauc's laboratory in order to carry out those experiments. And I was funded. I got $10,000 for travel and living expenses that year abroad, which was very nice. And so it struck me as those two years were very rich years. And one of the things that was really critical for allowing me to think rather extensively about these problems in ways that influenced me for almost a decade thereafter was this argument I had with Denise about spending more time at home with Paul, not being so absolutely obsessed with the laboratory as I had been at the NIH. And that allowed me to spend more time at home, not only with Paul, but thinking and reading. And as someone once said about Jim Watson - I don't want to compare myself to him, but I like the metaphor - Jim Watson never confused hard work for hard thought. And I really spent a lot of time doing as hard thinking as I was capable of, and I enjoyed it, and I think it turned out to be very profitable for me.

Ladislav Tauc was a perfect match as a mentor to me. He was not very much older than me, so we were sort of chronological peers. And he had a strong background in biophysics. He, for his thesis, studied the electrical properties of plants. He did intracellular recordings from giant plant cells and then he moved to Aplysia where the giant cells were similar to plant cells, he recorded primarily what we now call R2, a large giant cell in Aplysia in the abdominal ganglia. And he showed, as had been shown in the mammalian nervous system that the action potential initiated in the initial segment of the axon. He had never thought about behavior, he hadn’t thought much about integrative action, he hadn’t thought much about neural circuits. That was not his interest. His interest was biophysics and cellular neurobiology. I didn’t know much biophysics, I knew a modest amount about cellular biology, not as much as he did, but I had a broader perspective on it. So when I outlined for him the idea of looking at cellular analogues he was at first ambivalent, but then allowed me to do it. He gave me a great deal of freedom. And I proceeded to do it, and I couldn’t have been more surprised, but these things worked quite well.
I recorded from R2, I stimulated a pathway repeatedly, and I saw the synaptic potential go down. If I waited a little bit, it gradually came back. It was down for minutes. If I stimulated the pathway just rarely, and came in with another pathway, what we call heterosynaptic, very strongly, I produced dramatic facilitation of the first pathway. Heterosynaptic facilitation. Extremely nice. And again, that persisted for long periods of time. And amazingly, in cells near R2, we found that if you paired the two in the way of classical conditioning, with a weak stimulus just barely preceding the strong stimulus, you could produce pairing dependent facilitation. Classical conditioning. This was quite remarkable. And we summarized this in a series of papers, in which we said this is just an analogue of learning, but it suggests that similar mechanisms may be involved in the learning process, per se, because clearly built into the synapse is the capability for changing, and changing in both directions: it could go down, the same synapse could go down, it could go up. And although we could not isolate individual monosynaptic connections, we did try to do sort of threshold stimulation in which we could convince ourselves; it was not the most compelling evidence in the world, but quite suggestive, when stimulating a single fiber, we could see an elementary synaptic potential. And we could see some of these events in the elementary level.
So this is completely encouraging. And it gave me a sort of different view of how things work. Really if one could be so bold as to say, modification of Cajal’s view, there’s not a single learning process as Cajal thought about it. Learning is a family of different processes, and it utilizes a family of different mechanisms.
 

That was an exceptionally rewarding year, because it really outlined for me what the task ahead was. And that was to begin to learn how to work out neural circuitry in Aplysia, and look at behavior in the whole animal, and work out the neural circuitry of behavior. And that's the task I'd set for myself coming back to the United States.
But in addition, it was a wonderful year for Denise and myself and Paul in Paris. Denise had been raised in Paris, she knew it quite well. We went to museums, we began to buy art. We had a very nice time. And the French not only take long lunch breaks, which I didn't take, but they take long summer breaks, so we spent five weeks in Marina di Pietrasanta in Italy right near Florence. We had… a babysitter was with us. We went to Florence three times a week and had a fabulous time getting to know the museums and walking around Florence. It was great.

In 1963, we came back to Harvard. In retrospect, there are several things that strike me about this almost magical period. One is the naiveté, one might call it in retrospect courage, but for me it was naiveté, to give up something in which I had achieved what overtly seemed like considerable success, the hippocampus, to go not to the spinal cord, but to an invertebrate animal, which really was a lower class solution, if you will, for most neuroscientists. It was quite bold. Alden wouldn't do it. He wouldn't leave the mammalian nervous system. People thought the mammalian nervous system was magical and was governed by different rules. Somehow my naiveté, not that I had any background in biology at all, I believed in a conservation of biological principles; if evolution finds a mechanism that works, it's likely to retain it. That seemed to me to be very obvious. So… but Eccles actually contacted me and said it was a major decision, and it was a mistake. And that I should come and work with him on the hippocampus. And he invited both Alden and me to join him to work on the hippocampus. And Eccles was a genius who knew infinitely more than either of us, or both of us together, but what would he teach us about the hippocampus that we didn't already know? So I didn't think that was a very profitable thing. Also, I wanted to be more adventurous.

I wrote this application to the NIH on analogues of learning, and you could say it's outrageous, it's amazing that the NIH would support it. But one has to realize, it was a completely different environment in 1962 than it is now. If you can read and write you were funded by the NIH. If you were serious about what you were doing, if you had a good laboratory to support you, there was very little question you would get [funded]. So I was very fortunate to come along at a good time. In fact, I would put it even more. I came along at a time in which the questions that interested me were unanswered, and I in my naïve way was addressing issues that were absolutely ripe to be answered. But somehow, practically no one else but me was addressing them in ways that could be productive. That was just so lucky, because it wasn't that I knew that much or was that smart, just sort of a combination of, you know, having psychiatry behind me, behavior didn't scare me. Having been successful with hippocampus, and the neuroendocrine cells, I had some confidence that I could do experiments. And then the feeling that Aplysia is likely to be a terrific system gave me courage to go ahead.

Kuffler was very supportive of a reductionist approach. He was skeptical about my ability to handle the behavior, but he liked very much the stuff coming out of Aplysia, and I once gave a seminar to the Harvard group and they were actually quite supportive of it. They weren't prepared to move in that direction, but they were quite supportive.
So when I came back, I realized that I was now setting up my own lab, and I needed to get help. And I needed to get help of two kinds. One is I wanted to work out the neural circuitry, so I needed some people who knew some cellular physiology. So I was able to recruit Wes Frazier and Rafiq Waziri as post-doctoral fellows, and they had some experience with intracellular recordings. And then soon thereafter I realized I didn't know enough about animal behavior to tackle this myself. I was very fortunate, through Wes Frazier, to learn about Irving Kupfermann who had an allergy to rodents, and therefore had worked on pill bugs for his dissertation at Chicago. I called him up, he was interested, he joined me at Harvard just before I was about to leave for NYU, and he joined in Aplysia. And they were fabulous. So with Rafiq and Wes Frazier, we did some very interesting experiments.

We first wanted to see whether or not this notion that I had, in which Arvanitaki-Chalazonitis had provided some support for was true. Could you identify many of the cells as unique individuals?
So we began to record from individual cells, we made a map of the ganglion, and we characterized the electrophysiological properties: Was it a silent cell? Was it spontaneously bursting? What was the nature of the spontaneous input? Where was it located? What's its pigmentation? Where did it send its axons? And we found after a while that most of the cells on the ganglion were uniquely identifiable, and we could return to them from preparation to preparation.

I then asked Coggeshall to join in because we were beginning to map connections between cells and he was a very good anatomist. So it then dawned on us that maybe we could map connections between cells. And we found something very interesting. We started to record from cells, two at a time, instead of one at a time, to look at connections between them. And we found something very odd. We found if we recorded from certain cells, that there were inhibitory synaptic potentials in one cell that were synchronous with excitatory synaptic potentials in the other cell. Wow, that's odd. That suggested that a single cell was producing different synaptic actions on different follower cells. That had never been described before. There had been what Eccles has called Dale's principle. A neuron released only one transmitter which produces only one synaptic action at all of its terminals. This seemed to be a violation of Dale's principle. So we hunted around and we hunted around and boom we found a cell, L10, that produced excitation on some cells and inhibition on the others. We could clearly show, this was mediated by the same transmitter: acetylcholine excited one cell, inhibited the other. Acetylcholine receptor blockers blocked it.
Moreover, not only was this a fascinating finding, and Coggeshall helped us actually trace the connections, but it showed for the first time you could map connections between single cells in a neural structure. This had never been done before, but this really opened up the studying of neural circuitry, and that was really very encouraging. And then with Howard Wachtel and with Daniel Gardner, we went on to show a further variation of it, that some cells receive from the same synaptic neuron, L10, both excitation and inhibition. If you stimulate it slowly, you had excitatory synaptic potentials, if you now speeded it up, it converted to inhibition - really quite remarkable - mediated by acetylcholine. So just by combining receptors in different ways with different kinetics, you can get all kinds of synaptic properties.
So that convinced me we could begin to work out the neural circuitry of the behavior.

At this point, this is about 1965, our second child was born, Minouche. And I received an invitation to develop a group at NYU. Bill Van der Kloot was the chairman of the physiology department. He wanted me to develop a subsection in that department. This seemed very attractive to me for several reasons. One is it turned out at that time Denise's mother and my father both had medical problems, and we spent some time in New York taking care of them; we thought, you know, it'd be nicer for them and for us if we were in New York. Also would be nicer for our children to get to know their grandparents. Number one. Number two, Alden Spencer, with whom I stayed in close contact continued to be a wonderful friend with whom I shared all of my thoughts, he was doing parallel experiments on the spinal cord. He ultimately gave that up because he could not define mono-synaptic connections in the spinal cord that easily. But he did very nice work with Dick Thompson - wrote a major review on habituation, and also was interested in neural analogues. He was doing a lot of teaching at the University of Oregon, where he had come from, and where he went back to, and he wanted to have more time for research. And I tried to get him a position in the Harvard community, and I didn't succeed. NYU gave me a chance to recruit several people. So he would be able to come along. And so I thought that combination of factors, having Alden there, having our own group, being close to our parents, would be a nice thing to do. So we moved in 1965 to New York, and set up a very nice group at NYU.

I was very much influenced by Steve Kuffler. As I indicated before, he'd pulled together anatomy, physiology, and biochemistry into neurobiology, but he didn't have any behavior. So we called our group the Division for Neurobiology and Behavior.
And soon after I got there, Jimmy Schwartz was recruited to NYU. I had met him at summer school at Harvard when I went to take that chemistry course, he was with us in that house that we rented at 1588 Mass Avenue. And he had, after he graduated from medical school, he had gone to Rockefeller to get a PhD with Fritz Lipmann. And he was a very well trained biochemist. And as he was coming to NYU he was getting interested in the nervous system. So I showed him Aplysia, the big cells, and he realized this is wonderful. He could identify the transmitters involved in different identified cells. So we really had a wonderful little group that got going.
And I realized that now the big emphasis had to be in behavior, so Irving Kupfermann really pioneered… he defined a whole bunch of behaviors for Aplysia: feeding behavior, inking behavior, egg laying behavior, and simple withdrawal reflexes. He went on and actually identified that there were a group of cells called the bag cells attached to the abdominal ganglion, two clusters of cells that release a substance that was responsible for egg laying. Really quite fantastic. Wrote a very nice paper on that, but realized that many of those [behaviors] were too complicated for studying learning, and we focused on a very simple behavior, the withdrawal of the gill from tactile stimulation of the siphon, just like the withdrawal of a hand from a hot object. So Aplysia has a respiratory organ called the gill that is covered by a protective sheet of skin called the mantle shelf that has a residual shell that the opisthobranch mollusca have. And that mantle shelf ends in a fleshy spout called the siphon. If you apply tactile stimulus to the siphon, you get a brisk withdrawal of the gill.
So Irving worked on this behavior, and showed that it undergoes habituation and dishabituation. And then we recruited Vince Castellucci and Harold Pinsker who was also a very good behaviorist. And we began to study this in some detail. Irving and I worked out the neural circuit for the behavior. We showed that there were six motor neurons, there were about 20 odd sensory neurons and several interneurons. And we published a very nice paper in Science in 1969 indicating he'd been able to work out the neural circuit of a behavior in cellular terms. And a year later we published three papers in Science back-to-back which indicated that this behavior could be modified by learning - habituation, dishabituation - we could work out the sort of neural mechanisms, first on a sort of global level, and then the last paper on a cellular level, showing monosynaptic connections changing with habituation and sensitization. That just made a wonderful impact. Let me read you what we said in the last of those papers.
'The data indicate that habituation and dishabituation sensitization' - we had shown that in fact dishabituation is a form of sensitization - 'both involve a change in the functional effectiveness of previously existing excitatory connections. Thus at least in this simple case it seems unnecessary to explain the behavioral modifications by evoking electrical and chemical fields with unique statistical distribution in neural aggregates. The capability for behavioral modifications seemed to be built directly into the neural architecture of the behavioral reflex. Finally, these studies strengthen the assumption that a prerequisite for studying behavior modifications is the analysis of the wiring diagram underlying the behavior. We have indeed found that once the wiring diagram of the behavior is known, the analysis of its modification becomes greatly simplified. Thus although this analysis pertains only to relatively simple and short-term behavioral modifications, a similar approach may perhaps also be applied to more complex as well as longer-lasting learning processes.'

Well with Jimmy Schwartz there of course the next question was: what underlies this mechanism? And we began to explore that and we looked primarily at sensitization - heterosynaptic facilitation. We were able to show on a monosynaptic level this was changed by a strong input from the tail, stimulating single sensory neurons and recording from single motor neurons. And we wondered what was responsible for it. So one thing we said is we wondered whether this requires protein synthesis, because people were beginning to explore the role of protein synthesis in various kinds of processes. So we applied inhibitor of protein synthesis, and we saw no effect at all on these short-term memory processes, so that suggested it must be some short-lived messenger system. So we began to think, and I think Jimmy was one of the major proponents of this, that maybe this could be mediated by cyclic AMP, a second messenger system through which a number of transmitters worked. And so we began to dump several transmitter systems onto the abdominal ganglion, and we found that dopamine and serotonin increased levels of cyclic AMP. Of these, only serotonin produced sensitization. And then later we were able to identify neurons that actually released serotonin that mediated the sensitization; that was consistent with it. And then when Marcelo Brunelli came on board, we encouraged him to inject cyclic AMP into the sensory neuron. And he did, and he was able to reproduce the facilitation which also provided evidence that it's likely to have a very important presynaptic locus which Vincent was able to show with a quantal analysis.
We then collaborated with Paul Greengard who was very much interested in cyclic AMP and who'd purified in the nervous system the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase, the enzyme through which cyclic AMP produces its action. And we could inject the catalytic subunit with the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase, and produce the facilitation, and we could inject an inhibitor of the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase and block the facilitation. So this was really very nice. We had the first insight into this, into cyclic AMP being important. And we were tremendously encouraged by this when within a couple of years people in Drosophila began to explore mechanisms of learning and memory in the fly. Seymour Benzer was doing, this in part, I think, stimulated by our work, and began to look at mutants [that were defective] in the learning they were looking at, and they found that the mutants interfered with the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase. So this was really very encouraging, that we were on the right track.
So clearly the next step was to see whether we could see long-term memory, and try to explore that. And so Tom Carew came on board and he and Harry Pinsker explored both habituation and sensitization, and found that with repeated training, particularly spaced training, which was Tom Carew's idea, we were able to get long-term habituation and long-term sensitization lasting days, and we could show it in the monosynaptic connection between the sensory neurons and the motor neurons.
Now again, as with Alden and my work on the hippocampus, and Irving in the behavioral work, I can't overemphasize the role of Harry Pinsker and particularly Tom Carew in the behavioral work. He brought to it an energy and understanding of the behavior - he had worked, I think, in mice before. So he and Irving had a very sophisticated understanding of behavior that was extremely helpful. And I really thought we were onto something.

I wrote a book modestly entitled the Cellular Basis of Behavior: An Introduction to Behavioral Neurobiology, in which I pointed out that a general approach was emerging, which could be useful in approaching not only simple behaviors, but ultimately more complicated behaviors, analyzing not only short-term memory, but also long-term memory. And I wrote it so that it was useful not only for a scientist working in the field, but also for graduate students. And people began to develop a number of preparations – Hermissenda, Limax, etc – to look at simple forms of learning in simple animals, crayfish. And we were, of course, now inspired to go on and look at the molecular mechanisms for long-term memory. And that opened up a beautiful area of research.
First of all, Jimmy and I went back and tried the same thing we'd tried earlier - inhibitors of protein synthesis - and we again found they had no effect on short-term memory, but they selectively blocked long-term memory. So the question arose: how does long-term memory arise? Well, we knew that if it was new protein synthesis, it quite possibly involves alteration in gene expression. And at that point, two things happened. One, I was joined by Philip Goelet in the laboratory. And he'd come from Sydney Brenner's lab and was very au courant on molecular biology. And two, we had just moved to Columbia, and there all kinds of things opened up.
So 1973, we received an offer to come to Columbia, for several reasons. They had a neuroanatomy course run by a guy called Malcolm Carpenter, and he was beginning to wear on students. He was not very exciting, and he was slightly sadistic, and they wanted to get a more effective teaching of neuroscience which they realized was becoming more and more important. And at NYU we'd developed a quite good neuroscience course, and we began to develop a good syllabus for neuroscience, because we thought - I thought - that I don't want students sitting there during a lecture and just scribbling things down. I want them to listen to it as if listening to a symphony, to sort of take it in. So I would hand them out what they needed to know.
We came to Columbia, we gave a course, the first year was very successful - I was elected teacher of the year - the syllabus ultimately became a textbook, Principles of Neuroscience, and our course and the science that our faculty did was very well regarded.

I also got to know Richard Axel who'd been recruited to Columbia just before that. And Richard Axel was a spectacular molecular biologist. And he and I bumped into each other at a faculty meeting one day, and on the way out he said, 'You know, I'm getting tired of all this gene cloning. I want to move into the nervous system, and I want to study the nerve biology of walking'. And I said, 'Well, maybe we're not quite ready for that, but maybe something in Aplysia.'
So we started to talk, and he went back to his lab, and he said, 'Anybody here interested in working on Aplysia?' And Richard Scheller volunteered. We began to talk, and we decided we'd pick up Irving Kupfermann's finding, that there's something released by the bag cells that is responsible for egg laying, and Scheller cloned the egg-laying hormone. Major article in Cell, first time I published anything in Cell. Except in the most remarkable way, Richard… I wrote it, I wrote the draft, I was very proud of myself. I mean, obviously they add a lot to it, but I remember Jimmy Schwartz saying to me, 'I wish I would have written that'. And Jimmy's a very good writer. I was really very inspired by that. And we sent it in, and Ben Lewin read it, showed it to somebody at MIT that afternoon, and in the evening he'd accepted it, he called Richard the next day, and he said, 'It's in'. And I think we had a chance to contribute something for the cover. I could be wrong on that.
So anyway, Richard got interested in the nervous system; that was very exciting. And with Philip Goelet, he encouraged me to actually set up in my lab – see, Jimmy was doing the biochemistry before – to set up the molecular biology in my lab, because Jimmy didn't know any molecular biology. And we wrote a sort of speculative review for Nature, suggesting that long-term memory involves the turning on of a cascade of transcription factors that leads to long-term memory. And as we were doing this, the likelihood of long-term memory [requiring transcription] became even more likely when we began to realize, from Craig Bailey's work with Mary Chen, that long-term memory differs from short-term memory in having the growth of anatomical connections with sensitization, and the retraction of connections with habituation.
Now that was a spectacular finding. Anatomical changes associated with it. So as I would begin to say to the medical students, if you remember anything about these lectures, it's because you're going to walk out of this with a different head than you walked into. It also changed my whole view about psychotherapy. I realized that insofar as psychotherapy works, it must be producing anatomical changes in the brain, and some day with imaging we should be able to pick that up. And now that's possible to demonstrate.

So this was a very exciting period. So we wanted to identify some of the molecular mechanisms underlying this. So we began to test this idea. So - we knew that the cyclic AMP dependent protein kinase could activate a particular transcription factor called CREB - cyclic AMP response element-binding protein. And how that happened was that the cyclic AMP dependent protein kinase moved into the nucleus to activate CREB. So Roger Tsien had developed imaging techniques and he relabelled the cyclic AMP dependent protein kinase, and we actually saw it move into the nucleus with repeated serotonin applications.
And then, first Pramod Dash and then Dusan Bartsch showed that CREB was critically involved. Pramod Dash just showed that if you inject a blocker of CREB it blocks long-term memory. Dusan Bartsch actually cloned CREB and showed that if you inject the phosphorylated form of CREB you don't need anything; you can get long-term facilitation. Doesn't last very long, but you can turn it on. Moreover he made an amazing discovery. He found there were two CREBs: CREB1 and CREB2. CREB1 activates transcription, and CREB2 inhibits CREB1. That was fascinating. And he realized that there was a machinery for turning on the long-term process. And that machinery became even more interesting about five or six years ago when Priya Rajasethupathy, a fantastic MD-PhD student was in my lab, and she found that there are small RNAs that regulate CREB1 and CREB2. There's one, a micro RNA, that normally inhibits CREB1, and serotonin releases that inhibition, turning on CREB1. But in addition there's a piRNA which no one realized exists in a nervous system, a whole bunch of them. And one of them inhibits CREB2 and gets turned on by serotonin. So serotonin relieves the inhibition in CREB1, turns on the inhibition of CREB2, so CREB1 can be on for longer period of time to turn on the long-term process. Really quite beautiful. So with time we've got a very good understanding of how that transcriptional cascade works, and the growth of new synaptic connections.
And that has turned out to be a very general mechanism. In almost every learning process, simple or complicated - Aplysia, hippocampus - that one looks at, long-term memory involves CREB. May not be by itself, but acting with other, you know, colleagues, but it's a critical factor in it. But that generality was reassuring, but it raised an important problem in the cell biology of neurons.

If long-term memory involves transcription and therefore the nucleus, an organelle [that is] in contact with every synapse a neuron makes, and a neuron can make up to a 1,000 synapses, does that mean every time you turn on the long-term process, and therefore transcription, you change the synaptic strength of every single synapse? That long-term memory is cell-wide? With short-term memory we're able to show it's synapse-specific. So clearly this is something we needed to explore.
Now fortunately, a number of years earlier, Sam Schacher, when he was in my lab, took advantage of a wonderful discovery that had been made by Arnie Kriegstein, another spectacular MD-PhD student.
I was very much influenced by Stanley Crain on the one hand, and by Gerry Fischbach, a relative of mine, who was getting beautiful results with the dissociated cell culture of motor neurons and muscle. And I wondered whether we could get the gill-withdrawal reflex, a sensory neuron and a motor neuron and a serotonergic cell, in culture. So for that, we needed young animals, and we didn't know how to get young animals because Aplysia has a step in metamorphosis, and no one had been able to trap that in a laboratory. So Arnie Kriegstein went to Woods Hole, and he realized that metamorphosis is triggered by a particular species of seaweed called Laurencia pacifica. And he found it, and he saw the metamorphosis in front of his eyes. He was able to get baby Aplysia in large numbers and that revolutionized the study of learning and memory in Aplysia, because now Eric Proshansky working with Sam Schacher was able to dissect out individual cells, put them in culture, and they survived perfectly well.
Actually we were very much influenced at the time by John Nicholls who had developed dissociated cell culture for leech cells, and we went out to visit him at Cold Spring Harbor, and he showed us how he dissected it. Turned out in Aplysia the cells are much larger, and you don't need such fancy techniques, but anyway, we were stimulated to do this. And we could show that you put a sensory neuron together with a motor neuron, and you put a serotonergic cell in, the serotonergic cell produces very nice facilitation. Moreover, you don't need the serotonergic cell, you can puff on serotonin. One puff of serotonin, short-term facilitation. Five puffs, long-term facilitation. Growth of new synaptic connections. Blocked by inhibitors of CREB. We could repeat the whole thing. Beautiful.
So Kelsey Martin comes into the lab, and she takes this culture system and she revolutionizes it. She takes a single sensory neuron and she cultures it so it has a bifurcating branch that ends on two separate motor neurons. So you have a single sensory neuron bifurcating axons ending on two motor neurons. So she puffs on one puff of serotonin here, nothing there. You get short-term facilitation here, nothing there. Five puffs of serotonin here, nothing there. Long-term facilitation here, nothing there. That's interesting. So despite the fact it involves CREB, apparently, this can be synapse-specific. So she asked, are we sure CREB is involved? She does again the same thing, five puffs here. She blocks CREB, she blocks the long-term facilitation. So clearly a signal has gone back to the nucleus, activating CREB, and is going back to the initial site. But is that the only place it's going to or is it going to all sites and all we lack is a marking signal? So she said, well let's see whether a mark will do it. She gave five pulses of serotonin here, and she gave a single pulse here. Single pulse produced facilitation lasting minutes. But if you gave that single pulse together with the five pulses here, she captured long term-facilitation, in reduced form, only 50%—but nonetheless, persistent, at the other branch.
So clearly gene products were shipped all over, you needed a marking signal. So that raised the question, what is the nature of the marking signal? Well, she began to explore it. She gave five pulses of serotonin here, together with an inhibitor of PKA. She blocked everything. She repeated the experiment, and she realized that one thing that you have at the synapses is the machinery for local protein synthesis. So maybe that has something to do with it. So she applied five pulses of serotonin here, with an inhibitor of protein synthesis. And she found she produced a long-term facilitation. It persisted for 24 hours. She had the growth of new synaptic connections, but it collapsed.
So this was the first evidence that there were wheels within wheels. That long-term memory has sub-steps. There's an initiation of long-term memory, and there's a maintenance process. The maintenance process is separate, it requires local protein synthesis. Wow! Just fabulous.
So this raised the question: what's the nature of that maintenance process?
 

At this particular point, Kelsey leaves the lab, and I go into a funk. Fortunately, Kausik Si comes along, and he picks up where Kelsey leaves off. And he had a very interesting background. Terrific kid, from India. Many of my best post-docs are Indian – Priya Rajasethupathy, Pramod Dash – outstanding. He had worked with yeast which came in handy later on. So he argued, if you're going to send gene products all over, as the marking signal suggested, you probably want to have the gene products in the dormant form, otherwise they might be promiscuously activated at inappropriate synapses. So he said, you know, there's evidence for this. In Xenopus oocyte one had found that mRNAs have a short poly(A) tail, so they're not recognized by the ribosomes, but there's a special regulator of protein synthesis called the cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein (CPEB) that carries out cytoplasmic polyadenylation that allows the mRNA to have a longer poly(A) tail, now to be recognized and translated by the ribosomes.
So he looked for CPEB in Aplysia, and he found, in addition to the developmental isoform that had earlier been described, a novel isoform that had never been described, that had a peculiar end terminus. And he looked to see whether or not this was affected by serotonin. And he found, sure enough, that if he gave even a single pulse of serotonin, it was increased in its level of expression at the terminals. Okay? So it was present at the terminals, and increased in levels of expression. Moreover, if he injected an antisense oligonucleotide against this, he got long-term facilitation, but it was not maintained. So then he was curious, you know how does this function? So he sequenced [the isoform], and he saw [that the protein] had a very peculiar ending – a peculiar N-terminal. It was very rich in glutamine residues, in polar residues. And this is exactly what one had seen in yeast cells with prion proteins. In fact, he showed that 50% of the N-terminus were these polar residues. He then looked to see what the Drosophila CPEB was; it was exactly the same. So that was very encouraging, and since he had experience in yeast, and Susan Lindquist helped us with this, he put this into yeast and showed it had all the characteristics of yeast prion.
What is so special about prions? They exist in two forms: a soluble form and an aggregated form. The soluble form can get recruited in the aggregate form, and leads to a self-perpetuation of the aggregate form. So as proteins drop off the aggregate form, new ones form, and as soon as they touch the aggregate, they get transformed, so they're capable of joining the aggregate.
Moreover, this aggregated form was self-perpetuating, and he showed all of these characteristics. And then he was able to take this to Aplysia and show that all of these characteristics apply. That is if you express it at high levels it forms aggregates. If you chop off the N-terminus, which has these polar residues, you lose the aggregate formation. If you give serotonin, it increases aggregate formation. Chop off the N-terminal, you lose it. He then developed a specific antibody that recognized only the aggregated form, and he blocked the maintenance, but not any other part of the facilitation. So this was really quite a remarkable finding, and it suggested that we had a new category of prion.

Prion had been described by Stan Prusiner in the 1980s as being a mechanism for killing cells and for producing disease – called it proteinaceous infectious particles, and it had two characteristic features. One, it existed in two states: soluble and aggregated. The conversion was not regulated. It occurred spontaneously. The aggregated form was self-perpetuating, and it killed the cell. The killed cell then died, in so doing it released [the prion protein], was picked up by other cells, and killed those cells.
The function of prions that Kausik had found was different in two ways. One, the conversion from the soluble to the aggregated was regulated by serotonin, and two, the aggregated form was not destructive for the cell; it regulated local protein synthesis. It was a repressor of translation when it was soluble, and an activator of translation when it was aggregated, and critical for the maintenance of long-term facilitation.
So Aplysia's been extremely good to me and my colleagues. I've been extremely fortunate in having a spectacular series of colleagues. And we've learned and we continue to learn a great deal from Aplysia.

As we're coming to Columbia, I heard a very disappointing and painful piece of news. Alden Spencer, my closest scientific colleague, and a wonderful, wonderful friend, developed amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. The way we found out about that is Alden was a very good tennis player, and he began to complain about having difficulty hitting backhands, he couldn't get his shoulder around, he had some weakness in his elbow. And we talked about it, and we thought it would be very good for him to see an excellent neurologist. And so I knew somebody who was really quite outstanding, and I sent Alden to him, I suggested Alden see him. This person was a specialist in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [ALS], and he said to Alden that you have amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Alden came back from seeing him and was ready to jump out the window. He was unbelievably depressed, he started preparing his will, going through his belongings, and he was just absolutely distraught. I spoke to his wife, Diane, about this, and she was very upset as well. And it dawned on me that maybe we should seek another opinion. Now Alden complained about stiffness of the elbow that sounded more like an arthritic condition. So I suggested that maybe he see somebody who specializes in arthritis. So somebody recommended a guy at NYU, and he saw this guy, and the guy said, 'You don't have ALS, you have arthritis. And that explains everything.' Alden felt immensely relieved, went back to work his usual energetic self. After six weeks he had another appointment with the neurologist, he went back to him, and the neurologist said, 'You have ALS. I have a lot of experience with this disease, you have amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.' Alden came back ready to jump out the window.
I call up the neurologist, who is a colleague of mine, and I said, 'Look, Alden can't handle this. Can't you soft peddle that in some way?' He said, 'I can't mislead a patient, and particularly this man has an important career, you don't want to mislead him.' Well I disagreed, I was prepared to mislead him, because he couldn't handle that diagnosis. So I said to… he said to me, this neurologist, 'Why does he have to come and see me? There's nothing I can do for him, let him go to this other guy, let him be deceived.' So I told Alden, 'Look, this is a waste of time. You continue to see this orthopaedist guy, this guy who specialises in joints.' And so he continued to do that, he did exercises, he had a special contraption that allowed him to get into his swimming pool, he, you know, continued to work out of a wheelchair, and for a while he considered that maybe to a warmer climate… moving to a warmer climate, would be helpful for his arthritis. In fact, a friend of his offered him an opportunity to move some place in the south, I forget now where it was. The chairman of that department came down to see him. He sat in the wheelchair, and he said, 'I can't do experiments myself, but I supervise all the experiments. They continue to do well.' They offered him a job. He came home, and he told Diane he wants to move to this place in the south, and Diane said, 'I'll move if you seek another opinion. Because moving means we move the kids out of school, into another school. I'm willing to do that, but I'd like to get another opinion.' And Alden said, 'You know what will happen if I seek another opinion, the person will say I have ALS. I don't want to seek another opinion.'
So Alden continued to work, and ultimately died the day after he'd been in the lab, the previous day. Not only that, but because we had such a heavy emphasis on sort of cellular molecular approaches at Columbia, he organized a group of people from Rockefeller and NYU on systems neuroscience, because he was now working on the somatosensory system. They would meet every three or four weeks, and he just had a meeting of that group a few days before that.
So this was a tragic loss, but given the circumstances… But he was so meaningful to Columbia and to me, to all of his friends, that we established an endowed lectureship in his name, the Alden Spencer Lectureship, which is an award given to major neuroscientists under the age of 50, and a number of outstanding people… I mean, everyone who wins it is outstanding, but a number of people have gone on to win Nobel prizes and other major awards and that.

Very lucky when we were working with cyclic AMP that Steve Siegelbaum whom I'd met very briefly, because he was working in Paris when I visited there one time, was recruited to Columbia in the pharmacology department, and we had talked a little bit about working on Aplysia when we met in Paris, and he worked in Aplysia, and he isolated channels using patch clamp technique which was a very, you know, modern technique at that time. Very few people had mastered it. He had spent some time with Bert Sakmann and learned how to do it, and isolated a potassium channel modulated by serotonin and cyclic AMP. Cyclic AMP stimulated by serotonin closed that potassium channel, and that was one of the contributing factors to the broadening of the action potential with sensitization which led to increased calcium influx and enhanced transmitter release.
And we called that the S channel because it was named after Steve, and it was modulated by serotonin.
Steve has become one of my closest friends at Columbia, spectacular scientist, gone on to do a number of wonderful things since then, including recently showing that the area CA2 in the hippocampus is involved in social behavior, may be impaired specifically in schizophrenia, is now chairman of the neuroscience department which he took over from John Koester, I think you know who John Koester is. And like John Koester has done a fabulous job leading the department.

When I was still at Harvard, I was in constant contact with Alden Spencer, in part because I was eager for him to come to Harvard – he wanted to leave Oregon – and also because we had formulated a parallel strategy. He had carried out in the spinal cord experiments dealing with habituation, actual behavior habituation. And he wasn't able to reduce it to monosynaptic level, but nonetheless was able to see changes in synaptic strength, and we realized that a cellular approach was going to be extremely productive to studying learning and memory. So we wrote a review together for Physiological Reviews that came out in the early 1960s called “Cellular Neurophysiological Approaches in the Study of Learning” which really encouraged people who were cellular physiologists to get interested in behavior and learning. And we spelled out a number of strategies, including analogues of learning, but pointed out that the real challenge was to explore real instances of learning, and indicated how this might be done.
So we got a great deal of pleasure doing this. We learned a great deal from doing it, and I think the review was quite influential. And it started a trend in my own thinking of periodically writing reviews, which led to my later writing, the Cellular Basis of Behavior, and then getting inspired to do a textbook of neural science. And one of the things that we did at Columbia, once we got there, was to take the syllabus that we had at NYU, expand it, make it even better, include illustrations, and after a while we said, this is too good for just Columbia students. We should make a book out of it. We called it modestly Principles of Neural Science. And did extremely well. It's now in its fifth edition, and it's often considered the standard textbook in the field. It's gotten two awards, and we're looking forward to doing the sixth edition.

When I look back on my work in Aplysia, I'm struck with the coincidence of several factors. One is that naiveté is not necessarily a great limiting step. That it's not necessarily an enormous handicap. If you're willing to educate yourself and dive deeply into the subject. That position was influenced by what I learned at Harvard. In history and literature, one would ask you to go out over a three-week period and write an essay on Nietzsche, Dostoevsky and Freud. Now you would think this would be the most preposterous thing in the world, and it is on some level of preposterous. But there's no reason to believe while in a several-week period you can read at least, you know, some meaningful thing about those few people, see how they, you know, overlap in their interests, and how they differ from one another. So to go into a new subject and learn how to come to grips with it on some meaningful level is a very important exercise. Obviously you don't want to stay superficial like that, but to have the courage to go into a new topic is something I learned to do at Harvard. Two, chance was such an important factor. The same things that worked so effectively for me, would not have been effective had I come along 10 years earlier or 10 years later. The timing was just right. This was a time in which the study of learning was just opening up. I was one of the few people that knew cellular physiology that could apply it to the study of behaviour. It was just a chance and that, with the system that I had, interesting results emerged rather readily. This was sheer luck.
Also, who can determine the choice of colleagues at every point in the anatomy initially with [Richard] Coggeshall and later with [Craig] Bailey. In the biochemistry with Jimmy Schwartz, and the behaviour with [Tom] Carew, and Pinsker and Kupfermann. In the cellular physiology with [John] Koester, and then [Steve] Siegelbaum. You know, at each point… Axel when I came to the molecular biology, Philip Goelet. You know, Goelet came to my lab just as I'm ready to think about genes, and he helped me think about genes. You know, that's amazing. So it was really very fortunate, the timing of these things. A lot of it is chance.
[Q] Going further back, if you had never gotten involved with Anna Kris and her family and gotten so taken up with Freud, do you think you ever would have become a scientist?
Never. Never. Not only that, I must say, without Denise I would have never had the kind of career I had. Because my brother was so outstanding, I never appreciated my capabilities. Not that I have such great capabilities, but I didn't have the confidence that I had in myself that I gained with Denise. Denise saw in me a creative potential that she encouraged at every single step. And sometimes actually it, you know… certainly financial sacrifices to our family, I don't think it was any other kind of sacrifice. But she was immensely supportive at critical points in my career. And the whole Anna Kris episode shows what a role chance is. I mean, Anna Kris got me interested in psychoanalysis, but you know, if we had stayed together I would have ended up being a psychoanalyst, I would not have… So it's really, you know, having gone with Anna, having… You know, the two of us separating, taking this elective, by chance, and Denise urging me to stay with it, because I enjoyed it so much were really absolutely seminal in me doing this. And working with Grundfest and Stanley Crain and then Alden Spencer. And Kupfermann and Carew. I mean, the behavioral people were so immensely helpful. Schwartz—very, very helpful.

[Q ] You've mentored several dozen or more students in post-docs. Is there any philosophy you try to impart to them in general terms?
No. I think it's important to like your students. And I select students in part because I feel, you know, good communication between the two of us. I respect their ideas, and I fully expect them to generate ideas. One of the things that's so great about having a lab is if you don't have any ideas about a problem, the chances are you students will come up with ideas. And many terrific ideas. I mean, Priya's project, completely her own ideas. Kelsey Martin, this bifurcated culture, I mean, wonderful. Kausik Si, I mean, many, many people I can give example after example.

One of the things that struck me when I was in Harry Grundfest's lab, in talking to Harry, to Dom Purpura, to Stanley Crain, is how different laboratory work is in reality compared to what I thought. I mean, the conventional view of some people about science, my view about science, is scientists work in a dark room, looking into a microscope, and hallucinating to themselves. And nothing could be further from the truth. The science that I've experienced is a social enterprise. What's enjoyable about coming to the lab is the social interaction. I walk around and make rounds to see what's going on. We gossip. You know, we discuss lots of things unrelated to science. And it's enormously pleasurable. I would think few careers… I mean, every career has joy to it, but many people don't [know] how intrinsically enjoyable science is. And also, if you're fortunate, you come up with something completely new. You see something that no one has ever seen before. Or see it from another dimension that people haven't seen before. That is really quite fabulous. And I found it very rewarding.
The difficulty with it now compared to when I came along, when I came along, as I said before, if you could read and write you were funded. If you could show that you were serious, you were committed, you know, analogues of learning, you know, who would support that today as you suggested? But I was confident it might be… it seemed like a reasonable idea to me, and there was adequate funding for that. The scientific workforce was small, and the resources were substantial.

Let me give you one example of how important resources are. The NIH until 10 years ago was funding people quite satisfactorily. But I was extremely fortunate beyond that. In 1983, at Columbia, when my work with Richard [Axel] and with Jimmy [Schwartz] was moving along very well, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute approached the three of us and asked us whether we'd form a Howard Hughes Institute Program in Neuroscience at Columbia. And they've reviewed us, the three of us, and they accepted us. The three of us became investigators, and I was asked to become a Senior Investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
That was spectacular. First of all it ensured us wonderful support which I still have to this day. I was just renewed a year and-a-half ago. It allowed us to keep Steve Siegelbaum, he was offered a wonderful job elsewhere. We gave him a counter-offer with the Hughes position, which guarantees your salary, and also gives you a good level of support for your research. It allowed us to bring Tom Jessell here, Gary Struhl here. And it's been spectacular as a source of support. So from 1983 on, we've continued to be Hughes investigators which is wonderful. So that has picked up in my case and in Jessell's case, Axel's case, and in Steve's case until recently, the slack that came about as a result of reduction in NIH funding.

The work on Aplysia was extremely encouraging, and I considered myself much more fortunate than I thought I had a right to be, but I realised in Aplysia, as wonderful as it was, we were studying implicit memory, a memory for motor and perceptual skills, which did not require conscious attention.
What Brenda Milner described, and what really appealed to the psychoanalytically-oriented part of myself was explicit memory storage, a conscious recall of information by people, places, and objects. And conscious recall, I mean, that relates to consciousness per se, is a very deep problem, and I clearly, you know, wanted to get involved in studying that.
Now I left the hippocampus in 1960, and I decided in 1990 – 30 years later – that I wanted to return to it, to explore explicit memory storage. And the reason I wanted to return to it was not only because the problem was so challenging, but because there had been three major advances in the study of hippocampus.
One is Bliss and Lomo had described their form of synaptic plasticity which they call long-term potentiation (LTP) which they produced by stimulating one of the pathways in the hippocampus at very high frequencies – 100Hz or more – and they produced a facilitation that lasts for very long periods of time. Now this was really quite interesting although it had some problems with it.
One problem was that that frequency was unusually high, and many people, myself included, thought that this was not the kind of frequency that's going to be used by learning processes, certainly nothing of that frequency… nothing comparable to what we had seen in Aplysia.
Number two, that its relationship to memory in the hippocampus was also uncertain. Now Richard Morris had worked out a behavioural task, and had shown that if you block LTP, which we knew was mediated by NMDA receptors, if you blocked the NMDA receptors that you interfered with memory storage. And that was encouraging, but it was very correlational and indirect because this drug affected lots of synaptic actions in the brain. So I think, you know, I felt one needed to understand LTP better.
But in addition, John O'Keefe had made the marvellous discovery that the hippocampus encodes space. That there are cells in the hippocampus that fire when a particular animal assumes a certain position in space. So there are lots of these place cells, and some fire when the animal is here, some fire when the animal is here, some fire when the animal is there, and if you look at the whole pattern, you can predict where the animal is by the firing pattern of the cells. And he showed me one day, when I was in London, what this is like. It was absolutely remarkable. He put the mouse on the table and it had multiple recording electrodes in, it was really quite spectacular. And that also made a lot of sense to me, because when Alden and I were trying to see what sensory inputs drive hippocampal pyramidal cells, and we tried light and we tried touch, we tried auditory stimuli; they weren't particularly effective. But place is a multi-sensory modality, and you could understand why we were not effective.
And the third thing is that Capecchi and Smithies had just described methods for knocking out genes in mice. So here was a method that allowed you to dissect LTP, to relate different components of LTP to memory storage in hippocampus, and to relate both of those things to place cell behaviour. So it opened up a whole new approach to the hippocampus that made the hippocampus very attractive.

And just as I was beginning to think in this direction, Seth Grant and Mark Mayford came in the lab. In fact, I may be being unfair, maybe some of my thinking evolved because they were in the lab and talking about this. And so we decided to go ahead and try to dissect out signalling pathways and see whether we can dissect LTP and memory storage and relate them to one another.
Now Seth Grant was very much interested in the tyrosine kinase pathway, a very important second messenger pathway that we had never [explored] in Aplysia. And he had a quite good inhibitor for tyrosine kinase, and when we used that, we blocked LTP. Now there are a number of tyrosine kinases, and he was able to get genetic knockouts for the four major tyrosine kinases. And we explored all of these, and LTP and memory storage, and none of them had any effect except for one: the knockout of the fyn tyrosine kinase. That was quite beautiful. Eliminated LTP, and eliminated memory storage. That was wonderful, knocking out a single gene, selective interference, with, you know, tyrosine kinase pathway, and at the same time with this one molecular knockout to get rid of memory storage in the hippocampus.
And Richard Axel was chairman of a symposium at Cold Spring Harbor, and he invited me to present this, and he also invited Susumu Tonegawa who'd made a parallel observation. Susumu did an analogous experiment. He knocked out CaM kinase II with the gene knockout. Found it interfered with LTP, and also found that it interfered with memory storage. So here we had a breakthrough, it was really quite inspiring.
And that got me really interested in trying to dissect things a little bit more finely. And I thought I would begin by exploring LTP. And one of the things that I'd found very powerful in Aplysia was the fact that synaptic facilitation had an early phase, which did not require protein synthesis, and a late phase that did, and so we began to explore LTP, and we found a similar thing. There's an early phase, produced by a single train that was protein synthesis-independent, a late phase that was protein synthesis-dependent. The early phase did not require cyclic AMP—it was very different than in Aplysia. It required CaM kinase, calcium influx, etcetera. But the late phase required the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase, and it required not serotonin as a modulator, but dopamine acting through D1, D5 receptors. So that got us quite inspired to seeing whether we could really home in a little bit better on LTP.

Ted Abel in the lab, at that particular point, was beginning to take advantage of some of the methodology that Mark Mayford had introduced. Mark Mayford revolutionized the field of gene knockouts in the hippocampus. What we had used initially, what Susumu and I had used initially, were general knockouts in which the gene was knocked out in the whole animal. What Mark Mayford developed is using a CaM kinase promotor, he was able to produce knockouts that were forebrain-specific because that's the only place the CaM kinase promotor was expressed. Moreover he developed the tetracycline system for the brain whereby you could switch a gene on and off. So you not only had regional expression, but you had temporal expression.
And we now used this, Ted Abel used this, on PKA [protein kinase A]. Used a dominant negative inhibitor of PKA, and he found when you did that you interfered with the late phase of LTP, and you got rid of long-term memory. Really a very beautiful experiment in which he clearly identified a component of the late phase of LTP system and cyclic AMP. We were able to go on and show, together with Alcino Silva that CREB was important as a transcription factor.
So that was really sort of a major step forward in allowing us to understand how LTP functions a little bit more, and how it relates to memory storage. And that really inspired us to go one step further. What was really so wonderful about the hippocampus is one now understood that it had an important representation of space, and that was mediated by the place cells. And Cliff Kentros in my lab was interested in studying that, and we collaborated with Bob Muller from Downstate who was really one of the major people in studying place cells.
So I wanted to ask simple questions that the place cell people had never asked. You know, is the stability of place cells dependent on protein synthesis in the long run? We found that it was. We found that it was mediated by dopamine. And then we said, look, this is an unusual map. The visual system is a map, the… Wade Marshal had studied all of these maps, but these are built into the brain. The spatial map is very different. It's a cognitive map. So the capability to form a map is built into the brain, but the specific map, whether you're going to map this room, whether you're going to map next door, that is a learning experience. So presumably, you know, attentional processes must come in at least in the learning component.

We began to look at the stability of the place cell map as a function of attention. Now here we were unbelievably lucky. See all the early work had been done on rats. Rats don't run around. So for anyone to develop a place cell map you had to throw pellets into the enclosure and draw the animals' attention, so they implicitly drew the animals' attention whenever they did an experiment.
Mice run around all the time. You don't have to do a darn thing to get them to move around. And we found when you just let them run around like this, the place cell map forms, but it's unstable. After 12 hours, 24 hours—disappears. If you increase the attention by throwing in pellets, there's even… a little bit of stability, lasts a little bit longer. If you draw more attention, if you move them back and forth from one enclosure to another, even more stable. But if you force them to learn something about space, it's unbelievably stable. And what we did was, mice hate sound and music. It's unlike adolescent Americans. Turn on the lights and you play jazz music, they hate it. The only way they could shut it off was to find a particular position within that space, sit on it for 10 seconds, and that would shut off the sound of the music. At first they hit it randomly, and then they learned where it was, and boom, they mastered it. The map was unbelievably stable. And then we could show, we could simulate that stability, at least in good parts with D1, D5 receptor agonists. And even now we're still working on the problem.
Kimberly Kempadoo in my lab has marked the dopamine releasing cells with channelrhodopsin. She's going to be able to stimulate individual cells and see the release of this. Now in the course of this she's made a marvellous discovery. People have always wondered, you know, there is clearly a dopamine effect in the dorsal hippocampus where the place cells are, but there are very few nerve cells, very few processes that come from the actual dopaminergic cells in the striatum. So she looked at that, and she found this is true. That if you stimulate those cells, the dopamine cells, you don't get much of a stabilization of place cell behavior, of spatial behavior. But it also was known that the locus coeruleus cells, the noradrenergic cells, released dopamine. In fact, Arvid Carlsson with whom I was later to share the Nobel Prize, described dopamine, which had been missed by earlier students of synaptic transmission, because it's a precursor step to synthesizing norepinephrine. But it turns out that not only is it a precursor, it's also released. She [Kimberly] showed it was released, she did back-tracing experiments, she showed she filled up the locus coeruleus cells. And when you stimulate them, you in fact get release of dopamine. So we have not yet done the experiment of stimulating them and stabilizing the place cells. But that's where we're building up to do, I'm just showing you that this is building up to this.

We've recently found that as in Aplysia, there is in the hippocampus, a homolog of the cytoplasmic polyadenylation binding protein – CPEB. There are four homologs which we creatively called one, two, three and four, and CPEB3 has a domain that has these glutamine rich residues, a prion-like domain. And it acts exactly like a prion. You put it into yeast, it forms aggregates. In the basal states, it's soluble, and it's a repressor of translation. With activity, it becomes aggregated, translocates to the ribosomes, and functions as a regulator of translation. And dopamine stimulates the aggregation, and initiates the protein synthesis. So it really fits in very much like serotonin did in Aplysia. So this was really very nice progress, and it encouraged us to begin to think a little bit more broadly about what can we do with this information.
Well one thing we could do is to try to explore disorders of memory storage. And we looked at a number of these. We began by looking at age-related memory loss. It had been thought for some time that there may be two independent processes in the brain,– Alzheimer's disease, and age-related memory loss. Now at first this was not appreciated, it part because until 1900 people didn't live very long. They lived to be 50 years old. So when I was in medical school in the 1950s, we were seeing, you know, people pretty much of that generation coming along, and Alzheimer's disease was not much discussed in medical school. But now, when people are living… men live to be 78, women live to be 82, you see a significant amount of age-related memory loss.
But people are not simply living longer, they're living better. So one sees in parallel with Alzheimer's disease, there appears to be a more benign process in which there is significant forgetting, but it doesn't seem to progress to other areas of knowledge, and it seems to be more restricted than Alzheimer's disease. So it doesn't interfere with speech, etc, etc or grammar formation and things like that. And so we thought we'd begin to explore it.

The first experiments we did were to see whether or not mice show age-related memory loss. Because one of the interesting things about mice is mice don't show Alzheimer's disease, [spontaneously]. You can put a mutated Alzheimer's gene into it, but on their own they don't show Alzheimer's disease. Do they show age-related memory loss? So we explored that. And we found – this was with Mark Mayford – and we found that mice who live to two years old begin to show a significant decline in memory in middle age, round about one years old, and then it progresses dramatically. And that is PKA-dependent. If you give cyclic AMP or the cyclic AMP dependent protein kinase you can restore that.
More recently we've gone on in two major directions with that. One is we collaborated with Scott Small. Scott Small had found that age-related memory loss seems to start in a different region than Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's disease starts in the entorhinal cortex which is the input in hippocampus. Age-related memory loss starts in the dentate gyrus. So he worked on autopsy specimens, and he took autopsy specimens from people ranging in age from 40 to 90, and who did not have Alzheimer's disease, and he compared dentate gyrus to entorhinal cortex, and he found that there were about 19 to 20 genes that were selectively affected. They either went up or down in a systematic way in age-related fashion in the dentate gyrus and not in the entorhinal cortex.
We focused on one particularly dramatic example, RbAp48 which declined systematically as a function of age. And what's interesting about RbAp48, it's part of the CREB transcription machinery. CREB binds to the CREB-binding protein, which binds to RbAp48, which is a histone acetylase. So it's really the trigger for the gene expression initiated by CREB.
So we went to mice, and we asked the question: when mice age, do they show a decrease in RbAp48, and is it selective to the dentate gyrus? Beautiful decline, absolutely selective we didn't see in other regions of the hippocampus, we didn't see it in the entorhinal cortex, okay? Then we said, what happens if we take an old mouse and restore RbAp48? And we did, it with a tetracycline system so you could, you know, put it back, and then turn it off again. If you restore it, boom, you restore the memory. Turn it off, disappears.
More recently we've begun to collaborate with Gerard Karsenty who has made the interesting discovery that bone is an endocrine gland. It releases a hormone called osteocalcin. And osteocalcin has many functions, including functions of the brain, acts on a number of transmitter systems and affects memory. So he called me up, and we began to collaborate on age-related memory loss. This is Stelios [Kosmidis] in my lab has done this beautifully and he showed stimulation of RbAb48 is very important for age-related memory loss. And as you know, bone mass decreases with age, particularly in women, also in men. Exercise overcomes that, and you exercise an old mouse, you can partially restore age-related memory loss through RbAb48.

So that was sort of the major thing we looked… We also looked a little bit at post-traumatic stress disorder. This came out of my walking through the lab and telling people, you know, one example of a functional prion is a biological curiosity, two examples is a biological principle. Let's find another example. So Joe Rayman in my lab, who's unbelievably gifted, scoured the literature, and found that there is in many cells something called TIA, T cell intracellular antigen, that forms aggregates in cells. And these aggregates… even the person who studied it suspected they may have prion-like properties. So we put it in the yeast and we tested it rigorously and we found classic features of prion properties: forms aggregates, self-perpetuating, SDS resistant, etc. And he is beginning to explore what it does. And it turns out that it's involved in post-traumatic stress disorder. It's a protective factor, but it's a protective factor only in female mice. If you knock it out, female mice show a much more profound response to post-traumatic stress disorder. And it turns out, it seems to be a sex-specific splicing factor of the glucocorticoid receptor. So we're really trying to pin this down, and we're close to doing it. We also raised the question, there must be a male-specific splicing factor, and we're looking for that as well. Anyway. We're having a very good time with that.
Some time ago, way before the experiment with Scott Small and Gerard Karsenty we thought… actually Denise's idea…. Wally Gilbert, who's a wonderful molecular geneticist is a good friend of ours. We were having dinner together one night, and I was telling him about the early experiments with PKA and aging mice. And Denise said, there's a little red pill here, and you guys should form a company. So we've formed a company for age-related memory loss. Actually, Scott Small was on the board. And after a while we sold it to Hoffmann-La Roche. And at the time we sold it we had several drugs that were better than phosphodiesterase inhibitors that were then available, but the FDA did not accept age-related memory loss as a distinct entity. In the last year, it's changed its policy but 10 years ago when we were doing this, there was nothing like this going on. So I think Hoffmann-La Roche is in a good position now, but…

With this in the background, Denise and I are getting ready for Yom Kippur and the year 2000. We had gone to Kol Nidre Service the evening before. We went to sleep early, because she fasts, although I don't fast on Yom Kippur. And at 05:30 in the morning, the telephone rings. It's on her side of the bed. She answers it, she pushes me, wakes me up, and she says 'Eric, this is Stockholm calling, it must be for you, it's not for me.'
So I answered the phone, and it's the executive secretary of the Nobel Foundation, Hans Jörnvall, who informs me that I've just won the Nobel Prize, and I'm sharing it with Arvid Carlsson and Paul Greengard. Unbelievable, I couldn't believe my ears. And then he told me what the protocol was, and what was expected of me. And he spoke for about 5 or 10 minutes or something like that. But I didn't open my mouth during all of that period. Denise had never seen me silent for so long. She thought that something was wrong. Finally, you know, when we said goodbye to each other, Denise was relieved, not only because of what I'd told her, but because I was still intact. So she said something like, you know, it's still early, let's… He said, you cannot talk to anybody for an hour or so, because we have to wait for the press conference. So I said, how can we possibly go to sleep, so we talked and, you know, when the time was up I called up everybody I could possibly get on the phone. Obviously I called up my kids, I woke up Minouche in San Francisco. Within a short period of time, a knock on the door, Tom Jessell, Jane Dodd, and their kids come over with a bottle of wine. The phone is ringing off the hook. A lot of the calls were from Vienna. Isn't it wonderful, another Austrian Nobel Prize. And I said, I think you've got this wrong. This is an American Nobel Prize. An American Jewish Nobel Prize. I thought I would stick it to them. Then I get a call from Columbia, they want to have a press conference, and so I decided even though it's Yom Kippur I should… Obviously want to go to the press conference for me. So I went to the synagogue just to say hello to my friends and tell them this wonderful news, that I would not be there in the afternoon for the… because we went to the press conference. And we went to the press conference, you probably remember that. It was absolutely marvellous, the people in the lab were fantastic. They met me at the door as I came in, it was really a wonderful celebration and it was clear this was a shared experience. I would never have accomplished this without people at least as good, if not better, than me.

Several things that came out of it were spectacular. I mean, obviously the most marvellous thing is the Nobel events themselves. I mean, from the moment you arrive at SAS Airlines you're treated like royalty. They come out and they meet you, they take your luggage, and you don't have to worry about checking in or anything like that. You have a first class seat. And when you arrive they assign a chauffeur and a limousine to you, same person takes care of you for two weeks, and you have a sort of administrative assistant that says, you know, now you're going to meet this, and now you're going to meet that. And you know, it's just a wonderful series of events in which you have a meeting… a wonderful party at the American embassy, wonderful party at the Swedish Embassy, or at least the Swedish formal office of some sort.
On the Sabbath we went to the synagogue and they gave us a wonderful replica of the synagogue. We went to the Jewish museum, and they had - which I didn't realize at the time - a wonderful memorial of the saving of the Danish Jews. Denmark had 7000 Jews; practically not a single one was killed. When they found out that the Germans wanted to round up the Jews, they contacted people in Stockholm, and then shipped almost all of them to Stockholm where they were safe for the remainder of the war years. But 400 of them they were not able to round up, and the Nazis later rounded them up and sent them to Theresienstadt. But the Danish government was so nervous about that, they sent extra monies and supplies to make sure they would be protected and not sent off to Auschwitz or something else, and as a result, most of them were also able to return. So Denmark really saved almost all of its Jews.
And then there was the Nobel Prize lecture which was extremely enjoyable for me because I think if I remember correctly I was the last one to speak. I think Paul spoke first, or maybe Arvid spoke first, and then Paul, and then myself. And I enjoyed giving the lecture once I got over my initial nervousness. And what made the lecture particularly pleasant for me was that Jack Byrne has sent me a wonderful photograph of Aplysia with a Nobel Prize medal around its neck. This is the animal that deserves the Nobel Prize. And when I introduced Aplysia saying what a beautiful animal it was, clearly highly intelligent and very accomplished I said, and I showed this image, and laughter and applause broke out. And I said, from now on it's downhill. I didn't have to worry anymore. And I had a very pleasant talk, and after that there was a reception, and all my kids were there. Well first of all, before the reception… there was a reception, and my kids and my grandchildren were there. And my granddaughter [Libby], who's now a freshman at Columbia, was standing in the receiving line shaking hands. She very much insisted she wanted to be there shaking hands. And after about 45 minutes she said, 'My God, that's an exhausting job, standing in receiving lines!' And then there was the prize ceremony, which was really quite magical. And it was particularly important because Denise is very demanding of me, standards. And there was a major rehearsal beforehand, which you walk through all the steps. And the critical step is that when your turn comes, you walk up, the king gives you the medal and a certificate, and you bow to the king, you bow to the Nobel Assembly that gave you the prize, and then you turn and you bow to the audience. And Denise was there for the rehearsal, and she said you just don't bow properly. Look at the Asian recipients. Watch them, they bow from the waist, not from the head. And so when I received it and I turned to the king and I bowed and I turned to the Nobel Assembly and I bowed, when I turned to the audience I obviously focused on Denise who was pushing Paul in the arm, pleased with how I bowed.

Then in the evening there's a wonderful banquet, and after the banquet there's a dance. Okay? So we had taken waltzing lessons to brush up on our waltz, and the banquet itself was very pleasant. We had some very nice wine. And I was asked to speak on behalf of Arvid and Paul about this. And before you give your two-minute talk, the people who give those two-minute talks are shown a prototype of a good two-minute talk. And the talk they showed us was by Issac Singer, a Jewish writer who writes in Yiddish. And he says, 'You know, I write in Yiddish. And people say, we don't understand you, why do you do this? This is a dead language, why would you write in a dead language?' He said, 'Those people, they simply don't understand. They don't understand. Most of the people in the world are dead. Someday they're going to rise up and they're going to say, “Nu, what's to read?”'
So I knew I couldn't possibly top that. But you know, my talk was not humorous, but it was interesting. May I read it?
[Q] Sure.

I spoke for our group.
Engraved above the entrance to the Temple of Apollo at Delphi was the maxim: 'know thyself.' Since Socrates and Plato first speculated on the nature of the human mind, serious thinkers through the ages, from Aristotle to Descartes, from Aeschylus to Steinberg and Ingmar Bergman, have thought it wise to understand oneself and one's behavior. Arvid Carlsson, Paul Greengard and I, whom you honor here tonight, and our generation of scientists, have attempted to translate abstract philosophical questions about mind into the empirical language of biology. The key principle that guides our work is that mind is a set of operations carried out by the brain, an astonishingly complex computational device that constructs our perception of the external world, fixes our attention, and controls our action.
We three have taken the first steps in linking mind to molecule, by determining how the biochemistry of signalling within and between nerve cells is related to mental processes and to mental disorders. We have found that the neural networks of the brain are not fixed, but that communication between nerve cells can be regulated by neurotransmitter molecules discovered here in Sweden by your great school of molecular pharmacology.
In looking toward the future, our generation of scientists has come to believe that the biology of mind will be as scientifically important to this century as the biology of the gene has been to the 20th century. In a larger sense, the biological study of mind is more than a scientific inquiry of great promise; it is also an important humanistic endeavour. The biology of mind bridges the sciences concerned with the natural world and the humanities concerned with the meaning of human experience. Insights that come from these new syntheses will not only improve our understanding of psychiatric and neurological disorders, but also lead to a deeper understanding of ourselves. Indeed, even in our generation, we've already gained initial biological insights towards a deeper understanding of the self. We know that even though the words of the maxim are no longer encoded in stone at Delphi, they're encoded in our brain. For centuries the maxim has been preserved in human memory by the very molecular processes in the brain that you so graciously recognized today, and that we are just beginning to understand.
 
 
 

Denise and I were heading to the dancing afterwards, and we bumped into Per Anderson, we bumped into many of our friends, several of you guys who were not at the banquet joined us, and I just so enjoyed talking to my friends that I couldn't pull away. By the time we had showed up, they had stopped playing waltzes, and they were doing rock 'n' roll. And Denise was furious. It turned out that in 2001, there was the 100th anniversary of the Nobel Prize. We were invited back, and this time of course no one was there to greet us, so we had a chance to waltz.

So the question is, what does one do after the Nobel Prize? It's a very difficult question, and it has an interesting history.
So, we have a summer house in South Wellfleet where we're going to go to in a few weeks - we go there every month of August, and the children and the grandchildren come. And we have a set of lines outside the house on which we hang laundry, even though we have a drying machine, because Denise is French, she likes the smell of freshly hung laundry. So we're hanging the laundry one day, and the phone rings inside, I go inside, and Steve Koslow from the NIH - this is 1996/1997 - telling me I've gotten the grant from the NIH. In those days, if you could read and write you got funded. The end of the conversation, he said, 'We here think you're going to get the Nobel Prize'. Well, that's nice. I go outside and I tell Denise, 'You know, they think I'm going to get the Nobel Prize.' And she said, 'I hope not soon!'
I said, 'How can you possibly say that? My wife.' And she said, 'You know, I worked with Robert Merton, the sociologist, and he and Harriette Zuckerman wrote a book about Nobel laureates. And they found that after they win the Nobel Prize, you know, they have film clips made about them, they go to symposia, they go to one banquet after another, they're intellectually dead. You have a lot of ideas. Play them out first, lots of time to win the Nobel Prize.'
So after this telephone call and after this visit in Stockholm, I figured I better settle down and prove to Denise that I'm not intellectually dead. So one way to do that came quite naturally.

Denise, who's a wonderful scientist, is interested in how kids get involved with drugs. And she wrote a major paper in Science in the early '70s in which she pointed out, there's a sequence of steps whereby kids get involved in drugs. They don't begin with cocaine or heroin. They begin with smoking and drinking. She found this in all societies, and you know, etcetera. And after a while she realized that these were correlational models, she doesn't know whether it's… maybe it's the availability of the drugs that determines that. So she wanted to develop an animal model for this, and she looked for people to collaborate with, and she wasn't able to convince anybody. So I volunteered, and we collaborated together. And Amir Levine joined us, and we used the mouse model, and we developed the paradigm, this gateway paradigm that she had provided evidence for, but we could do manipulations that she couldn't do.
We gave the animal nicotine first and then cocaine, and then we gave an animal cocaine first and then nicotine. When we gave an animal nicotine and then cocaine, nicotine enhanced the effects of cocaine on every level. The level of behavior, the level of physiology, the level of gene expression. Nicotine inhibited a particular enzyme, a histone deacetylase, that allowed the acetylation of chromatin to be active for a longer period of time, and boom, cocaine was just active for very long.
If you gave cocaine first and then nicotine, no affect whatsoever. This was extremely important, and it got all sorts of attention. Moreover, we made a very interesting finding. We found that for cocaine to have this booster effect, nicotine had to be on board. If you stopped taking nicotine for five or six days, cocaine was not amplified. She went back and she examined the data in human populations, and found exactly the same thing.
So this was really very encouraging. So we were invited to give the Shattuck Lecture for The New England Journal of Medicine. This was… our first paper was written up in Science Translational Medicine, but this was an invited lecture, we talked about that. And by the time the paper came out in the galleys we were able… she was able to ask something very interesting. People were getting interested in e-cigarettes, and they thought they were great because they didn't cause lung cancer. But Denise pointed out that the effects on the brain were every bit as strong. It's, you know, perfect delivery system for nicotine to the brain. So for elderly people who've been smoking a long time, it could be beneficial, but for young people, this was likely not to reduce the tendency for addiction with other things. We then went on with Eddie Griffin, and we're just doing this now, to explore alcohol and cocaine, and we see very similar effects. So it's been really very nice, and I think she's slowly but surely convinced that I'm not yet intellectually dead.

When you get the Nobel Prize, they ask you to do two things: to prepare an autobiographical sketch, and to prepare a lecture. So one or two days after I hear about the Nobel Prize, Harold Varmus calls me up and says I've got to speak to you. So since he runs Sloan Kettering, he wanted to ride his bicycle up here. I said I better come down and see you. I came to see him and he said, 'Look, this autobiographical sketch, take it seriously. A lot of people just hand in a CV. You know, write about your life. Take the time to do it.'
So I did. It's the first time I described, you know, what it was like to be a Jew in Vienna, and I showed it to friends and they were just amazed, they found it so interesting. And when the booklet came out, which combines your autobiographical essay with the lecture, it was really quite interesting, and many people commented on it. So I took it and I made a book out of it, In Search of Memory, and it went on to win major awards. It won the Los Angeles Times Book Award, in science it won the National Academy of Science award. So that inspired me to go on, and I'd always been interested in arts, and bringing art together with science, and I wrote a book on Vienna 1900, on Klimt, Kokoschka and Schiele, and what neural biology can bring to bear on their work. And again the book has done quite well. I got a lot of pleasure out of doing it. It won the Kreisky Award which is Austria's highest literary award. So I got a lot of pleasure out of doing that. And also, it came at a time when my whole relationship to Vienna was changing.

After all these telephone calls - you know, isn't it wonderful that we have another Austrian Nobel Prize - the President of Austria, by the name of Klestil, wrote me a letter saying, what can we do to honor you? And I said, I have more honors than I deserve. I would like to see a symposium at the University of Vienna, a response of Austria to National Socialism. And he said, be delighted to have that.
So I asked Fritz Stern to help me, and we invited people that compared the response to Austria, response to France, to Germany, etcetera. And it was really quite wonderful, well attended, and a book came out on that. For the first time, they honestly spoke about how horrible Austria's response was. Now this was already 2001 when they were beginning… in 1996 there was a formal apology on the part of the, [Chancellor] of Austria, about the role that Austria played in the Nazi period. But what was even more interesting is when the book came out, it's a bound volume, we went back to Vienna. Klestil had died, and the new president of Austria was a guy called Fischer. And he asked Denise and me to come to dinner at the Sacher Hotel. So he and his wife, Denise and me, and Anton Zeilinger who was Austria's best scientist he's a very good friend of mine, we belong to a common organization together, and his wife, the six of us had dinner at the Sacher Hotel. No guards, no nothing.
So as we're having the second glass of wine, Denise asks him, what does the Austrian president do? Is this just an honorific title, or do you have real power? He puffs himself up and he says, of course I can declare war immediately, but I'm not going to do that. And Denise takes him through his political career, really quite fascinating. And we became quite good friends. His wife is part Jewish, was in hiding in Sweden during the war. He was in Sweden also during the war. And he'd been in Austrian politics for a very long time. He had a science education, and he'd done a lot for science in Austria. And he was actually Minister of Science at one point. So almost every time we're in Vienna he invites us for a cup of tea or something like that, and it's just wonderful to think that you're kicked out one day, and now you have tea with the President of Austria.
So I'm becoming more comfortable with Austria, although it's got a long way to go. And I've been helping two of the neuroscientific organizations in Vienna. I consult for them. And we usually go to Vienna once a year. Denise used to find Vienna quite boring compared to Paris, but then she discovered Liska. Liska is a fabulous furrier, and we're great friends with the Liskas, and Denise who loves fur has always, you know, picked up something extra. You know, a hat, or shortening one of her fur coats, or getting a new fur coat. So we have a good time with the Liskas.
And in addition, we took advantage of the funds from the Nobel Prize, because I felt so indebted to Denise, we bought ourselves an apartment in Paris that we go to every Christmas time which we enjoy enormously. Hardly pays back what Denise has given me, but it's really been spectacular.

Charlie Rose interviewed me for the Nobel Prize, and we got along extremely well. And he had me back once or twice more, and we had very good programs. And then he invited me to Aspen where he runs a series of roundtables. He asked me to organize something on age-related… any topic, I organized an age-related memory loss.
And so they had a roundtable on Iran, on Afghanistan, on, you know, Israel/Palestinian interaction. One depressing topic after another. So this audience was moving around, becoming progressively more despondent. And then he came to our roundtable with this delusional optimism of biologists really is at work, and they loved it. They thought it was the best thing they heard. It was B+, but fine.
So Charlie said we have to do something about it. So we started the first of what turned out to be three series on the brain. The first was the normal brain, perception, action, etc, memory. The second one was abnormal brain, psychiatric and neurological diseases. And we've just started the third series on brain science in society - aggression, parenting, and just now we did a terrific program on transgender.
So having a wonderful time. I've always enjoyed sort of the public outreach aspect of science. I mentioned earlier how Principles of Neural Science was really an attempt at least to reach medical students in a coherent way. The two books that I wrote were designed for the general reader, and this was wonderful, and Charlie's just fantastic in his capability of doing that, and I've learned an enormous amount from him about that. So that has been very enjoyable.

So when I look back on my career, which has been so privileged, I can identify, you know, several factors that I think are particularly important. One is that, you know, surviving Vienna gives you a certain courage to go on, to face difficult situations and to try to overcome them. It, you know, I wouldn't say I'm free of anxiety, I can be quite anxious, but it makes a survivor out of you. Also, I mean a European background gives you a certain cultural perspective which is very important to me. And I still identify very strongly with the wonderful and intellectual environment in Vienna in 1900 where Jews and non-Jews interacted in such a productive fashion.
In addition, I think my psychiatric training and my interest in psychoanalysis and also my experience at Harvard in history and literature were very helpful, because all of those things that I learned at Harvard, and in psychiatry and psychoanalysis, work at bridging between disciplines. And I enjoy that a great deal. And I think one of the few things I was able to bring to bear is that very early on I was not scared of behavior. I was able to bridge behavior to cellular nerve biology before most other people were willing to do that. So when the Kuffler group, that knew infinitely more neurobiology than I did, they didn't tackle these problems until later, while I had the blind naiveté to go ahead and do this.
Then it was Denise, who really had from the beginning an unbelievable degree of confidence in my creativity. I thought it was completely unrelated to reality, but she saw something in me that I did not see, and she still sees things in me that I don't see. She also sees things in me that I don't want her to see, but she sees lots of things in me that I don't see. And she was an enormous source of encouragement. It's hard to describe how important she was particularly in helping me see my way in relationship to my brother who was wonderful, but she thought I was more creative than he. She thought that he certainly had more book knowledge than I did, but in terms of thinking freely she thought I was quite strong in that.
And then I was very fortunate with my colleagues. At every point in my career, I bumped into the right person. Richard Coggeshall when I was working with identified cells and trying to look at the anatomy. And then Craig Bailey when we were actually looking at the anatomy of it. Kupfermann and Carew and Pinsker looking, you know, at the behavior. Koester and a whole bunch of other people when I get interested in biophysics. Steve Siegelbaum later on in the same category. Jimmy Schwartz in the phase of biochemistry. Phillip Goelet and particularly Richard Axel in the molecular genetic era. You know, Seth Grant when we moved into genetically modified mice. So really I've been extremely fortunate. And then, you know, my junior colleagues have been unbelievable. I've had fantastic people. We spoke recently about Priya Rajasethupathy. I mean, a fabulous post-doctoral student. Arnie Kriegstein. You know? Made the development of Aplysia possible. Kelsey Martin. Kausik Si. Fabulous, fabulous post-doctoral students.

I mentioned earlier that when I came to Harvard I sensed I want to be embedded in the university community. I just felt it was such an exhilarating feeling. And I've had this at Columbia. I love this university. It's given me fantastic freedom. I find it intellectually invigorating. And there are terrific interactions between people that are critical but supportive. You know, people don't bullshit one another. We are very honest in criticizing one another, but these are designed to help you. And when we prepare for major things, for example Hughes renewals, we help each other a great deal in preparing for that. So I think that's been absolutely spectacular.
The other thing is support. The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, you know, I'm not sure I would have gotten the Nobel Prize without it. It came along just as I was moving into really molecular neuroscience. And it allowed me to make the transition effortlessly. So it's a privilege to be supported by them.
And then I have a wonderful family. You know, my kids are great, my grandchildren give us a lot of pleasure. We've never had serious problems.

I am not competent to develop methodologies. I've really never developed anything really important methodologically. But I'm not reluctant to use methodologies, new approaches, new techniques, to further my own work. And I do… I have developed a taste for problems. I have a sense when a problem is really important, and that's what I want to work on.
I tell the people in my lab, this is not original with me, that it takes as much effort to work on a boring problem as an interesting one. Why don't we work on an interesting one? And I think as a mentor, my function is to help people develop taste as well as high standards. You know, particularly now, it takes years to get a good paper together to publish it. And the idea that you get a paper out in six months or a year is absurd.

When I was a resident at Harvard I went through analysis. And at that time, I was still thinking of becoming an analyst. So during my analysis, I not only learned about myself, but I had to work through several problems. One, the decision not to become an analyst. People encouraged me, because they thought I had some clinical competence to develop a speciality. Because I told them, you know, who wants to go to a physician who practices medicine one day a week? And they said, well why don't you take something you can specialize in? Something that would be unique to people? And I said, well what in psychiatry can you do? So people suggested hypnosis. Well this is not me. I like interacting with people. I like, you know, the press of the flesh and the smell of the crowd. I like this contact. Hypnosis, you know, that has no appeal to me whatsoever. So I decided I would do nothing. For a while I supervised residents in psychotherapy, because that you can be helpful on. It's the blind leading the blind. Seeing two people in action, you could always see things that you could improve on.
And then I made this very difficult decision of turning down the job to become chairman of psychiatry, and again Denise just said this is absolutely ridiculous. So I worked through all of that. And then giving up Harvard, leaving Harvard, which was a difficult decision. So not only was I solving, you know, chronic problems, oedipal-schmedible, my relationship with my parents, my relationship to Denise, my relationship to the kids, but a number of professional problems, it was extremely helpful to me. And you really get insight into it. I've always felt that in my interaction with people that I supervise, the insight that I get from doing therapy myself, and from my analysis, has been helpful. Seeing issues with people that I might be able to intervene in ways that is helpful. And I'm very fond of psychoanalysis. I think it's a shame that because it has never gotten empirical, and never reached out to become biological, it has not lived up to its promise. To me, the ideal would be if there's some merger between psychoanalysis and neuroscience. Because psychoanalysis has really wonderful insights into the human minds. Things are sort of intuitive, and they've not rigorously demonstrated many of them. And to test some of these ideas biologically would be enriching for neuroscience as well as, of course, fundamental for psychoanalysis. So there are now several attempts to do this. In fact, this Sunday there's going to be a discussion in The New York Times that quotes me very briefly of people who've been trying to do this. The problem with the people who try to do this is they think that a few hours a week you can solve these problems. I spoke at the Psychoanalytic Institute recently, and the director of the Institute was very proud that all analysts in training now spend four to five hours a week doing imaging experiments. Well they don't realize, you know, when we start off in our career, this is a day-and-night job. This is a full time job and more. And they have no idea what science involves. I think that's one of the problems.

I took a wonderful course in history of art when I was at Harvard, and it really sparked my interest in art. And when I met Denise she also had an interest in art, and she had an interest quite profound which she derived from her mother in objects - vases, furniture. Her mother had a wonderful collection of Art Nouveau furniture, and she gave us a fantastic Gallé table as a wedding present. She then later for my birthdays gave me several vases, and we have a wonderful collection of vases, of porcelains, of lamps, and of furniture from that period. And in Paris, we have Art Deco furniture which is somewhat later.
So Denise has a fantastic taste for being surrounded by beauty, really remarkable. I mean, you walk through our apartment, it's just riddled with what Jews would call chachkalas, little things that… well, even look at my office for god's sakes, most people don't have a crazy office like mine. That's number one. Number two, when we spent a year abroad in '62/'63, we first began to buy art. So we bought a painting by Weissbuch that reminded me very much of a Kokoschka; we could afford the Weissbuch, it was, you know, $150 or something like that. We bought a wonderful Picasso lithograph from the Vollard Suite which was $400, an artist and his models. And Denise liked another etching from the Vollard Suite even more. It cost $450 and we couldn't quite afford it, so for a recent birthday I've come back and bought it for her.
Then when we came back to Boston, we began to go to the galleries a little bit and we began to buy some Kokoschka etchings, and Schiele etchings. And with time, you know, as our income grew and we came to New York, we developed a very nice collection of German and Austrian Expressionists. So among the Germans we have a wonderful collection of Beckmann including two oils. Now, you tell people you have two oils, their eyes glaze over. These are two of the earliest oils he did, they're from about 1903. He visited his niece for a weekend at the seashore. She had a house there and as a present he painted these two seascapes. And we bought one of them about eight years ago and I wanted to get the second one then, but Denise didn't want it but I convinced her subsequently. This was from Jürgen Mars, a dealer in Berlin that we visit almost annually. We have wonderful etchings and lithographs of Beckmann, the Man With The Bowler Hat, several self-portraits, Edelbar, you know, a scene in a restaurant. We have his political commentaries, the conservatives and the radicals, really wonderful stuff. We have Kirschners, we have wonderful Noldes. And then we have the Austrians. We have a wonderful Kokoschka adolescent nude, we have a Schiele nude. The Kokoschka adolescent nude, this is… I'm showing off. The Obere Belvedere, Austria's most important Expressionist… Austrian Expressionist museum which had the original… not the original, it had the Klimt, a Bloch-Bauer. And so, they're having an exhibition on Klimt and Kokoschka, Schiele's women.  And two things:  they invited me to write an essay on that, but they asked to borrow one of our works of art. And it was this adolescent nude of Kokoschka's that they borrowed. Unbelievable that somebody would borrow… this is not that valuable, but nonetheless, it's a very nice image. For my 70th birthday Denise bought me a fantastic Klimt drawing, just fabulous, of a woman, elegantly dressed woman. And many people think the Klimt drawings are his best art.
So we've enjoyed this a great deal. We are constantly on the lookout. Not that we buy that much. We go to museums a great deal. We, for example, there was an Israeli artist called Moshe Kupferman, and we have a wonderful collection of Moshe Kupferman; we probably have the best collection of Moshe Kupferman in the city. Torsten Wiesel also has a good collection. And actually, we were in Israel together one time doing some scut work for the Israel Academy of Science, and they said, how can we pay you back? And Torsten said, well why don't you get a car for us to take us to the north of Israel, Kupferman works in a kibbutz there. And so we came and visited him, and he lived like a saint. He served lunch out of a… served us lunch, gave us a can of sardines, he opened up, and we all had a little sardines. And we saw wonderful stuff there, both of us bought something. So he's really like Jasper Johns, sort of an abstract artist, but we have maybe ten or 12 Kupfermans. We have one whole wall that is Kupferman. Actually have more than 12, I think that wall itself has 12 pieces. And he said as we were leaving him, 'I dream - and I'm getting too old to dream - that someday I'll have a major exhibition in New York'. Torsten and I turned to each other - New York, I mean, this is our town, I mean, you know? So we formed a committee, Ann Temkin was on the committee, this was when she was still in Philadelphia. And we began to call around. The Metropolitan Museum occasionally shows a modern artist, and they said, of course, we have several Kupfermans, but he's not for us. We called up the Guggenheim, we called up MoMA. All of them recognized and respected him, but didn't think they would do something. We call up the Jewish Museum and they said, you know what, he's not Jewish enough for us. So that was… So a mutual friend, who was affluent, brought him to New York so he could get at least to know the dealers, but unfortunately a year or two after that he died. But anyway, we have some wonderful stuff of his.

I don't remember when, I'm making it up now. In about… 1988 or something like that, I was awarded an honorary degree from the University of Vienna Medical School and they asked me to give a talk on behalf of all the recipients. So I thought I would belt the hell out of them, tell them how I felt, how the University of Medicine handled itself: two days after Hitler came to power, a Nazi was appointed dean of the medical school, and two days later, half the faculty, the Jewish faculty was half the faculty, was fired. And you see a famous picture, it may even be in this book, of his calling a faculty meeting and giving the 'Heil Hitler' salute. So I thought I was going to tell them that. And then I decided, don't be a schmegegee, they're honoring you, use that on another occasion. Be decent.
So I thought I would do something about the history of the Vienna School of Medicine and its contribution to world medicine. So I began to read up about that, and to speak to people about it, and I discovered Rokitansky and how important he was, and Škoda, the people he worked with, and also brought in Sigmund Freud, and also Gall. I mean, the fact that Viennese medicine contributed a great deal, not only to medicine as a whole, but to understanding the mind and the brain, and it was well received, and… period. End of paragraph.
Many years later, about 2005/2006, maybe even after that, the Practitioners' Club, which is a club that I belong to in New York that meets six times a year at the Century Association, you go around and you take turns, one member pays for the dinner, there are about 30 or 40 members, and the other gives a talk. Whatever you want. Your science, your hobby. I thought I would speak about my hobby, Klimt, Kokoschka and Schiele. Very well received, and as I gave that talk I saw a connection between Rokitansky and the influence he had on this through the Zuckerkandl salon. And I sort of put together a talk, and once for a meeting of the European Neuroscience Society, I was asked to give a talk. And I gave a talk that put the whole thing together, beginning with Rokitansky, Zuckerkandl, and all the way, the influence of Zuckerkandl and Klimt, etc. And these young kids just went wild. They thought it was one of the best talks they'd ever heard. They didn't know these artists. They ran to the museums and had a great time. And that's when I decided to put it together and make a book out of it. And it's given me enormous pleasure. And now this movie came out, The Woman in Gold, and sales of my book, which have been doing reasonably well to begin with, popped up again.
And Schoenberg, the lawyer who has a critical role, he was the one who really saved Adele Bloch-Bauer so that Lauder could buy it, he sends me - knew him slightly - he sends me an email after the art book comes out, says 'Nu, where's my grandfather?' And I said, 'Your grandfather's a great artist', which most people don't realize, 'but it didn't fit into my book'. And subsequently I've come back to his grandfather. Most people don't know it, it's an interesting and complicated story. So Schoenberg, great composer, is not earning much money. And he thought he would become a painter, because painters earn money very easily. So he is very impressed with this young guy, Gerstl, who before Kokoschka was already moving into an expressionist direction, and before Schiele was beginning to paint himself in the nude. Really quite extraordinary painter. He was very young in his early 20s and Schoenberg was very much taken with him, and asked Gerstl to give him some lessons. And then he invites Gerstl to come with him to his summer residence, spend the summer with him. And he comes and he proceeds to have an affair with Madam Schoenberg. Not a good idea. Schoenberg finds out about it, tells Madam Schoenberg you have a choice, him or me. She chooses Schoenberg, and Gerstl does himself in, like age 26. Paints a painting of her with her mouth sealed… or eyes closed, because she was told never to look at him again, and then…
And so, you know, to write about this, when I was speaking about Klimt, Kokoschka and Schiele, I didn't think was a good idea. But what is not known is that Schoenberg after the death of Gerstl went on to paint for about a three- or four-year period, quite remarkably and became abstract. So in 1910, he was already doing abstract art. And the general thinking is that abstract art began with Kandinsky, and Kandinsky was trying to leave figuration and become abstract, and he couldn't do it. And then in January 1911, goes to a New Year's concert, and he hears Schoenberg, and Schoenberg's atonal music, says if he can leave tonality, I can leave figuration. He goes and he does some abstract work in April of 1911, not knowing that Schoenberg himself had already done abstract work. And I have several essays on that.

I'm in a very privileged phase of my life. I'm really enjoying things quite a bit. We've moved to a wonderful [Columbia] apartment in Manhattan that the President of Columbia made available to us. And our kids are doing well. And we're continuing to work so I'd like to continue to work. I'm working on another book, Radical Reductionism in Art and Science. I enjoy the Charlie Rose series, and I enjoy the science we're doing. I think the key thing is to be physically active. So I try to swim many days in the week. We go for walks on the weekend in Riverside Park. We eat sensibly, we have a very good diet. And to enjoy life and to enjoy each other. There's no magic formula. I mean, you know, people can have a meaningful life in lots of different ways.

[Q] I suppose, unless you tell me it's none of my business and I shouldn't ask you, what I want to know is how you think about death.
I don't actively think about it, but obviously I'm not going to escape it. I hope it's peaceful. I would not like to suffer, and I'm prepared to make that as a written statement that I think I should be spared suffering. To be honest with you, I'm more afraid of being alone if Denise's death precedes mine, than I am worried about my own death. I think it would be very difficult for me to be alone. We've been married for… it'll be 60 years this year. And in many ways our interdependencies are extraordinary. And our affection is great.
[Q] Do you think of your legacy? Scientific legacy?
A little bit. I'm certainly obviously aware of it in the context of this Web of Stories. You know, it amazes me how few people know Sherrington, or Eccles, or Kuffler. So I realize that, you know, this is a passing thing. But I'm very pleased, I'm very grateful for what I've been able to accomplish. I feel myself very fortunate to have done it. Never expected this of myself. Far beyond anything I ever expected. And there's a Hebrew expression called dayenu, that's sufficient, and I feel dayenu.
[Q] Did you want to talk about religion in your life, or…?
Religion in my life. No, I'd rather not.
[Q] Okay.
I mean, I can speak about my Jewishness.
[Q] It would be really good, just imagine a sort of…
I'm not a religious Jew. I don't observe the Sabbath. I do go to the synagogue on High Holy Days. And my children are more religious than we are. But I feel myself very Jewish. I feel very comfortable being Jewish. I like Yiddish. When I was young my mother would take me to the Yiddish theatre on Second Avenue in New York; I enjoyed that a great deal. And I identify very strongly with the Jewish religion. Not with Netanyahu, identify strongly with Israel, but a progressive two-state Israel, not the Israel we're seeing now. And I'm very proud of what Israel has accomplished. An enormous, you know, democratic state, and an environment that was not democratic when it started, although it's veering away from that. Great intellectual accomplishments in science, in industry, in art. Great biotechnology. It's really spectacular what it's done. And I like the emphasis that Judaism has placed on scholarship. Also…
[Q] Was your grandfather influencing in…?
Oh, a wonderful scholar. He read Goethe and Schiller, he didn't just read, he knew it. Particularly Heine who was born a Jew. No, he was very scholarly. And his attitude towards Hebrew, the Talmud, was very scholarly. He was a remarkable man. Yes. And my brother was a fantastic scholar. Yes.

Well love is a wonderful experience. And it has many phases. The acute phase of meeting a person that you really like, and becoming intimate with them, which is really quite wonderful. But it takes on another dimension when you live with each other for a while, because it's such a rich and enduring experience. I'm surrounded by beauty. I mean, I come from a family in which my mother was quite wonderful but had really no taste for, you know… she didn't have the resources to have elegant furniture, but she didn't have elegant taste. She didn't cook well. I've never had a bad meal.
Not only is the quality of what we eat, although it's very modest, but the way it's set out, you know, we have cloth napkins, dinners are a feast with us. And the… I mean, I take it for granted. I expect it. I would be disappointed if it wasn't there. But the quality of our life is just wonderful. And what we do together is so interesting.
We're planning our 60th wedding anniversary. So what do you think we're going to do for our 60th wedding anniversary? So Denise wants to rent a house, or something attached to a hotel which everyone can come in France, of course, in the South of France. Where we would have a swimming pool and tennis court and we'd all be together for a two- or three-week period, and also be able to visit some museums, maybe start off in Paris, and then go there and have a great time together and come back. I think it's just a wonderful idea to do that. Particularly wonderful for Denise, because Denise, unlike myself, thinks very carefully about money. I don't think about money at all. Denise counts the pennies and yet here she's willing to really… splurge is not the right word, but you know what I mean. I would not have accomplished what I did without Denise.
I had wonderful relationships before Denise, thought of getting married several times. Once I was very close to getting married. And those were great women. But my life with them would have been extremely different. In one case, I would have ended up being an analyst, I could have been, you know, maybe moderately competent analyst, but without any due respect to analysts, for me you can't compare the pleasures I've gotten out of science to the pleasures I would have gotten out of private practice. Just absolutely can't compare it.
[Q] This is love you're talking about?
Love. Yes. Denise saw things in me that I never saw in myself, and she brought them out. I'm wearing the suit that I'm wearing and the tie that I'm wearing because Denise thought this would be very good for this film. I have worn this on occasion with Charlie Rose, and she said, that's what you wear. And if she sees me hunched over or bent over she says, 'Straighten out. You look 20 years older'. I mean, she's great. I mean, not all of those things I enjoy as much as I make it appear at the moment, but she has standards for me in all aspects of my life which I respect.
[Q] How have you reciprocated in bringing out things in Denise?
I've brought out a lot of things in Denise. Denise did not have the intellectual confidence in herself. She was very bright, but her father gave her the feeling she's not a big picture person. She's very good in details, but she's not good conceptually. And that's quite wrong. I mean, she just didn't have as much practice as I had, but she has really quite deep insights. And our collaboration has been very satisfying. I mean, I… part of the collaboration was to give Denise an opportunity to get involved in animal work, and it's been wonderful for her, but also wonderful for me. But I think I've brought out features in her, in her academic life. She was the first sociologist ever to publish in Science. And my feeling was, one publishes in Science because you don't just want to speak to the person next to you, you want to speak to a larger scientific community. And she's continued to do that. No one showed slides in sociology, I don't know whether she was the first one, she was one of the early people to show slides.

So I called her up because a friend, Zevi Jaffe from college, who unfortunately is no longer alive, gave me two telephone numbers, hers and Marie Lesnik, a mathematician in Brooklyn. I went out with Marie Lesnik a couple of times, I didn't hit it off. And I called up Denise, and she had no interest in going out with me. And I tried various things, didn't work. And then I finally dropped that I was from Vienna and I could see that interest picked up. She thought, if he's European he can't be all bad. So she agreed to go out with me, and I asked her whether she wanted to go to the movies or the best bar in town. And she said let's go to the best bar in town. So it turns out in our apartment we built a wonderful bar… Bob Goldberger, later became provost at the medical school, he was a couple of years behind me, but we'd been friends in college, so he roomed with me. We roomed together near NYU medical school. And we had a modest sized but very nice apartment. And he was into whiskey in a big way. I don't mean he was a drinker, but he knew good whiskeys, he was much more affluent than I was. And so we had a wonderful bar. He also was a very good carpenter and things like this. So I took her there. She'd actually… she didn't like whiskey, so we had something else. And this was, you know, shocking for our period, and but nonetheless she was really quite game, and we very rapidly became good friends. And I think I told you this before, way before I was prepared to get married, she wanted to get married. I was uncertain and for me it was a leap of faith, and you know, you sometimes have to make those decisions. I was worried my parents fought periodically, and she said, of course people fight. But you know, it's how you resolve it.
[Q] Great.
There is a wonderful painting of me that Denise made on our honeymoon which… I don't know if you ever saw it. It's hanging in our apartment, you'll see it when you come up. It's different than a Kathy Hilten, but Kathy did it at a different phase of my life. This is an oil. Wonderful. Yes. Actually quite wonderful. She only did two paintings in her whole life, both on our honeymoon. That and a landscape. We lost the landscape somewhere along the line.

[Q] You have a great love of opera, when did that develop?
Well that’s interesting. That started… my brother was a fanatic of Wagner. And he would trace the leitmotifs on the phonograph and listen to everything. And he even though he had very little money would buy standing room at the Metropolitan, that’s the old Met. And then Max Rudolf whose daughter, Marianne Rudolf, was a friend of mine, and she married Bob Goldberger. Her father was a conductor at the Met, and when we were medical students, he would give us tickets. I think I told you, Max Rudolf is the great-grandfather of a girl I’ve got working in the lab right now. It’s amazing. I’m going to have lunch with Marianne over the next few weeks. So we would go when tickets were available, and then when I started to date Denise I took her to a dress rehearsal of The Tales of Hoffmann. And at the end of it she said, ‘I don’t enjoy the human voice as a musical instrument’. I said, oy vey! So I started to, you know, move her in the right direction. We went to lieder recitals, Fischer-Dieskau, very good people. And she began to enjoy that. And then we worked slowly toward opera, and now she’s as addicted as I am.
[Q] Even Wagner.
She loves Wagner like I do.
[Q] Amazing. Amazing.
We learned a great deal from each other.
[Q] So you brought that out in her.
Look what she’s doing for me now. I’m taking French lessons now. I’m not sure that’s going to work but we’ll see.
