frederic.raphael

Born in America in 1931, Frederic Raphael is a writer who moved to England as a boy. He was educated at Charterhouse School and was a Major Scholar in Classics at St John's College, Cambridge. His articles and book reviews appear in a number of newspapers and magazines, including the Los Angeles Times and The Sunday Times. He has published more than twenty novels, the best-known being the semi-autobiographical The Glittering Prizes (1976). In 1965 Raphael won an Oscar for the screenplay for the movie Darling, and two years later received an Oscar nomination for his screenplay for Two for the Road. In 1999, he published Eyes Wide Open, a memoir of his collaboration with the director Stanley Kubrick on the screenplay of Eyes Wide Shut, Kubrick's final movie. Raphael lives in France and England and became a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1964.

It's a funny thing about telling stories, and that's after all what one does in one way or another or what I've done, virtually all my life, through telling stories including, of course, telling lies, so to speak, but not necessarily in that way. I'm reminded now of that thing that Jean-Luc Godard said about stories having to have a beginning, a middle and an end, but not necessarily in that order. And it makes me think also of a book that I once ghosted when I was... when we were poor, and I was asked to edit a book by a secret agent. I'm talking about 1954 or 1955... '55, I suppose. His name was Jacques Doneux and at that time I was a member of the Oxford and Cambridge Club in Pall Mall, and I arranged to meet him there. And I went into the hallway where we were supposed to meet and I sat down and after a little while I began to look at my watch and I began to think that he wasn't going to come. And then I looked up and there was a... small bespectacled man sitting... sort of diagonally away from me in one corner, and I went up to him and said, are you by any chance Jacques Doneux. And he said, yes. And I said, oh, did you just get here? And he said, no I saw you come in. He had that curious quality of being entirely undistinguished and, in a sense, indistinguishable. And when I read his manuscript, which of course was the usual kind of tissue of courageous clichés, I came across at one point a passage where he had escaped from Brussels and he arrived in Paris in the cold winter of 1943, and he went to what was supposed to be a safe house, and he took off all his clothes, which he had been in for several days during his journey from Brussels, and got into a bath, leaving his clothes to dry because it had been raining. And the phone rang and a voice said, 'Il faut y sortir vite!' - get out of there, fast! So he had to put on the underclothes, which he had washed, while they were still wet and put his still damp clothes on and leave at once for the... I think, the Gare d'Austerlitz. And he went to the station and he said in the manuscript, I couldn't walk onto the platform because, of course, it was patrolled by the Germans and I didn't have the right papers but, he said, I managed to get onto the platform quietly, and when no one was looking I slipped under the train and hung myself face downwards from the lattice of the springs or whatever they were under the train... and waited. In due time, the train pulled out of the station. The next chapter began: when I got off the train at Lyon... And when I read this and I said to Jacques Doneux, you've sort of missed something rather interesting out, haven't you? I mean you... how long did you actually hang with your face down over the rails on the way to Lyon? He said, oh, about five hours. So I said, well perhaps it's worth mentioning that. And he said, oh, you think that's interesting? And I said, well yes, I think it's quite interesting; what went through your mind? To which he replied – if I remember correctly – nothing. Which of course is more than credible. 
But it did point out, this story, that most of us, and that includes me of course, have a very poor appreciation of what interests other people in one's story and what doesn't, and one of the things of being of a certain age, and God knows I know what it is, is that one is told a good many stories about oneself and around oneself often enough to begin to find them somewhat used up, whereas other people who haven't heard them before sometimes have the grace to be interested. So I'm wary of assuming that because I've said something before, it ain't worth saying. On the other hand I'm naturally apprehensive of being too smooth in my delivery of old stories. You may remember that people say that you don't only reach your dotage, you reach your anecdotage and God knows writers do that. 

I say writers because certainly for the purposes of this... number, I'm more interested in talking about being a writer than about being Frederic Raphael in any kind of other context. On the other hand, I have to give some account of myself otherwise it won't make any sense that I should have chosen this curious, not entirely amiable, profession.
A lot of people talk about their parents and their grandparents when they first start talking about themselves. Whether that's polite or whether it's merely a convention, I don't know. I have to confess that in an age where people seem to be very interested in their ancestors, I'm not extremely interested in mine, partly, I think, because of the split in my personality, a very obvious split between America and England, the reason being that my father was British. His family, I discovered some time ago, had been in England since the... certainly the end of the 18th century where one of my paternal ancestors was a member of the synagogue which had a list of members which they have kept. My mother was American. She was born in Kansas City, Missouri, from which you cannot be more middle-westerly American. She went to Chicago when she was about 18 to become a secretary and because her father had gone bankrupt and she couldn't go to college even though she was a bright girl and she was very marked by that. She was a bright and very good-looking girl. My father, meanwhile, had been to St Paul's and to Oxford. And he was, while at Oxford and afterwards, a very keen ballroom dancer. In fact, he was not only keen, he was the amateur champion in the world, particularly in the tango. And a very old friend of his and later of mine called Guy Ramsey, a journalist, once said to me, the thing about your father was that when he danced the tango he was a dago, and when he danced the waltz he was a Viennese gentleman. My father, when I knew him, had already become... somewhat staid. He did dance, but not a lot with my mother because in his rather clear and understated way he had observed that she was not a very good dancer. I never heard my father raise his voice. He was not in any sense the sort of Jew that other people might think was a Jew. He spoke correctly and calmly. I never heard him raise his voice, I never heard him say 'fuck', I never heard him say anything worse than 'bugger', which was said in a very English kind of way when something got broken or whatever. He was very restrained. But he had not always been like that I suspect, and in particular he had not always been like that as a young man when he danced and when he danced with many women, and when he slept, I suspect, with not a few. One of them was a person called Molly who was a member of the Baltic Exchange. This is in the middle to late 1920s so she must have been quite an extraordinary woman since I don't know how you qualify for the Baltic Exchange, but I can't believe many women did. She did what many women have done before and since which was to tell him that there was no risk of her becoming pregnant upon which she became pregnant. She was not Jewish. My father's father went to synagogue and was in many ways a proper Jew. My father's mother, Amy, was one of several sisters, also of Jewish provenance, but she wasn't very keen, to put it mildly, on being Jewish. She did not, of course, keep a kosher house and she... conducted herself like an English lady. In fact, she and her sisters used to sit in the foyer of the Grand Hotel Eastbourne, which was one of their favorite summer haunts, and when a Jew came in through the rotating doors, my Aunt Minnie, who had a great voice and she had sung, she told me, in front of the Prince of Wales, used to intone, 'Fish', which was their code, not very subtle rhyming code, for Jewish. They were beautiful enough not to be taken for Jews. They did have a number of Jewish characteristics, however, and originally, although their name was Benson by the time that my grandmother married my grandfather, their original name had been Bebro and they came, I think, from Manchester. I said I wasn't going to talk about my family; here I am talking about them, but they are quite fun.

There was a man called Harry who was one of their brothers – Handsome Harry he was known as, and he was also a swindler and a con man and a ladies' man and all the other things, and eventually he was caught and sent to jail for quite a long time; I think we're now talking about the Edwardian era. And my grandmother and her sisters and their brothers if they had... did she have any brothers? No, I think they were all sisters. Oh no, she did have a brother! Of course she did... she did have a brother, several brothers. They all met and decided that Handsome Harry had brought shame on the name of Bebro which in any case they weren't all that keen on because it sounded a bit foreign. So, they decided that they would call themselves Benson. But one of the brothers, who was then called Godfrey, they didn't like because he was rather low-class, he was a stamp dealer actually, a very nice man. So, they said to him in the cruel way that people had particularly in those days whenever they were, 'We're all going to change our name to Bebro but you can't... to Benson, but you can't, Godfrey'. So Godfrey, who was quiet and dignified, said,' I don't care, I don't want to be called Benson anyway'. But he didn't want to be called Bebro, either. So from that day onwards he had one name: Godfrey. And since he signed his name Godfrey when he wrote letters and things, people began to think that he must be a peer of the realm which is one of those minor comic dividends which can come to some people. Anyway, my grandmother and her sisters and brothers all changed their name to Benson. One of them, actually, as I might, you know, why I thought there were no brothers because one of them was a man called Frederick Jessel Benson and he became very rapidly a millionaire. He wasn't a swindler like his brother, but he was every bit as plausible and charming. And Jessel was said to have allowed an insurance salesman to come in and try and sell him some life insurance and the salesman had left having bought shares in Jessel's company. So, he was pretty good with all that stuff. He was also in the end very rich in fact he was so rich that he had a country house to which he would go every night in his Rolls Royce, and he had the Rolls Royce arranged so that if he had to sleep in his office where he had a cot, and he fell asleep, the cot could be carried out and slid into the back of the Rolls Royce as in a hearse, and he would then be driven to his country house. And...as I say, it must have been in the Edwardian era. And one time he invited the prime minister to come for the weekend, I think, and he did and this Jessel said, 'We have dinner at 8.30'. And the prime minister was detained for some reason and didn't arrive until 9.30 by which time Jessel had started dinner. And the prime minister came in and sat down and they talked for a while and then Jessel said, 'I always go to bed at 10 o'clock, so please help yourself to anything you want – goodnight'. He was the kind of Jew which in a sense only exists in England. There was a sort of mutation which Disraeli, I think, initiated. They were totally, as they say, unapologetic about being Jews.

America is something else entirely. My grandmother in America was Lithuanian who had been born in St Jo, Missouri. My grandfather, Max Mauser, had been born in Germany in a place called Bad Kreuznach, I think. And he left Germany when he was 14, I think, in about 1906 or 1907, perhaps a bit earlier, no probably in the early... in the early 1900s, and came across the Atlantic on his own at the age of 14 to meet an uncle who lived in St Louis and from then on he made his way as best he could, and it wasn't all that good, in America and became very American. Meanwhile his brother was left behind in Germany and was killed fighting for the Kaiser in the First War. Max became extremely American. 
My parents met in Chicago in 1930 on Christmas Eve, a romantic occasion my mother always used to tell me, and my father's dancing and British accent and various other qualities certainly charmed her. My father had gone to America because after Molly and her child had been paid by his father to disappear he was, I think, more chagrined than grateful, although he was certainly grateful to be disembarrassed of this woman and her child, and he said to my grandfather and, I presume, my grandmother, though she would probably be less interested, that he would marry the first Jewish woman that he met who didn't have a moustache and who had decent legs. My mother didn't have particularly good legs though they were quite long and she always thought they were very thin but she was a beauty and she didn't have a moustache and she was a young girl of 19 and my father was 30; not a great age after all. 

I was born a year later in the Grant Hospital in Chicago which had previously been called the German Hospital up until the outbreak of the First World War. We left Chicago quite promptly and went to live in St Louis, and my earliest memories are of living in St Louis where I think my Uncle Louis, my mother's uncle, had a bakery shop... no, not a bakery shop, a bakery. And I remember the flour and the dust and the fresh loaves. And I remember my mother going to sculpture classes. And I remember, I think, a yellow car we had. We left Chicago... we left, I'm sorry, we left St Louis when I was about three or four, and drove because my father had been given a new job in Shell Oil in New York at Rockefeller Center. Quite a promotion. He knew people in Shell at the high levels and that's how he'd gone to America and taken a job in Chicago selling oil to Irish gas station owners who weren't all that thrilled by his English accent, but he seemed to prevail. He had a good deal of charm, my father, when he tried. So we drove north to Ohio and... with my grandmother Fanny in what was called the rumple seat – or was it called the rumble seat? I'm not quite sure which it was; I think it's rumble – of a little Dodge, I think, we had. I'm not sure... maybe it wasn't a Dodge – we got the Dodge later. Anyway, she sat in the outside of the ... under the sun while we were three of us in the front of this little hump-back car, and off we went via Aurora, Illinois, Columbus and then I don't know what, and eventually to New York. And in New York we had an apartment not on Central Park West, but just off in 13 West 70th Street. And I walked up, when I was a little boy, to the corner where there was a Spanish and Portuguese synagogue and I had the idea that there was something rather special about being Spanish and Portuguese as against being what the other thing was. But since I didn't go to the synagogue anyway it didn't really make much difference, but I was conscious without being overly-conscious of being Jewish in that part of New York because, to put it bluntly, almost everybody was. On the West Side of the park there were a lot of Jews; on the East Side of the park there were a lot of what my father always called Christians. I never heard my father say the word goyim or anything of that kind his entire life. He may have known a few Yiddish words – my mother certainly did because of her parents and my grandfather being German, or ex-German – but my father had nothing to do with any of that. Not that he in any way ever denied it, being Jewish I mean, but he really made nothing of it except a certain antique piety so that now and again he would go to synagogue on Yom Kippur because that was a holy day and his father would have liked him to go. Jews are quite keen on doing what their father's would have liked, and in that respect I am not altogether one of them.

I went to a school, my first school in New York, which was called Ethical Culture. Quite a famous school founded by Liberal, as they were called, Jews, mostly German Jews. German Jews incidentally in New York were... the peak of their social circle and in fact there's an ugly word, 'kike', which Americans have used, and they still use for all I know, of certain kinds of Jews or indeed of all Jews. But the truth of the matter is that the German Jews whose names did not end in ski used the term 'kike' and devised it to describe peoples whose names, i.e. Poles and other lesser folk of that kind, Eastern Europeans, ended in ski and hence they were 'kikes'. Not particularly nice, but that's the way that the Jews can be. 
So I went to Ethical Culture which was liberal and sought, without any sort of shame or doubt, to make assimilated Jews, that is to say good Americans, out of Jews. And I was quite good at school. Not that there was very much labour involved because it was kind of free and I had a teacher called Miss Henry and she thought well of me and I had a number of nannies, some black, some Irish. I don't know what my mother did because I was an only child, quite common in the slump, in the Depression. My mother went to classes, I think, and went shopping at Saks and I Miller and all the usual places in Fifth Avenue. We didn't have much money and she never had any... she never had a bank account all her life while my father was alive, but she did have checking accounts as they used to call them. And she was frugal and very good at sales and smart, and smart in every sense, that is to say that she always looked very good. I was always proud of my mother. 

I was American. What else? I did of course actually have British nationality because in those days a British citizen, a natural born British citizen like my father who was born in London, his legitimate children were all British by right. So I had dual citizenship, but it didn't really show because I was an American kid. We did go to England on what was called leave because my father, being employed by Shell and being British, was allowed every three years a free trip, cabin class, on a Cunarder back to England for however many weeks it was. And during those weeks when I was, I think, three years old was the first one and then there was another one when I was five, I was brought back to London or brought to London which I didn't think much of because the buildings were in those days very low, the people spoke in very strange accents and it was all rather stuffy. My parents were both only children so they had... I had no cousins. 

The strange thing about being an only child without any... not only without any siblings but without any cousins, although I had people that I knew and my parents' friends' children and so on, I... I was always very solitary. I suppose I was used to my mother's sympathy, but I wasn't used entirely to no company because of the maids and so on. I was very proper. And I remember when I was in St Louis when I was three, I went with my mother to visit a friend of hers who had a house, I remember it was up some steps, quite common in St Louis, the sidewalk is above the level of the road, you have to go up steps from where you've parked. We went into this house and there was her friend, blonde I think, and a little boy – the friend's little boy – ran out of the back of the house into the living room, as we used to call it, and he had nothing on his lower half, and he stood in the middle of the carpet and pissed all over it. I don't think his mother was particularly pleased, but she wasn't particularly horrified either and I... I think, I can remember thinking: I could never do that – I wish I could. If there's any truth in that memory, it's... it's a good one because I've often thought as I've gone on through life and have I not, that there were certain sorts of things which it seemed to me some people could do that I never could. The courageous things I understand very well why I wouldn't be able to do them, or might not be able to do them, probably wouldn't be able to do them, but the bold things, the challenging things in public... no, I've never been very good at that. All my challenges come covertly, later, in print or at least in handwriting. That's the kind of way I piss on the carpet: never at the time, always a little later, but hopefully, as they say, in a nice pattern. 

We came to England a couple of times. I loved being on the ship because, in those days, being on ships was such fun. You played ping-pong and you did all kinds of things, or watched people play ping-pong, and they raced horses on the deck; that's to say, they moved... the purser moved horses along and people bet on them. It was all terrific fun. And you ate enormously as long as you weren't seasick. My father was; my mother never was so I used to eat with her, while my father bravely walked around the deck. 
England was a place of heavy Victorian furniture and heavy Victorian people, maids with caps and aprons, red buses with staircases up the back in the open, taxis where the lids folded down, busbies and... nannies and nurses and all that kind of thing. It was very sort of Kensington life that I was conscious of. I didn't know anything about poor people. I'd seen them driving through Ohio during the Depression; then we saw lines of people. And my father's security in his job was, to say the least, not nothing, even though his salary was not very great. Clearly it was fine. 
Anyway, 1938 my father was told that they would like him to come back to London to Head Office of Shell in order to take a course in whatever it was that it was going to be in – management, I suppose, of some kind – before returning to New York a year later to take up a more senior position. He wasn't at all reluctant to do that because although I wasn't conscious of anti-Semitism in America, except in a very overheard kind of way – there was, for instance, a man called Father Coghlan who used to have a radio show in which he abused the Jews, and there was Henry Ford who not only made motor cars but also regarded the Jews as the source of all evil and had a newspaper which proclaimed this. Anti-Semitism was entirely in order in America, and that is to say Jews were not allowed to live in certain parts of New York than those restricted areas, and... they didn't mind that much because there were plenty of Jews and they didn't actually mind that they didn't mix very much with gentiles. Not that they objected, but they didn't do. So most of my parents' friends were Jews. Anyway, my father had more trouble with anti-Semitism, strangely enough in Shell because his boss, a man called Kittinger – with two Ts, not Mr Kissinger – was a member of the German-American Bund which was an overtly Nazi organization, quite powerful, that used to have quite long marches and things. 
So my father suffered alone. He was given to that and he was very stoic. His mouth was rather thin by the time I was conscious of it, and I think it was partly because he... he held in a lot of pain. He'd had the worst luck in the world... in one sense. When he was in his 20s he had a kidney stone and he had a friend called Teddy Schlesinger who was a young surgeon, and Teddy Schlesinger said to his friend, Cedric, 'I can take care of that kidney stone for you'. It was a banal operation, but Teddy Schlesinger was in those days not the distinguished surgeon he later became, and while operating on his friend he severed my father's urethra which had nothing to do with the kidneys, whatever. And as a result, when it healed, it healed with scar tissue which inhibited the passage of urine, and it got worse as my father's life went on. So actually, my father's life was in a sense ruined by too great a trust in a friend. Anyway, Teddy Schlesinger had a son called John Schlesinger, but it wasn't that John Schlesinger as we will come to if we live so long. 

In 1938, we had to pack up and leave Central Park West and our very nice apartment and my grandfather Max, who at that time was living with us. Max was then in his fifties but he had no job and he was parted from Fanny, who had disappeared from New York and was replaced by Max who lived in our spare room in a not very big apartment. And my father, with his strange kind of resigned stoicism, never seemed to make any fuss about the fact that this unemployed man lived and ate and slept under his roof. Max was a very sweet man. You couldn't help liking him and he couldn't help liking other people even when they swindled him, which they frequently did. He invented things, but if it was a good invention they stole it and if it wasn't, he lost money so it didn't go very well. 
Anyway, we left Max behind, and I don't suppose my father was all that upset, and set sail, I think, for Liverpool, I can't remember now, anyway on the Britannic, the motor vessel Britannic. And I arrived in London, and it was 1938. Soon after we arrived, the Munich Crisis took place and I began to become aware in a very childish way, I was still... I was not quite seven, that something bad was happening in Europe which was certainly not the case in the US. And I was sent to a little school in Putney, where my parents found a flat. It was typical of them that they should find a flat in Putney because Putney was not North London and North London was Jews. It wasn't again a question of my father being in any way ashamed, but he did not wish to be a Jew. He didn't think of himself as one. And on the boat, as we were coming over he said to me, 'There's one thing about living in England, Freddy boy, and that is, if we do that, you can grow up to be an English gentleman, not an American Jew'. There was no great competition between these two things and which one was preferable. This was 1938, the British were still ruling the waves or, at least, they thought they were, and so on.

So I got to... to a flat on Putney Heath and I was sent to a little school in Putney which was called Leinster House. The headmaster was called Mr Moyles, and I there began to do the things which small boys did in those days, i.e. copybook writing, adding up sums and all those other things. And I'm a docile person. Show me how you want it done or how it's best done and I will mimic that, just as my voice mimics the voice of English gentlemen whether or not I am one. I learned very quickly in 1938 that it was not a good idea to have an accent which was not 'proper'. Not everyone in Leinster School had proper accents, and one of the people that I got to know was called Martin, who was my friend. And I took him home one day to Manor Fields and Martin had... I don't know if it was a Cockney accent or what it was but it wasn't... I'm tempted to say a kosher accent – it was not a correct English accent! And my parents were not, as far as I know, snobbish; they were more afraid than they were snobbish, my mother certainly because she was now an American Jewish woman in an English environment and she was 27 years old... 26 years old, I think, actually. Anyway, she was frightened of being thought ill of, she always was frightened of being thought ill of and she was very good at not being thought ill of because a) she was beautiful, b) she was charming and c) she never ever said anything which would offend people, not if she could help it. 
So I quickly became a facsimile of a little English boy, and since I was quite good at mimicry – it is, I'm told, a racial characteristic though, I fancy nearly everybody does their share of mimicry, that's what human beings do as soon as they put their clothes on, and sometimes when they take them off, but we'll let that go. 
[Q] I hope we won't!
What?
[Q] I hope we won't!
So I went to Leinster House. And the war situation got worse and worse and... the international situation, I mean. And as 1939 came and we were... I was hoping still to go back to New York and assuming that I would. Shell then asked my father whether he would stay in London because they needed brains to help run the office, particularly since the younger people looked as though they were going to get called up. So from being merely on leave, so to speak, from New York, we suddenly were going to stay in London. I am told by my father – I was told by my father – that they considered sending me back to America, it was not an unknown thing to happen in 1939, but for whatever reason they decided that we should all stay together. I think my mother might have gone with me, but anyway, for whatever reason they decided not to do that. So one of the not particularly terrible consequences of the war was that I stayed in England. And I went to school in Sussex first.
We went actually in 1939, September 1939... for some reason we went to stay with Teddy Schlesinger, the surgeon who had ruined my father's life, and his wife whose name, I think, was Gladys – it would be. And they had a son called John who had an electric motor car with which he drove around the grounds of their Sussex House. It was quite a big place. And he had a boiled egg for breakfast, but since I was, so to speak, a charity patient I didn't get one. And I never drove his Daimler... electric Daimler, but I sat with him in it once or twice. And on September the 3rd 1939, we all went onto the tennis court for some reason with a portable radio and heard Neville Chamberlain say that we were now in a state of war with Germany. I think it came as something of a relief to my parents, though I don't know. My father was then 39 and he was not, of course, going to get called up. Not that he would have been sorry; he had been called up in the First World War, but he just missed it because he was 18 when it ended. He had actually, I remember, been in camp on Wimbledon Common when the war was still going on in November of 1918, and they were all given rather rancid bacon for breakfast. My father then elected to become Jewish and he went to the commanding officer and said that it was unfortunately against his religion to eat bacon for breakfast, could he have something else? And the commanding officers in those days, you know, listened to people who had religious reasons, and he arranged for my father to have fried egg for breakfast upon which a number of people came up to my father and asked him what you had to do to be Jewish and when he told them they decided, well, it wasn't worth the sacrifice. Anyway, there it all was.

So I went to... down to Sussex and when war was declared my parents decided I should go away to school in order to be out of London in what was expected to be the bombing raids which would do great damage. And suddenly, from being a pampered mother's boy of... at that time I was just eight, since my birthday's in August, I was told I was going to go away to school, which I did not take at all well. I don't take many things well I'm bound to say except good news. So suddenly I was wrenched more or less literally from my mother's arms and delivered to Copthorne School which was actually near East Grinstead. It was a good school. The headmaster was a... was a good man, a good scholar, Latin and Greek, I mean. The teachers were largely amiable and able. As far as I know, they were in no way interested in small boys. I was never aware of any breath of scandal, and I wouldn't have known if there had been because I just didn't know about those things. I didn't know about anything below the waist, so to speak. But I was diligent, so I did well at school. I lost my American accent with some speed. I acted in plays. And then after a little while when we heard the bombing and the noise of guns from France as we did in May 1940, we removed from Sussex which was, of course, right on the line between where the bombers would start and where they would end over London, and the school was removed through the wisdom of the headmaster, whose name was E Skete Workman, to North Devon where he had had the wit to reserve, as it were, a small hotel which in the wartime, of course, was not going to get many guests. And so the school removed to Lee Bay in North Devon. And there I spent the next, whatever it was years, four... four or five years, learning Latin and Greek mostly and maths and a bit of French, but Latin and Greek was the heart of it. It might as well have been Chinese or horticulture or anything else. I was a diligent little boy, eager to... eager to come top and... and competent to do so pretty much. I also wrote a... remember writing an adaptation while I was there of Anthony Hope's Rupert of Hentzau.

[Q] Were you aware at that time that you were unusually bright?
I don't think I've ever thought I was unusually bright. I just thought I was brighter than other people, which isn't quite as conceited as it sounds. What I mean is, I noticed when I was better than other people, but I never actually thought that I was very, very good at anything and even now I'm somewhat surprised even when I read a piece of old prose or something of mine and I think... when I think, oh, that's quite good actually. I have a high opinion of myself in company – sometimes, but not unduly elevated. In fact, I'm inclined to think that I have been foolishly modest. There's something quite comic about my saying that, and I'm not unaware of it but the truth is, I've noticed that people who have become very famous as writers or other sorts of persons never ever make the mistake of making any ironic or self-deprecatory remark about themselves. On the whole, people of discovered genius are usually very keen to leave it prominently displayed for discovery. I never quite managed to be conceited enough for that and I think that the Jewish thing, which haunts... haunted me all my life ever since I got to England, has something to do with that. My father was very much against anyone who was pushy or flashy or showy even though he had been a world champion dancer. He never spoke of it. In fact, as I think I wrote somewhere that you haven't... people don't know that modesty was his main conceit or his only conceit, and actually that is very British. I notice that people who win medals in the war never talk about winning medals in the war; people who've won foolish awards talk about their awards a great deal.

I was in North Devon and I worked and I played on the beach and we didn't play many games and because we were living in a valley, the hotel was in a valley like that so there weren't any... we couldn't play cricket, we used to play rounders which was very ill-regarded by masters of a certain kind. Anyway, I... I one of the masters read Rupert of Hentzau by Anthony Hope before he read The Prisoner of Zenda actually for some reason, I don't know why, and I was much struck by it. So I did an adaptation of it which we were going to perform. And Mr Workman was very tolerant because I was able to order costumes from Berman's and when they arrived there were swords among the costumes and at that point Mr Workman rather prudently took fright about this production, and it was rather abruptly cancelled and the costumes were sent back. I don't know who paid for them, but I don't think I did. I used to... Mrs Workman was a more formidable lady than her husband was a formidable man, and she had a very, very sharp way of calling me Raphael. My father was always greatly vexed by the fact that only in England was the name Raphael never pronounced correctly. Nearly always, Raphaels, particularly if they were Jews, were called Rayfel as in Rayfel Tuck for which my grandfather worked. I always thought that he was the Raphael in Raphael Tuck, but he wasn't – that was actually the first name of the first Tuck. My grandfather just worked for them for many years and he had a chauffeur, by the way, which the company gave him and a driver... a chauffeur and a car and the chauffer was called Theobald. They weren't rich but they were good middle class people. 
Anyway, I was at Copthorne in the country for all of the war. I did come to London for the Blitz from time to time, and I remember running up Putney Hill during one of the bombing raids in 1944. And I walked... ran up the hill – I was about 12 I think – and I ran up the hill with my hand on the top of my school cap. And my mother, when we got to the shelter, said how sweet it was that I had thought to put my hand on the top of my head thinking it would protect me against the bombs and I said, no, I thought it would protect me against being accused of losing my cap.

I heard a few bombs fall. And when we went down to Bognor Regis on the 1944 summer holidays, I used to watch the buzz bombs going along the front and over the sea and all the way past us towards, I suppose, Southampton and sometimes they would fall into the sea and sometimes they would go on. It was actually rather fun. It never occurred to me that I was in any danger during the war. I had the sort of sense of immunity which the only child of a Jewish mother is sometimes alleged to have. 
So the war ended upon which my father was offered again the job in Rockefeller Center in New York which he had agreed to postpone because of the war. During the war, my father was actually about to be seconded to a mission to Russia, and he was going to be given the rank of colonel because it would enable him to impress the Russians. I was rather pleased to think of my father being a colonel because he wasn't in the forces, but for some reason they thought better of sending him. It may have been because the Russians perhaps didn't want a Jew to be in this delegation – I don't know. Or maybe the English didn't want a Jew to be in the delegation – who can say? Anyway, by the time the war ended, I was ready to take my scholarship to Winchester, my school specialising getting people into Winchester. And my father thought about going back to New York and then, supposedly, he decided that it would not be fair on me if he were to do so since I was now likely to get a Classical scholarship and that would not be much use to me in New York. I have a notion that his mother, who was still alive and very domineering as a serious hypochondriac can be, was determined not to let him get away, but there we are. She never spoke to my mother nor my mother to her. We were not, as they say, a close-knit family.

So went to Winchester to take the scholarship with a friend of mine called Richard Bird who had been in America all his... all during the war; he was a linguist, I think. And the rule at Winchester was that you took the scholarship exams and they then added up the marks and the list was posted in the window of a bookshop, I can't remember the name of the bookshop, and those on the list went forward to the next stage whatever it was, or went to interviews. But there was a thing which happened which was that the gross marks determined the order in which people appeared on the list in the window, but there was something called 'weight for age' which meant that younger people got some kind of dividend for their few months, and Richard Bird was one of them... advantage over the older ones. Anyway, I came fourth in the list of scholars which appeared in the window, and since there were 12 scholarships my headmaster, Mr Workman, assured me that I was going to get a Winchester scholarship, and I believed him. I believed most people when they tell me anything actually and I still do; even though in principle I distrust everybody, in practice I trust exactly the same people pretty much. Anyway, but I did have to have an interview with the headmaster and a panel of his colleagues. Okay, so I went to my interview and his name was Canon Leeson. He was a Church of England clergyman. And he said to me more or less out of the... he didn't quiz me about Greek irregular verbs or any of the other things which I was quite competent at and he didn't ask me to recite chunks of Cicero which I was perfectly capable of doing. He certainly didn't ask me to explain the philosophy of Plato in simple terms or anything like that. No. He asked a few questions, I can't remember what, and then he said, 'What do you feel about going to chapel?' And I said in... I think quite honestly, but like an honest trimmer, 'It doesn't bother me.  I went to... I go to chapel at my prep school' – I didn't mind going to chapel. And there was a kind of... look, or at least so I now somehow can wish upon these long-dead faces, and off I went. And when the edited list of scholars was published in the window of the bookshop I had lapsed from fourth place to 13th place and Richard Bird who had been in 11th place had advanced to fourth place and there were only 12 scholarships. So Mr Workman was stunned. And by this time we had gone back to Sussex where the prep school was originally positioned, and he couldn't believe it but there it was. He agitated a bit but they said, you know they were willing to accept me as a Commoner or an Exhibitioner or something, but my father couldn't afford the full fees of Winchester because his salary was not high enough and so, I was told I was not going to Winchester after all. Now, I had to take another scholarship fast. We were now towards the end of the summer and in those days the public schools had sort of echeloned exams. So, there was only one school left which my headmaster thought appropriate, worthwhile, and that was Charterhouse of which I had never in my life heard even though one of the masters had actually been there. So, with the bad losing tears, for which I'm afraid I have been well known – if I'm well known at all – I sat down to take the Charterhouse exam and sniffling and blubbing I wrote my way through all of the papers and of course since I had been well coached and since I was on automatic pilot, I steered a pretty good course, did all that I had to do and since there was no interview to get into Charterhouse, nobody asked me how I felt about chapel so I was awarded the whatever it was, I think it was the fourth or fifth Charterhouse scholarship and in the Oration Quarter, as Carthusians used to called it, of 1945 I went to Charterhouse absolutely without any wish whatever to do so; I rather wished I'd gone to St Paul's like my father had, but London was in this era of turmoil and there it all was. So I was a Scholar.

The reason why I had slipped... the alleged reason why I had slipped from fourth place on the roll of marks to 11th was because this mysterious thing called 'weight for age' allowed the manipulation of the roll in whatever way seemed good to the people who were determining who was going to get in and who wasn't. I have to say that when I have repeated this story in front of Wykhamists or to Wykhamist readers, they have all denied absolutely that anything of that kind was conceivably possible, and the French answer to that is et ta soeur. The fact of the matter is, that although the Holocaust was not well known, to put it mildly, in 1945, so far from the British, gallant supposedly as they had been in coming to the rescue of the Jews, were actually horrified at the prospect of Jews coming to England and even of being in England still. Anti-Semitism was very strong. The reaction of two great public schools to the end of the war and the possible influx of Jewish refugees from the continent to join families or others in England was, in the case of St Paul's, which had always had a very large Jewish intake – they introduced a numerus clausus and limited for the first time the number of Jews that entered the school – until, Isaiah Berlin, not the most courageous person in the world but in this case outspoken, objected strongly, and so did Eton make the stipulation overtly that the number of Jews would be limited to X percent. And in that case Freddie Ayer, who was then a professor of Oxford and a famous and quite pugnacious English sort of Jew – he was descended from the Citroëns who had made cars in France and Belgium, I think. Anyway, he objected to that and in both cases Berlin and Freddie Ayer, who were friends in philosophy, managed to get the schools at least to deny that they were going to introduce a numerus clausus which didn't, I'm sure, prevent them from doing it. Anyway, that's how that all that happened. In other words, the Winchester roll, after all the things that one had been through in taking all the papers, was actually rigged and nobody is ever going to persuade me otherwise.

So I went to Charterhouse. It wasn't a bad school, but it was and is very anti-Semitic. Now, there's a comedy about anti-Semitism in this country which is, of course, that there isn't any. So, if anybody doesn't like you because you're a Jew, it's not because you're a Jew, it's because you're you – except, of course, there's not a word of truth in that. Now, the anti-Semitism which I met at Charterhouse, so also did my friend, Brian Glanville, who had never met it at his prep school, met it in a different house with a completely different set of people. And his was even more virulent in some respects than mine was, at least to start with. I had a very naïve idea of success in public school. I thought you had to... being a Scholar at Charterhouse was not very well regarded. They were known in slang as 'hash pros'. 'Hash' is work and 'pro' is professional and in those days in England being a professional was not a term of praise because it meant you needed the money. However, I wasn't the only Scholar in the house; there were a few others, but they were distributed all through the school, unlike Winchester and Eton they were not coalesced in a sort of elite house. I've always had a very sharp tongue. Not necessarily cruel, though I don't deny that it can be, but certainly very quick. My American grandfather used to say to me, 'You have to be quick on the uptake', and the comeback and in New  York, believe me, you did have to be, and you do. In England it might be prudent not to be too clever too quickly, but I've never quite managed to remind myself of that in time. 
It was a strange time and I was quite good at games and I... and all the rest of it and for the first year or two I noticed when people talked about 'Jewy' people and people looking 'Jewy' and various other things, but these remarks were not addressed particularly to me and I elected out of cowardice or prudence or whatever not to take offence. And this went on for quite a long time. And when I was... been there for two years, I had to take what's known as a Senior Scholarship which was the sort of next echelon of Scholars, and to win a Senior Scholarship was considerably more difficult than a Junior one because of each bundle of dozen or so of Junior Scholars in each year only, I think, five or six became Senior Scholars which I did with some ease and with, I have to say, not much surprise. So then I was in the Senior part of the house, but this coincided with 1948, yes 1947/8 and of course with the... what was going on in Palestine including the hanging of two British sergeants by the... by the Stern gang, by... by whatever his name was, I can't remember it now...
[Q] Begin. Who was it? 
Begin and his men. That's right. I could hardly say that they had... the British had actually hanged a lot of Jews before the Jews hanged the British, but of course the nature of British justice was that we do the hanging and you hang, which I thought quite proper, quite proper. I had no notion of being on the side of those funny folk with strange accents and embarrassing names who were doing all sorts of things in Palestine. I was aware of Belsen, but I wasn't aware of anything else. We had a boy in our house called... who was very skinny and his nickname was Belsen. That's how the boys enjoyed all that. In effect, there hadn't been a war for us... we'd missed it and England went on being, although austere, rationed and cold, in terms of class élan very much as it had been.

In 1947/8, for some reason which I have never yet discovered, quite abruptly I became the object of what one of the descendants, the direct descendants actually, of William Ewart Gladstone was pleased to call a 'Jew bait'. Now, I was quite a large and fairly strong person so nobody ever laid a hand on me, but you don't need to lay hands on people in order to turn them into pariahs. So to my chagrin – somewhat tearful chagrin from time-to-time – I did have a study of my own so I could go in and shut the door, but I was subjected for not that long a time, maybe a week, maybe two weeks, first of all, nobody spoke to me and secondly, certain jokes were told endlessly in the dorm at night and when I was sitting having lunch and when people spilt things on my food and on and on and on it went for quite a long time, and I became quite depressed about it. In fact, very depressed which of course cheered the enemy up greatly. I noticed also that certain people did not participate, but they made no gesture of friendship or consolation, they just didn't do what the others did and later regarded themselves as having done something rather friendly, but I didn't particularly take that view. And although in terms of persecution it was to say the least a bruise-free occasion, one can't determine what sort of thing marks one for life, and comic or pathetic or whatever it is, that marked me for life. I learned with incredible speed, or with what incredible speed, people who you thought were your friends would turn against you, whether they were people I'd acted in plays with or walked up to school with or anything else. No Classicists by the way. A curious brand of people, Classicists. Not, God knows, necessarily the salt of the earth, but something quite different. Anyway, I confronted one or two people and that didn't seem to do any good, and then one day there was a place called Hall where everybody over 16 tended to congregate where we kept our food in which they had managed to drop my butter on the floor and various other things, and they were all, my enemies were assembled there by chance and I walked in and there was the usual kind of noise and I said, I don't know where I got it from, very untypical, I said, 'I'm going to fight you, all of you, but here's what's going to happen', I managed to say without bursting into tears, 'I'm going to start with the weakest because otherwise there's always a risk I won't get to them, so I'm starting with you and then it'll be you and then it'll be you so are you ready?' And they rather quickly left the room. But I have to say I wasn't as gallant as all that because previous to this I had written a letter to my father in which I said that I had been... because I was 'the Yid', that was the word that I used, that was the word they used. I was 'the Yid' and and and and and and... I hadn't confided in my father at all usually, but this was a very panicky letter and he was panicked. And he at that time was running press relations for Shell, so he showed my letter or got it shown to, of all people, Rebecca West who in those days was writing in The Evening Standard and who had written a book called The Meaning of Treason in which she had written with some vigor about anti-Semitism among other things. She had also attended some of those trials, I think, in Germany. So, strangely enough, the first thing of mine which ever appeared in the public prints appeared in The Evening Standard because she printed my letter completely. I didn't know this, but there it was. I saw it sometime later. Meanwhile, my father was afraid I was going to commit suicide which I have to say was not on my agenda at all though I may have... I may have been dramatic enough to hint at it when I wrote to him – I can't remember. Anyway, he came down to see the headmaster who was a man called George Turner who had been headmaster of Marlborough and didn't really like being at Charterhouse much. And my father went to see him and said to him, I think that, you know, my son is at risk. I think he might kill himself. This is what's going on and here is what he wrote to me. George Turner, who was a prissy little man, said, 'What do you expect in a Christian school? And what do you want me to do?' And my father who was all of 45 at this point or 46, not a very old man, but I thought he was... he was then, my father said, 'You could do your duty perhaps', which seems to have been quite a good answer in the circumstances, very British. Anyway, it all suddenly stopped and whether it was because of my brave stand which I don't entirely believe or because the word had been passed to my housemaster that he better do something about it, suddenly all the people who had been 'yidding' me all the time stopped and as usual with people who are unkind to other people they quite forgave themselves almost instantly. So I was in the strange position as I continued to rise in the school, and there is a comic element to all of this, of being treated absolutely as if I had always been their friend. And then I was supposed, of course, to treat them as my friends, and I did. But, for the rest of my life with regard to males I have always held something back in my friendships with anybody, not on purpose, just because I have.

One of the other Scholars in the house a year older than me, who had nothing to do with the anti-Semitism thing, was made head monitor for the next year and I was by that time an acting corporal in the Corps, the JTC [Junior Training Corps], because, of course, I was British as well as American, and now I was much more British than American and expected fully to go into the army and all of that stuff. So, Jeremy Atkinson, who was a scientist, said to me, 'Well, I'm going to be running the House and I want you to run the Corps', even though he was this corporal and I was only an acting corporal having taken the exam. Of course, when I sat the exam I did well in the exam, that's why I became an acting corporal, and if it had been an exam to enter the Hitler Youth, and I hadn't been a Jew, I would have become an acting corporal in the Hitler Youth because that's what kids do, I'm afraid. Mimesis is all our trade. So Jeremy said, 'Will you do that?' So I said in my timid, careerist way, 'I don't think I can be expected to run the House platoon', every Tuesday they paraded in khaki with rifles and marshaled up the place and all the rest of it, 'unless I am a monitor', which is what the Carthusians called prefect or whatever. So he said, 'No, I'm sure you're right'. So the next term when the next year began, Jeremy was the head monitor and I was made a monitor along with one or two of the people who had been among the leading anti-Semites, and one or two who had not. And on the first Tuesday, when I was to take the call as their commander, 16 kids with big boots, clunky boots and rifles, possibly 20, actually – I think there were only about 60 or 70 people in the House altogether, so there were probably 25, 30 – I said to them, 'I know exactly what you think, you think that Tuesday afternoon Corps is a completely bloody waste of time. Let me tell you, I think exactly the same thing'.
But I said, here we are, all dressed up to play soldiers, so that's what we're going to do. And here's the other thing – it's like a play. We can either do it well and not do well in the competition which will, of course, take the form of one House against another – the whole of Charterhouse is made up of different Houses, all ending in -ites except for Gownboys which used to be the Scholars' House and wasn't anymore, but they still were called Gownboys and they didn't wear gowns – they had once. So, I said to my platoon, 'Lockites has always been rotten at Corps and I don't care, but why don't we amuse ourselves by becoming very good at it? So I'm going to give orders and you're going to obey them and you're going to stamp your feet and slope your arms and you're going to do up-two-three, down-two-three and I'm going to keep a straight face and so are you and we're going to do very well in the drill competition'. So we did. It's funny how you can do these things if you propose to do them. I was very keen. I polished my boots. I, you know, did all... blancoed my webbing and all of that, and I set a good example and I marched about and I learned how to operate with my swagger stick and all of that stuff, and we came fifth in the drill competition and I was promoted to sergeant and my second- in-command, who was a Welsh anti-Semite, became an acting sergeant and those other people became whatever they became, and everyone was rather pleased. Fifth wasn't high, but it was five out of twelve – not bad for a House which had always been in the relegation zone. And by becoming a monitor, I also became a bit of a toff in the House and I became friends with all sorts of people and I was in the under sixth and I did pretty well in Ancient History and all the rest of it, and then the question came about going to Oxford and, of course, since my father had gone to Oxford, my wish was to go to Oxford. And then a year later, that's the beginning of the next academic year of 1949, after my mother and I had been back to America to see her parents and I had had another refresher dose in what it was to be American and also, incidentally, what it was to kiss American girls, which was a great deal more rewarding than kissing English girls. So I was quite re-excited by America and by the clothes I bought there and all the rest of it – pants with zips! Nobody at Charterhouse had a zip and they didn't have... they didn't have lots of things. They didn't have pants that didn't have turn-ups. I came back to England because I resumed my Charterhouse uniform and resumed rehearsing the Corps, and that year actually, anyway. 

[Q] One of the things that I feel I don't know is whether you had any friends really.
At Charterhouse? 
[Q] I mean, this is a terrible tale you tell about your enemies, but did you have friends and...
I had a quite interesting experience, really. I didn't like myself when I was at Charterhouse very much. I was quite good at... at what Jews, as I say, and I think plenty of other people are good at, that is, I was good at imitating what worked in terms of creating fear in particular with smaller boys because you had to try and handle them. Jeremy Atkinson, whose father was a naval officer who'd actually been drowned off Singapore during the war, Jeremy had a kind of very tight-lipped cold way of looking at people. He actually sort of deliberately... and I learned that and it's very effective actually. I mean it really, really scares people. I kicked about with people. I laughed. After my experience of being a Yid I didn't know any other Jews. You see there were other Jews but there was no Jewish solidarity in Charterhouse. We all went our separate timid ways or more or less timid ways. People who were good at boxing were naturally less intimidated than others. I wasn't good at boxing, I was afraid of being... of hurting my nose. Anyway, I don't think I did have any friends but they would be shocked to hear me say so. That's how it is.
I became extremely solitary and I came back from New York in the summer of 1949 with a notebook with a spiral spine in which I wrote things down... nothing very nice about anybody but a lot of it very accurate. A lifelong habit. I don't mean I'm never nice about people in my notebooks – I can be. But I notice what's odd about people, what's interesting, what's distinct, what they might not care to have noted. That's the game I play. It's known as observation. Goya did the same after all. I don't feel ashamed about it. No, I don't think I had any friends but they would as I say be shocked to know that I thought that. 

I've no doubt that the main form of sexual activity at Charterhouse, and any other school in which boys of 14 to 18 were secluded, was masturbation. Not that you had much to masturbate about because there was very little in the way of pictures or other aids, but, on the other hand, between the ages of 14 and 18 you don't need an awful lot of help in that department. There may have been people who didn't masturbate. There were certainly House purity... not committees... I don't know what they were called... clubs or something, where people affected to be extremely chaste, but anyway.
My sexual experiences were limited to the holidays because in the holidays I went to the Liberal Jewish Synagogue to be prepared for a sort of Liberal Jewish version of confirmation. I didn't learn Hebrew. I did receive so-called students' exercises while I was at school at Charterhouse which I dreaded anybody opening because they were stamped Liberal Jewish Synagogue. That's all I needed. So I was ashamed not in myself, but I was frightened that people would find out and jeer. I actually dreaded that, but my father wanted me to go and I was very docile and I went. The upside of going to these classes between the ages... from the age of about 15, 16 was that there were some girls with moustaches, but there were some who did not have moustaches, and one of them was a very pretty girl called Hilary Phillips with whom I got on very well. She lived in Portland Mansions off Baker Street and her parents wanted her to go to Oxford so they wanted me... they wondered if I could help her with her Livy. So there was a certain trade-off between irregular Latin constructions and the kisses which followed them. Hillary was keen but careful, and with good reason in the 1940s. She was also convinced, as many Jewish girls were at that time and not only Jewish ones, that if she wasn't engaged by the time she was 18 or 19, the shelf loomed. I didn't make much headway with Hilary in the unbuttoning department, but kisses were very nice and we had those and there was the promise of buttons in due course. That was only during the holidays. Now during the term not only did she write me letters, but after I came back from New York so did one of the girls that I had met in New York who had been somewhat more... generous. Her name was Mary-Jane and she wrote me scented letters with... promising extended pleasures when next we met.
The thing about Charterhouse was that there was a headmaster, a famous headmaster in the 1920s, who said at the headmasters' conference where they were discussing homosexual behavior in public schools, 'My boys are amorous, but not erotic'. Some of them were more amorous than others and one or two of them were certainly erotic, one of them being Simon Raven who was expelled from Charterhouse in my very first, as we used to call them, quarter. There were three quarters in the year; there would be, wouldn't there – a British joke. Simon was expelled, but he was so popular and he'd already got a scholarship to King's that, actually, it didn't seem to matter that he had been expelled for what was called 'the usual thing'. I had no idea what was 'usual' or what the 'thing' was. Of course, as I went up through my own House, I was aware of certain crushes that people had on smaller boys.

I never had any impulse to any kind of homosexual activity that I can remember. I used to think this was because I was such a straight and admirable heterosexual. I'm now inclined, looking back, to think that probably my fear was as great as my lust was diminished.
Nakedness with another person – another male – is not something that I'm... I was certainly keen on, not that you had to be naked, of course, and it had something to do with trust as well as desire and all the other things that it had to do with, and I never felt that. There were plenty of circumcised boys; I don't think it was circumcision which created this illusion. I really wasn't interested in small boys, and I was very interested in young girls.
When I was 11, I had gone on a cycle ride with a friend of mine called Martin, who was at Dartmouth.  I was very admiring of Martin because he was about 15 and he had a... he had a Royal Naval officer's cap, which is what they wore to Dartmouth, and I did think it would be nice to go in the Navy and have one of those caps. I don't think I felt any other great desire for it. Anyway, we went for a bicycle ride on Wimbledon Common, and there was a disused... no, it can't have been disused, it was an anti-aircraft emplacement. Near the anti-aircraft emplacement was a pond, and round the pond there was a barbed wire enclosure, presumably to stop people walking into it during the blackout. And on the barbed wire, there were a considerable number of black-and-white photographs, which, as the judge would say, left nothing to the imagination: men and women having a shamelessly good and naked time in various combinations and postures. And in my studious way – and I took a good deal of interest in these photographs – and then we cycled home again. I didn't really know how it was done, but clearly it was done because there they all were. I didn't know how you got people to do those things, but...
Equally during the holidays on my own, I used to take the 14 bus up to Charing Cross Road, from the age of about 14 onwards, to go to the second-hand book shops. I bought a lot of books, sixpence, thruppence, all kinds of stuff. All kinds of stuff. Mostly classical, mostly kind of proper, because that was how it was. But eventually I might find my way, certainly as I became 15 or 16, to Foyles medical department, and in Foyles medical department there were a number of solemn medical works, one of which was called I think, The Perfect Marriage by a man called [Theodoor] Van de Velde, which contained diagrams, but of course not photographs, of the lower parts of females, which looked incredibly complicated.  But it did give a lot of advice about what angles of access should be gained, and how they might be enjoyed and all the rest of it. And I stood around in Foyles until I'd stuck out too far to stay there much longer, and then I took myself to the tube and read Nietzsche or Tennyson, or whatever it was, all the way home. So I had a wealth of inexperience by the time I was 18.

I was 18 in... in the winter term of 1939, and during that term – early – a man called the Provost of Guilford came to preach a Sunday sermon. And, as I had told Canon Leeson at Winchester, I didn't mind going to chapel, I went to avoid not going, a least up until that point. And this clergyman, at some point during his sermon, said something about Jesus being a carpenter when he was a little boy, and he was a very good carpenter apparently – I didn't know where he got that – and at the end of the week, the clergyman said, he would take his carpentry to the village shop, and the village shop owner being a Jew, would give him as little for it as he possibly could. And there was the usual kind of 'nuurgh', around the chapel. And I sat there in the sixth form pews and did nothing. But afterwards, when I got back to my House, I wrote a letter to the Provost of Guildford in which I said that I thought that he had said exactly the same sorts of things that the Nazis had said, and that he ought to be ashamed of himself.
And a few days later, I was summoned to see the headmaster, the same George Turner who had asked my father what he wanted me... wanted to be done in an Anglican school.  And he showed me the letter which the Provost had received and which he had forwarded to George Turner. And George Turner said, 'The Provost is good enough to tell me that he wouldn't have said what he said if he'd known there were any Jews in the chapel'. Which is tolerably comic now, but which I didn't find particularly funny at the time. 'But', he said, 'you have upset a visitor to the school and you must write to apologise'. I was 18, people had, you know, won the VC [Victoria Cross] by my age, and there I was, holding back tears in front of a silly little headmaster figure.  And he... I said, 'Well, I don't think that I can do that. In fact I won't. Sir'. And he said, 'I think you were hoping to take the Holford Scholarship to Christchurch, weren't you? The closed scholarship of Charterhouse to Christchurch?' So I said, 'Yes, I do want to take it, sir'. So he said, 'Well, I don't think you realise that it's for me to determine who can be a candidate for that scholarship. So I suggest that you write to the Provost of Guildford, and then I will consider your appearing on the list'. So I said, 'I won't'. Believe me, I'm not a very courageous person, but fuck him, as I didn't think at the time. He said, 'Well, in that case you'll have to find your own way to Oxford, won't you?' And I said, 'I will'.
But I didn't. What happened was, that I didn't write to the Provost of Guildford, I didn't get a chance to sit for that scholarship, but my sixth form master, a man called Gibson, who was said to have a glass stomach, and the glass stomach prev  =ented him from going up to school to teach – he always taught in his house. He lay in bed, and he was a very good teacher, and a very good coach, he wasn't a great scholar, not as good as the previous, famous sixth form master who was called the Uncle Irving. But he was... he was a very good coach, and so was a man called 'Sniffy' Russell, VSHR Russell – 'Sniffy' – who used to say, 'I... I will not be slapped in the face with a wet fish'. And he sometimes was and he sometimes wasn't. He was a very sweet fellow. He wasn't as good a teacher, but he was pretty... he was a good scholar.
Gibson had a number of people who were going to go for scholarships... Oxford scholarships, and he said to me, 'Raphael, I think you should go and try for St John's College, Cambridge'. He always had bits of cotton wool adhering to his face, because he had a very sanguine complexion and he shaved with a razor which he clearly didn't manipulate with great skill, so he was always badged with the bobbles of white, like a sort of trainee Father Christmas. And I said, 'Well, I don't want to go to Cambridge'. So he said, 'No, no, go and take that and then the Oxford scholarship's in the spring, you know, you'll be... you'll be ready for that'.

So, in December, early December of 1949 I went up to Cambridge. It was snowing and I had to stay in St   John's College, but the exams were taken in Emmanuel. I used to walk in the snow to Emmanuel and there were 600 candidates for, in Charter... 600 candidates for in St John's, two Major Classical scholarships. I mean, Classics is what people did in those days if they were clever – I mean, unless they were very clever mathematicians. But, I mean, generally that was the cursus honorum. So, I went in to the exams in Emmanuel, which actually was, had a Master in those days who like the headmaster of Winchester and St Paul's and other places, didn't approve of Jews. And in Emmanuel's case, since he was the Master, he actually could arrange for no Jews whatever to be in Emmanuel. So, that's what Emmanuel meant apparently.
But it wasn't true of many Cambridge colleges, I don't think. My list of colleges were: St John's... John's, Queens', Christ, Emmanuel, Sidney Sussex – and John's came top of the choices. So I did my, I did the papers, and I was pretty good. I was...
[Q] Why not Trinity or King's?
Well, Gibson distributed his best 'horses' – he was a keen horseracing man – to various colleges, so they wouldn't compete against each other. So, it was quite arbitrary where you went. I think he was not entirely without thought in sending me to John's, because for reasons that I'll disclose it was actually a very good choice for me.

So I took my papers, and I thought I'd done pretty well. In fact, I was so smart that not only, when I did my Latin verses, I did them both in the classical Ovidian style and in a somewhat more loose [unclear] Catullan style as alternative lines, because the... in other words, I did my stuff.  That's what I thought you went to Cambridge to do. At least I thought at Oxford and Cambridge, there was nothing... but if you had it, genius, or certainly intelligence to declare, that's what counted and that was what would put you wherever it put you. So I did that.
Then I went to see my... the tutor who was in charge of the exams, the senior tutor, who was a man called RL Howland, and he was known as 'Bede' from a very early age because he was so knowledgeable. A very, very clever man, he'd also been a shot putter in the 1936 Olympics and won rugger blues and God knows what. They must have been soccer blues, because he'd been to Shrewsbury. So my interview with Howland was very different from my interview for instance with the guy at Winchester, because I asked him about what soccer was like at Shrewsbury, knowing perfectly well that is was very good and that he'd done well at it. And he spent quite a lot of time telling me about that, and he talked about Charterhouse, he assumed that I was in the first 11 cricket team even though actually I only had my House colours. And we had a very nice chat, and he said, you know, well very good to have seen you and I hope it all works out, we'll see what the results are like.
So I went back to London and I went back to my parents flat in Putney, Manor Fields, at the top of Putney Hill; the previous flat they'd been bombed out of. And I waited for the results, and I waited for the results, and I began to think they weren't going to be good because as you know, no news is always bad news. And then the doorbell rang, it was a telegraph boy, and he handed in a telegram addressed to me, and the telegram said, depend upon it, I remember it very well, 'Elected Major Scholarship at St John's College, Cambridge', you notice my voice cracks, 'Congratulations. RL Howland, tutor'.
So I said to the telegraph boy, 'Oh... er, here, have half a crown', which I'm sure is the biggest tip he'd received for a very long time. My mother was out for some reason, there was nobody else in the flat, but eventually my father came home from the office and my mother came home from whatever she was doing, and I was the Major Scholar at St John's College, Cambridge. And I said to my father I remember, 'And of course in the spring I can go up to Oxford and take the Oxford scholarship, because you know, I'd really like to go to Oxford'. And I went back to Charterhouse wearing my American trousers with the zip front, and a number of other kind of discordant non-uniform articles. I don't think I boasted to the other boys about it, but I was... I'm sure it showed that I was fairly pleased with myself. And I said to Ivor Gibson, you know, now I can, you know... I'm sure if I can get a scholarship at Cambridge, I can get one at Oxford. And he said, 'Have you ever heard about a bird in the hand?'  So I said, 'Yes, I think I probably have heard of that'. 'Yes', he said, 'well, you've got a Major Scholarship. I think, Raphael, you might settle for that'. I don't know where his accent came from, it wasn't as Australian as I'm making it, nor as sort of 'oikish', as we used to say at Charterhouse, as I'm making it, but it was a strange kind of... grungy accent.  Anyway, in other words he said, Major Scholarship, you know, take it and be glad. After all there were only two out of 600 people. So I did.

[Q] So more than 60 years after this, you're still emotional about the award of the scholarship.
Well, I... I was going to say, first of all the main thing was that I had not only got a scholarship to Cambridge, I had got a scholarship which enabled me to write to George Turner saying, that I did not need a Closed scholarship, I had got a Major Open scholarship. The main reason that I am emotional about it is that it was... well, I mean, that it was an opportunity to stuff it right up where Charterhouse hurt. Incidentally, I had not done very well at my Latin verses, my Greek was not particularly special, but my English essay, which I had prepared entirely on my own, was really what got me the scholarship. And I had prepared it on the... I had noticed among the old Charter... all the old papers to Oxford, there was always a question about the Arts in the general paper. It was put one way, it was put another way, but the Arts. And I was actually extremely keen on painting and I had won the third prize in the House painting competition at Charterhouse. I liked to paint, and I had a daughter as you know, I think, who was a great painter. Anyway, I loved to paint, and I collected all those Penguin books of [Victor] Pasmore and [William] Coldstream and... who all else. I knew a lot about art, I read a lot. But I also, once I saw that this was in the paper, I... you know, I boned up a great deal. So when the paper came, when I was at Emmanuel – the general paper – one of the questions was: the Arts and their relation to life. A good question. And I wrote, this happens to you in life – doesn't it? – I wrote at the top of the page, the first page, 'Art is one of the four things that unite men – Turgenev'. And as I wrote that down, I thought – and I've thought on other occasions in different ways, and I'm sure everybody has according to the kind of things they do: it's done. I mean, if ever there was a winning number that was it, and I then wrote about Japanese painting, I mean I knew a lot of stuff, I knew all the names, I knew the dates, I'd taken trouble.
If there had been vivas at Cambridge, which there weren't, unlike Oxford, some surly shit would have said to me: Turgenev – tell me about him. Because the truth was, I didn't know anything about Turgenev, I didn't know what the other four things... or three things that united men were; one of them, you may depend on it, is anti-Semitism, but we can come to that later. However, I did not get quizzed and I did get the scholarship. I was told by my excellent Howland, that I ought to work very hard during the period between now, which was the end of December, and coming up to Cambridge in October – scholars didn't have to do national service before they went to Cambridge, they wanted to have them while they were still good. So I then decided that I would leave Charterhouse and pursue Hilary Phillips or somebody else if I couldn't get her, in a rather more urgent way than I had before.
So, I left Charterhouse. And I wasn't given a leaving scholarship of books, which every other scholar, Major scholar in Oxford... Oxford and Cambridge, was given almost automatically. And off I went.

And I was very lucky because the question was: what would I do between December and the following October? My father had been moved sideways in Shell, in fact he had been demoted, but his job was, as I think I mentioned, running press relations, so he knew a lot of people in Fleet Street. And I said to him, can you get me a job in Fleet Street? Or at least can you get me something to do in Fleet Street?
And actually he was very good to me, my father. He was not effusive, and he was not particularly affectionate, I mean I embrace my children, I still embrace my grown children, and they embrace me, and that's what we do, but we didn't... he and I didn't do that. And my mother strangely, I was thinking the other day, I do not ever remember my mother who was very nice to me, took me to museums and various other things, I don't remember her ever putting her arms around me. And oddly enough, I actually was never once put to her breast because as soon as I was born after a caesarean section, in those days mothers didn't feed their babies and I was immediately given the bottle. Whether this marked me for life or is of no importance whatever, or both, I don't know. It's just a fact.  What the Frogs call une constatation. They would.
Anyway my father introduced me to a man called Alan Brockbank, who'd been a Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve sailor during the war, who worked on the Sunday Express. And Brockie said, well I don't mind, Freddy can come and you know... be my runner. Incredibly nice of him. Anyway, he said that. But he said, he'll have to go and see the news editor first and you know, get clearance. He said, of course he can't have a job, because the National Union of Journalists won't allow people from outside to come in and have jobs, but we can fix all that. Just get him in. I didn't care anyway of course, I wanted a few bob, because I wanted to take girls out, but I didn't... the thing was to do something and I thought I was a pretty hotshot, as you have gathered, from my prowess at Cambridge. Yes, I mean, the great thing about getting a Major scholarship at Cambridge – I know almost anyone could do it – but the great thing about it is, I have to say, it cleanses you of all further ambitions for rewards for the rest of your life. I don't mean I would refuse the Nobel Prize or that I would mind terribly if I were given this or that prize, but to tell you the truth, nobody can take my scholarship away from me. And you haven't got one have you? So what are you going to do about that? Not nice, but that's how it is. So anyway, I was pretty full of myself, but also I was okay, I was quite a good looking young man, lots of hair and everything.

My father had a friend called Guy Ramsey who was the Daily Telegraph... he was on the Daily Mail and he had scooped the rest of the press by discovering where Rudolf Hess was hiding, or had been hidden after he landed in Scotland in 1941. And Guy was a hotshot journalist and he wore his coat round his, you know, round his shoulders and he had a hat and an umbrella. Anyway, a very sweet man, and I said to him you know, I was going to go to see the guy, at the Sunday... Daily Express and he said, well tell me how you're getting on. So I went to see the news editor who was slumped in his seat with ash and... he was... news editor of the Sunday Express, you know, was a high office, but it also was a high office which had Max Beaverbrook sitting on it night and day. Anyway, so Stanley Head said, 'What makes you think that you could be a journalist?' And I said... I said whatever I said, I don't believe I would have mentioned the Cambridge scholarship, I wasn't that stupid anyway. So he said, 'Well, I don't know. Brockie seems willing to take you on. We can't pay you more than just you know, a few bob expenses'. I said,' I don't mind about the money, sir, I don't want money'. Money! Jews and money was a thing which had always obsessed me. I wished I'd not been Jewy, God help me. Anyway, so Stanley Head said, 'Well, what you'd better do is you'd better go and do some kind of a story, you know. Find something to write about in the street or something, and write me the story and bring it back and you know, I'll tell you whether or not we can actually, you know, allow you to come into the newsroom'.
I had done verses like Ovid. I had done proses like Cicero. I had written Greek verses like Sophocles, you know, and I now had to do a news story for the Sunday Express. So, in my best English essay prize-winning form, I wrote up whatever it was that I wrote up. And because I wasn't entirely conceited or stupid, I thought I'd just show it to Guy Ramsey before I showed it to the news editor of the Sunday Express. So I showed it to Guy and I said, 'Do you think I need to do anything to this?' And Guy who was a very nice man said, 'Oh yes', he said, 'I think you should do something to it. I think you should tear it up. Because', he said, 'you've got semicolons in this!' He said, 'There isn't such a thing as a semicolon in the Daily Express or the Sunday Express or the Evening Standard. And', he said, 'you've got three syllable words in it!' The bottom line is then, I would say, is writing for the Express, it doesn't have to be followed, but the basic rule is: no sentence longer than three words, no paragraph longer than three sentences, and no story longer than three paragraphs. It's not an absolute rule, but if in doubt apply it. So what we're going to do is... Well, I am quite a quick learner, you have to be, that's what I did in the Classics, that's what Classicists do, they imitate. So I re-did it with Guy's guidelines and took it in to Stanley Head, and he was still slumped there and… 'It's not bad, okay, come in on Tuesday'.

You have to have friends. I'd never had great friends in the sense of lofty friends and I've never had access to great influences, but you make use of what you can, and Guy got me in there as my father had got me in there first. So I went in and I went to work with Brockie.
And it was the first time that I'd ever met working class English people. Because journalists in those days were not graduates, they were you know, leg men. They went about. The Sunday Express newsroom except on Sun... Saturdays, when the paper was gearing up for the... 'the stone' as they say, there were only seven or eight people in the newsroom. They wrote everything. Brockie was the diplomatic correspondent, he was the naval correspondent, he was the defense correspondent, he was the diplomatic correspondent and he was the industrial correspondent. And sometimes he was Alan Brockbank and sometimes he wasn't, depending on how they wanted to arrange the by-lines. But he didn't sit in the office like journalists do now, looking it all up on a screen, getting hand-outs and phone calls, he went everywhere, and I went with him. 
So I had a marvellous education in the underbelly of, to some extent, business and also politics. We went to the pubs, where the people like Herbert Morrison and others used to congregate, outside Transport House, and I began to hear how real people spoke in England. Not provincial people, they were mostly Londoners, but there they all were, and I learnt you know, just how shabby and cheap most people were. It was very reassuring. It was good fun and eventually one day I remember Guy said to me, 'You doing anything, Fred?' I said, 'No, no, no, sir'. I nearly always called people 'sir' in those days, I mean, I tried not to, but even with journalists... 'Oh', he said, 'would you write this up as if you were in Peking, old man?' And he handed me a piece of copy from the Press Association which was about the fact that whatever had happened in Peking, I don't know what, and instantly, you know – nothing comes more easily than falsehood – instantly I was, 'As I was looking out of the Forbidden City, I noticed large crowds had assembled, and blah, blah, blah'. All of this. Well, that was okay.

I used to go with Brockie and I'd watch him writing the stories and I learnt. And one day he said, Oh Fred, pop down to... pop down to Olympia would you and have a look at the British Industries Fair. Now... see if it's got anything there that would be of interest to us. The British Industries Fair happened every year and it was as it sounds, perhaps it still happens, a sort of showcase for British industry. And in theory you would have thought that the paper would wish to applaud what was going on there since they were trying to sell crap cars and various other things around the world. But the Beaver, who determined the content of everything in the paper, even though supposedly he didn't, was hostile to the British Industries Fair because it cut across his favourite form of... sort of international business, which was what he called 'imperial preference', that was, the British should favour Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa as it then was and so on, and that was where British trade should go, not to Europe, which was what the British Industries Fair was trying to do. So it was no use coming back with good news about sales to Europe. And by osmosis I had acquired all the prejudices necessary to be a Beaverbrook journalist in no time at all. Nothing good about Lord Louis Mountbatten – ever, was one of the key things, quite rightly by the way, because he had actually consigned a large number of ill-trained Canadians to their doom in the Dieppe commando landing which was under-trained, under-rehearsed, and entirely misconceived. The Beaver never forgave him, and I don't suppose many people did, except of course Prince Charles.
So I went down there and I really... everything was good news, they were selling cars, they were selling all kinds of stuff, and everyone kept telling me this, until eventually somebody said, you know the Germans are here, don't you? The Germans!? He said, the Germans – they're not supposed to be. He said, but they're wandering round, he said, and you know what they do? They come up to the people who are buying English stuff and they say, 'Psst, want to buy a Volkswagen?' I said, really? 'Ah yes, sir. All the time, sir'. Well, I went back to the office and... Royal Sovereign typewriter, get the paper in, carbon, bap, bap, bap, bap, bap, bap, bap. And I pulled it out and I gave it to the chief sub, Bernard Drew, garter sleeve, horn-rimmed specs.
'This is very good stuff, Fred. Good stuff. Could you, could you bulk it out a bit?' Bulk it out? So I bulked it out. I don't know what more I said, but I'm sure there was something. I don't think it was entirely false, but it was... whatever it was. Anyway and it appeared in the Scottish edition of the paper which went to press at five o'clock on a Saturday. Before even the English football results were in, because the Scots didn't care about those. And they were all incredibly nice to me. Bernard Drew and Bernard Harris who was the chief feature writer and Brockie. And after... after the paper had gone to bed, they took me across to the pub, across the other side of Fleet Street, called The Hole in the Wall, I think, and they all bought me drinks. And they were incredibly nice I mean they were really, really nice. And I became an Express man and I did... I did quite a lot of that.

Meanwhile, as they say, I decided that I would... I still hadn't found a female and Hilary Phillips was lost to me, because once she knew that I was going to be gone for three years, as I thought it was, to Cambridge, you know, she just couldn't wait. Because she was going to be old. I think she actually was very fond of me. But... So I abandoned thoughts of Hilary and I then decided that in order to find a female, I couldn't do that very easily because I didn't know any in Putney, I went to the drama club at the Liberal Jewish Synagogue, the same place where I had, God help me, been what was called confirmed. I can't remember anything about it much, but there it was. And there were a lot of people there and they were very nice. And I... I'd always been quite good at... at amateur dramatics, dramatising, and they... I remember they had a pair of steps, they were rehearsing something or other, and I climbed the steps and the script said, 'and he falls down the stairs'. So I fell down the stairs, upon which they all gathered round because they thought I'd hurt myself, which I actually by chance had not. Anyway, I... I can't remember what the plan was, if they were doing whatever they were doing, probably reading... reading a play or something, and about the second or third time that I went with no great enthusiasm for the females, though one or two of them were quite pretty and willing to come out, a particular tall, dark and beautiful girl walked in wearing a green mackintosh and flat shoes, and she had a very nice smile.
And – I don't know about love, I don't know about anything much in that department in terms of naming it, but at first sight she was a very good first sight. And after a while she and I began to talk and I discovered that she had never been to the synagogue before. Her parents actually were fairly Orthodox, at least her father was. I don't know why she came or how she came. Anyway, she'd come presumably because she had actually graduated from London University where she'd been a history scholar. So, I managed to weave into the dialogue that I had got a Major scholarship at Cambridge, upon which her interest was... accelerated. And we got on very well. And her name was Betty Glatt. And in due time she and I became friends. And in not all that much longer time we became lovers. Because she said she loved me and I loved her, which was a very un-modern way of becoming lovers, but that's what we did. She ran very quickly. She liked playing cricket. We went to watch Middlesex together. We didn't become lovers incredibly quickly, but during the course of that summer we did. And I was happy. And I had never been happy in England from the day I landed in 1938, so it was quite an extraordinary experience. I didn't entirely forget Hilary Phillips, nor was I entirely immune to looking at other girls, but there we were. Now Betty Glatt's real name was Sylvia Betty Glatt – for some reason her parents called her Betty, presumably because Betty was quite a common name in those days of movie stars. I think her father was very keen on Betty Grable. So was Wittgenstein, so there we are.

So anyway, I asked her name and she said it was Betty Glatt and I said, is that all your names? I don't know why I did, but she said, no, my name is Sylvia Betty Glatt, but everyone calls me Betty. And I said, oh really, I said, do you... do you have a nickname at all? So she said, well... actually my brother-in-law does call me something, but promise me you'll never call me that and I'll tell you what it is. And I said, yes of course. And she said, well, he calls me Beetle, because I've got this shiny black hair like a black beetle. So of course I've never called her anything else, that's the way the world goes. But I have called it her [sic] for a very long time.
Anyway, that all worked very well, why she attached herself to me, you would have to ask her. She wasn't particularly concerned about getting married, she wanted to get a job and she was going to get a job, and the fact that I was going to Cambridge didn't seem to faze her. And I was very lucky.
So I left the Sunday Express and we went... we went to theatres, we went to all sorts of things together, we didn't make love a lot because it was very easy... difficult to find a place to do it. Usually in her mother's house, her parents' house on a Saturday afternoon because her father had a shop in Marylebone High Street where... where they were always going and her mother knew better, having two other daughters, than to... than to intrude. Anyway, Beetle is not a person who accepts 'no' if she means 'yes'.

I went up to Cambridge and my mother gave me half a bottle of whisky, as a sort of gesture of maturity. And in the train I... there was an American guy in the same compartment, and I thought, poor guy he's all... coming up to Cambridge all by himself, and I was very friendly and said, you know you should come and see me in St John's. And his name was George Plimpton, he told me. And actually he had already spent three or four years at Harvard, I think. Anyway I didn't, know that, he was just a young guy and I was being a nice, friendly pseudo-American. Anyway, so I went up, I bought myself a gown. I remember thinking it was a shame that I went to Cambridge because in Oxford you have a long gown if you're a Scholar. At Cambridge there's no distinction between, between Scholars and hoi polloi. It should be tous pollous, but never mind that.
I went into college, I had very nice rooms at the top of Third Court, a garret all to myself because I was a Scholar. And I waited for things to happen. Now my father had said, when I went up to Cambridge, that I should be very careful, again a very kind of English-Jewish careful... note. Wait for them to come to you. Don't push yourself on them. There was never any advice better intentioned or more totally laming or misconceived that I've ever received. Because of course, I went up to Cambridge in the autumn of 1950, and it was not a time when being modest was particularly in fashion. But I didn't know that.
So I waited for people to come and find out how brilliant I was, but of course they knew how brilliant they were and they didn't really need to find out how brilliant I was. So I... I did my Latin and my Greek, but I was very disappointed quite candidly, and for good reason, to find that is was actually very like what I'd done at school. I was doing more Latin proses and more Latin verses and more Greek proses and more Greek verses supposedly to a higher standard, but I didn't know how to do it to a particular higher standard. I went to see my tutor and I was on the – Mr Howland – and I was on the staircase waiting to go in, and I sat next to a small person who spoke in a voice which I found it very difficult to understand because it was in a Liverpudlian accent. He had a really strong Liverpudlian accent, and I'd never heard anybody talk like that. He was a Scholar as well as, you know, he was a Classicist and all the rest of it. I... eventually I got in to see... oh, he was also it turned out a Major scholar by the way, but not of my year, the one before, because he'd been in the army first. I got in to see Howland, and Howland said to me in the way that more like a house master really than like an intellectual prompter. 'Of course we expect you to do very well here, but', he said, 'you'll remember to have a good time, won't you?' Which I thought was rather decent. And I was also, because I was a bit puritanical about other peoples' behaviour and also about my own, I was slightly shocked that he didn't suggest that I should read 30 books before breakfast. Anyway that was okay.
Sullivan then became a friend of mine and so did my neighbour at the top of Third Court, whose name was Tony Becher, who was a Minor scholar. And the other person at the top of Third Court... of my staircase, there were three sets at the top, was a man called David Wilson, who was a geologist – no, an archaeologist.  But he wasn't a scholar and he didn't drink because he was a Methodist and we didn't really have a lot to do with him. He ended up by being Sir David Wilson, the director of the British Museum, but at the time we thought he was rather discountable – very nice chap actually, full of humour. We correspond from time to time, very nice man.

To go quickly through my first year, I... I didn't meet all the brilliant people I expected to meet. I didn't know quite what to do. As usual with people who are somewhat vain, I thought the standard, for instance, of the amateur dramatic club, which was the posh drama club in Cambridge – you know that – the amateur dramatic club, I thought that the audition would be too difficult or me to take. Quite ludicrous by the way, because I was quite good at doing stuff, but I was very timid and, above all, a lifelong failing: I was more afraid of not winning than I was willing to commit myself actually to enter the competition.
There's an old Jewish story about the man who kept complaining that he didn't win the lottery. And eventually one day, he's moaning and moaning and moaning, and the heavens opened and God's voice comes out and He says, 'Jacob, you want to win the lottery, buy a ticket!' I, on the whole, have not bought tickets in that way, and oddly enough I haven't won many lotteries. I've won a few, and it ain't gone that badly, but it's still true.
So – I really had quite a good time. I played some bridge because I was quite good at bridge. Guy Ramsey was the bridge correspondent at the end of the Daily Telegraph, and I'd play with my father and all the rest of it. I was quite a good bridge player. Not quite good enough but pretty good. The... the senior member of the university ran the bridge club, he was a man called Peter Swinnerton-Dyer. He was a baronet and an Etonian and a very good mathematician, a Fellow of Trinity. And he divided the incoming players into three categories: probables, possibles, and awful warnings.
I was lucky enough to feature as a probable, but I was never actually better than being a probable, but I did play for Cambridge and all the rest of it. And I played with Richard Bird, the guy who'd got the scholarship that I didn't get at Winchester, and I met again, and he was... by that time a Scholar of Clare. And I had tea with Richard, and I smooched about and I joined a second-rate drama club, and by the end of the year I hadn't really done anything much and I didn't even get a First in the first part of the Classical tripos – whatever they're called – preparatories, I think... prelims – probably because I wasn't taking enough trouble. But the college was very nice, and didn't seem to bother about it, and the great thing was that Beetle and I were going to go abroad together.
And I arranged with John Sullivan, who'd become a mate of mine and who was a very dedicated Liverpudlian scholar, because he was the son of a docker. And the son of a Liverpudlian docker is not going to go back to Liverpool if he can bloody well help it, and certainly not to the docks. So Sullivan John Patrick had his eyes firmly on a First Class degree or better, and the academic ladder which lead out of Liverpool and possibly, and in fact, out of England.
I wasn't going to be an academic; I was going to be a writer. It was in my notebook. I wrote about him. I wrote about Becher. I wrote about everything. I wrote about poor Tony Becher who'd said to me, somebody told me that piss is a spermicide, so perhaps you should piss up the woman first. I made a note of this. It didn't seem to be a particularly gallant form of making love but never mind about that, it was worth noting. I noted lots of things, not all disagreeable, but strange. Strange.
Anyway, John Sullivan agreed to say that he was going to come abroad with me on a trip to the continent, my father was going to give me a small amount of money. My father was actually very generous in that regard, he didn't have much, but he did give me money. Strangely enough at Cambridge he paid my Buttery bill, that is to say, for any extras like wine and cigarettes and all the rest of it, but he wouldn't pay my book bill. Very Oxford, I think, probably. First things first. Odd. Anyway, there were libraries. I did buy books, actually. I don't know how, but I did.
And I read a lot of novels. I went to the union, and I joined the union and I... they had a very good library, and I read stacks of novels. That's what I was going to do. I read foreign authors as well, but I never thought of reading them in their own languages for some reason, I don't know why. Perhaps I wasn't... I just wasn't very good at them. I've become better since.

Beetle and I, she just got some money from working in London, she left her job and in June of 1950 we set off for France. I had not been to France since 1938 when I went with my parents to Knokke-le-Zoute for a week holiday. So it was all incredibly new and exciting. I read books about France of course.
And we went first to Paris, and then we went down to the south in a bus, a Phocien car, which took two days to go by Lyon to Nice. And it was wonderful. And then we took the bus along to St Tropez which was in those days was just a small fishing village. I mean, it was quite smart because I think even then Brigitte Bardot and people had gone there but she wasn't there at all. It was quite a smart Saint-Germain-des-Prés kind of place to go, and we put up in a little pension called Au Bout du Monde. And we lay on the beach and got sunburnt, because we both thought we didn't get sunburnt because we had dark complexions because we'd never been anywhere near a sun as hot as the one in the south of France in June. And we still made love, in a very burnt condition, and then we set out to walk from St Tropez to a place called Ramatuelle, a little hill village about 11 kilometres out of St Tropez.
And it was a very long walk with our luggage and we had those non-pliant antique sandals which rubbed in every possible place that they could; even when they didn't touch you they seemed to be creating blisters. And we walked along and walked along, and eventually a French army lorry came along with two guys in it. And they stopped, and they said – it was all like an American musical – where are you going? And we said, Ramatuelle. Allez. And off we went. And we found a little room, the woman called Madame Isnard. I think it was £3 or so a week... 5000 francs I think it was, francs were about 1200 to the pound. And it had a room and a bed, a big bed on... in the attic, and a kitchen. Of course, it didn't have any running water – you had to go to the fountain in the village. And we were there for six weeks. And every morning I sat with my portable typewriter and start... and worked on a novel. I worked and I worked and I worked, and it was all about a little boy going to Charterhouse, or an equivalent Charterhouse, and all the terrible things that happened to him. But it was written in a style which I had learnt from Somerset Maugham. What I'd learnt from Somerset Maugham, particularly from Of Human Bondage, which I'd read when I was 15, was that there was a way, so to speak, of representing your own pitiful experience – Maugham had stammered and had a miserable time at school, and he had created a hero who was lame, which stood for the stammer, called Philip Carey – and what I noticed in Maugham which gave me the incentive to become a novelist was that you can process experience in a cold, clear way so that it eliminates – you hope – self-pity, but enables you, nevertheless, to use your own personal experience. So I set about doing that. And Beetle read the pages, and she seemed to think they were okay, and in the afternoons we made love and then we walked to the beach, either to that beach, l'Escalet or to that beach which was called Pampelonne. Pampelonne was where the American forces had landing in 19... August of 1944. It was completely deserted, vineyards in front of it, now, of course, it's huge high-rises and all the rest of it. 
And we used to walk down there, or to l'Escalet. One time at l'Escalet, there was a Swede and he was standing above us. We didn't take our clothes off at l'Escalet because there were too many people, but he stood up there and this voice came across the beach, 'Adam and Eve!' which was a strange moment. Anyway we took it to be some kind of a... blessing. It's easy when you're happy.
Anyway we went to l'Escalet where we were... where we could take our clothes off and swim naked on the beach, and I remember a French couple came and sat miles away from us. We'd... I hurriedly put my clothes back on again and... 'Bougez pas, nous sommes aussi des  naturistes!' Anyway it was all fine. We had a good time. And then it all got a bit sad because we were going to have to leave. Our happiness was very fragile. Beetle was unhappy because she was happy and I was unhappy because she was unhappy, which is not an unknown thing to happen to both of us all through our lives. And I went back to Cambridge.

But before I went back to Cambridge, about a week before we were due to leave Ramatuelle, I realised that I was never going to finish this novel, because I'd only got to a very early stage of my leading character's – Paul, I think his name was – misfortunes. So I said to myself... I said to Beetle, actually, because we'd been in a play together called Hay Fever, Noel Coward's Hay Fever, which we'd done for this Jewish dramatic society. She'd been, played... she played my sister Sorel and I played Simon. She called me Simon in those days. Anyway, I said to Beetle, you know, Noel Coward wrote Hay Fever in three days, or at least he said he did. So listen, I'm going to stop writing this novel, because we've only got five days before we have to leave. I think I'll write a play.
So I did. And I wrote a play in I think three or four days. It was called With This Ring. A suburban love story, it was quite a good little play, quite funny, and it did have some good lines in it. I only remember one or two. One of them was, 'she chased him... no, he chased her all through the Olympic Games and she fell at the last hurdle'. Which I thought was quite funny. And the other one was, about some divorce which had taken place, 'she said, yes, she said, it was a terrible divorce, the judge said he'd never been so shocked'. Which judges said a lot in those days by the way. So anyway it was quite a good little play. We went back to London and we got back there in mid-August I think it was, no it must have been earlier than that actually, towards the end of July. There was still time for my Jewish friends at The Alumni to put my play on, if they would, and they would. So we... I rehearsed it, I directed it, because among Jews, you know, I'm quite confident. So I played the leading part and I directed it and Beetle played a female lead and all the rest of it. And we did it and it went very well. We played at a little theatre called the Westbourne Grove Theatre, which still exists, they've refurbished the building. And people came and it was really nice. I painted the pictures, I did everything. Except what I didn't do. Anyway we got a lot of laughs, it was fine.
And here's the kicker. Not that I knew it, The Stage, you know, the theatre newspaper, sent a critic there, so after the show, completely without my knowledge there was a review in The Stage. It was quite a long review, I mean about half a column, and it was on the whole very, very enthusiastic about the play. Not that enthusiastic about my performance, because it said, 'the director even walked backwards on the stage'. I didn't know there was anything particularly wrong about clearing in order to let people through. But apparently in the theatre you don't walk backwards. Anyway, there it was and that was really nice. And I went back to Cambridge.

And when I got back to Cambridge... it's the small details which to me are always interesting in stories. It's not obsessive memory which leads me to remember them it's just that I do remember them. As with Jacques Doneux getting under the train, I want to know what happens when you're under the train, not when you get off it again. Anyway, I went back. John Sullivan and Tony Becher and I had all now got rooms out of college. But Tony Becher had a row with his landlord over something or other and eventually was told that he could... there was a spare pair of rooms in college which they weren't going to need after all, and he could share them with somebody else. And he elected to share them with John Sullivan, which is entirely his right, but I have a great capacity for taking offence, or for imagining – which is worse – that I have been rejected. I felt quite bad about that. I felt quite betrayed actually, and not in the least proud of thinking that I felt betrayed but it's true.
So a certain kind of coldness descended upon my diction, as it does when I am displeased. And I went into Hall, I don't know, a night or two later whenever it was, and here they all were. Not Tony and Sullivan, but other people that I knew from the first year. And they were talking together, and in a way which I have, a mixture of vanity and paranoia, I sort of thought they were talking about me. And funnily enough – Stanley Kubrick had a great line which I've used several times, which is, 'paranoia means knowing what's going on'. And as it happens my paranoia was entirely just, because at a certain point the whole platoon of people – the 'arties' of St John's College – moved all of their places up towards where I was sitting sulkily by myself. And one of them said, 'You've written a play'. And they, of course, being theatricals had read The Stage.
To my relief they did not refer to the synagogue which may or not have been mentioned as the source of the play, I'm not particularly proud of this, but that's the way it goes. 
I had to read the grace, by the way, in St John's College Cambridge, ending with per Christum Jesum Dominum nostrum which I had no particular difficulties in saying, because after all, in Latin you can say anything. Oculi omnium in te sperant Domine, et tu das illis cibum in tempore. All eyes are on you, Lord, and you give them food in good time.
So suddenly this play that I'd written was the entrée to God knows not the highest echelon in Cambridge, but a certain... deference I excited among these people. Because a play, put on in London, reviewed in The Stage... so that was nice.

The play was actually a very important thing because a few days later, somebody that that group did not like, but who was involved in something called the Young Writers' Group, asked me whether I would enter the play for a play competition they were running. So I said, well listen, my play is about, you know, suburban... I don't know whether I said Jews, whether they were meant to be Jews, but they're about very suburban people in London, and I know enough about Cambridge at this point to know that a play about suburban people in London is not going to win a play competition. So I won't enter it. If I'm not going to win I'm not going to enter it. So he said, well, you know, that's your decision and... And then he went and talked to the president of the Young Writers' Group, a man called Peter Firth, who late became a bishop.
And the word came back that he understood, but Peter Firth said, would I please enter the play because, to put it candidly, they were very short of entrants. And it really would be nice to be able to have more than one play or two plays from which to select the winner. If I would enter my play it... he understood what I... he understood what I felt and I was probably right, but nevertheless he would say something nice about it in Varsity when he wrote about the competition. So... I happened to have a copy with me. I don't know why or how I did, but I did. Anyway so I entered the play. And sure enough, it did not win. What won was a play by a man called Hugh Thomas who is better known now as a historian of the Spanish Civil War and a member of the House of Lords, and a very, very senior kind of person and very superior in every possible way. And he wrote a rather clever play, I have to say, which postulated that Venice had never been deprived of its independence by Napoleon, had remained an independent republic and so continued to be one in the period of 1939 whenever it was, so that was when the action took place with funny Germans and funny Italians and all the rest of it in this little republic seeking favour from the Doge. And the set was designed by Mark Boxer who was in those days... well, became a very successful cartoonist and man-about-town and shagger of ladies and things like that. And my play was mentioned very nicely by Peter Firth and I didn't go and see Hugh Thomas's play, but they were auditioning for the part of the American ambassador in Hugh's play – I forgot to mention this. And Peter Firth said, 'Why don't you come and audition for the part of the American ambassador?' So I said okay. So I went to the ADC which I'd never been into before and there they all were installed, you know, being important, and I came in and picked up a text and said, 'Why have you got a Nazi in the, you know, why are you having Nazis in a gondola? I mean don't you know what those people do?' And they all went kind of... like this because there weren't any Americans in Cambridge in those days. I did it probably better than I've just done it and at slightly greater length. And they all went, very, very good, thank you very, very much. And I then waited as one does to discover what the result of this audition was going to be. And a couple of days later in Park Street, just up from the ADC where I had my digs, I met a man called Toby Robertson. A very tall, I'm sure, old Etonian. And he said, 'Oh Raphael, yes, I was meaning to get in touch with you'. Well, you know what that means. It means a) he didn't want to because he didn't want you to hear what he had to say, and he'd funked it. So I said, yes, and he said, 'Very, very good audition. Very, very good audition. We all thought you were the best'. And? 'Well, here's the thing actually. I'm sure you'll understand. We sort of felt that we should have a more experienced actor, you know, because the play kind of needs experienced actors. So Peter Firth is going to be the American ambassador, with a sort of Boston accent, you know?' So I said, 'Hmmm' and walked away. And many years later, I'm very pleased to say that I was able to employ Toby Robertson for a very small part in a radio feature. And I was really, really nice to him. Anyway that seemed to be that with the play. I never went to see Mark's... Hugh Thomas's play, I expect it was quite good and Mark's set was very adventurous and all the rest of it.

And then my second year ended, and I still hadn't really done anything very much. And then... end of my second year, John Sullivan was, I think, conscious that I had not been pleased at being excluded by him and Becher and had to spend my entire year in digs in Park Street. And he arranged for me to share rooms in the following year with a man called Brian Moore, who wore a tie slide and a correct shirt and all the rest of it and didn't approve of men taking women to the rooms, and he was a pain in the ass British style. But no harm was meant.
Anyway, I was in my rooms when one day Tony Beecher arrived with somebody I didn't know. And his name was Leslie Bricusse. And he was the secretary of the Footlights even though he had only come up the previous year; he'd just been made secretary for the current year which was just beginning. And Tony Becher said, 'Oh Leslie wants... he's very keen to meet you'. And I said, 'Oh, really - why?' And he said, 'Well I was talking to Peter Firth', who was the president by that time of the Footlights, 'and he... I was asking him who wrote the best dialogue in the play competition. And he said you did'. So I thought... I said, 'Oh, that's nice'. Then he said, 'The thing is this, I want to write musical comedies, and there isn't a musical comedy club in Cambridge. I'm going to form a musical comedy club, I want you to write musical comedy. I want you to write the dialogue and I'll write the songs and the music, and Robin Beaumont, who is the Footlights director of music will, you know, orchestrate it and conduct and all the rest of it. What do you say?'
So I said, 'Well, I don't... I don't want to write musical comedies particularly'. I said, 'The only bit of musical comedies that I every listen to when I go to the cinema are the bits between the songs'. He said, 'Well, that's what I want you to write!' Leslie was very smooth. He wore, so to speak, designer specs and a sports jacket with vents at the back and a yellow waistcoat and creased trousers and desert boots and he was very clean. And very keen. So. I said, 'Well, I don't know'. He said, 'Do you think Hugh Thomas would like to do it?' So I said, 'Well, I don't know'. So he said, 'Will you come with me and see him?' So I said, 'You don't need me to come'. 'No', he said, 'you don't understand. I want you to do this. I want you to do this. Because your dialogue is what I need. Don't let me down'.
So we went to see Hugh Thomas in Queens', and Leslie said that he had this idea, you know, he'd seen the play and would he be interested in doing a musical comedy. And Hugh said, 'Well, I don't know, it sort of depends what it was, you know'. So Leslie said, 'Well, you got any ideas?' So he said, 'Well... we could do it in the Balkans with sort of youth leaders and fairies'. And Leslie said, 'Er...youth leaders and fairies?' 'Yes, because then... sort of youth leaders sort of communists and, you know, sort of up for the modern world, and the fairies, sort of, you know, sort of... you know, people like... Dracula, you know, yes, people like that in the Balkans stand for the sort of old way, and there'd be a sort of competition between them'.
Leslie said, 'Yes, yes, hmmm... um, can I think about it?' He said, 'Yes, of course you can. Yes, of course'. I don't think Hugh had any intention whatever of having anything to do with this. But anyway, he was pretty bloody full of himself and he hasn't emptied yet. So off we went back across the mathematical bridge out of Queens' on to Silver Street Bridge, and Leslie said, 'Youth leaders and fairies!' so I was elected.

During the... at the end of my second year, I should have said all this before, at the end of my second year Beetle and I went again, first of all to Florence and then to Menton, and I started another novel, which I didn't finish, and then... then we came back... back to England.
And I was conscious that I didn't want to do Classics Part Two. By that time I had taken the second of the prelims and had got another 2.1 which wasn't good enough and wasn't interesting and I was tired of Latin and Greek. So I decided to switch to Philosophy which had been advocated by one of my supervisors at St John's, a man called Renford Bambrough who was a Classicist who'd become a Moral Scientist as we then called them. And in order to become a Moral Scientist he said, it's no use doing it for one year. And I thought my third year was not enough time to take a Moral Sciences course in full, I could do prelims in one year and I would have to take tripos in the second. So I would have to stay for a fourth year. And I asked my father, with some trepidation, whether he would allow me to stay for a fourth year, and to Cedric's great credit, while he shaved in shorts and suspendered socks and all the rest of it, he didn't even think about it, he said, yes of course that's... that's okay. Which was very nice. I think he'd been four years at Oxford, because I think that was the course in those days when you did Greats, so he wasn't terribly surprised. Perhaps he thought it was going to be four anyway.
Anyway, I had another year. So I was able to sort of think I could retrieve my Cambridge career, such as it was, in the second two years instead of just one. Anyway, so that's that. I agreed to do the book on the Lady at the Wheel, I can't remember when I wrote it. But also Leslie said to me, 'Do you want to be in the Footlights?' So I said, 'Well, don't you have to do an audition and sing?' 'No', he said, 'I'm the secretary, if you want to be in the Footlights, you're in the Footlights'.
So from being sort of... a very St John's outsider I became something quite different in my second, in my third and fourth years. I wrote things for the... for the Footlights and, of course, it wasn't as difficult as I imagined to get laughs. Eventually I was in the cast for the May week revue of that year, got my laughs there. Something... and I was going to do the book of the Lady at the Wheel, which I'd done quite a lot of before the end of the year. I was going to perfect it in the vacation again, the long vacation – I was going abroad with Beetle again. And Leslie said, 'Well, you should be on the committee next year'. So I said, 'Well, I don't care about being on the committee'. 'No', he said, 'no, no. You should be on the committee, it will be good. You can do the press because you're good at the press, you know people in the press. It'll be good. I'll fix it'.
So after the end of the revue, they had the meeting of the present committee to nominate the committee for the following year and there were various people on it all of whom were very friendly to me and to Beetle who'd been in Cambridge quite a lot during the course of the revue. Nobody had ever said a word, an unkind word or an unpleasant word to me that I could recall. Leslie came out of the meeting to say that... well, something rather unexpected had happened. Three people on the committee, out of however many there were, didn't think that a Jew should be on the committee of the Footlights. If I say I couldn't believe my ears, it's not true because, of course, whenever I hear anything like that I believe my ears, and believe me, I've heard quite a bit of it. But Leslie was a strange man because he was not aggressive to anybody, in fact he was extremely courteous and hospitable and generous. But he was quite annoyed, and he said, 'I will get those people off the committee next year and I will get you on. But don't do anything now. Don't get upset, don't say anything, it will all be all right'. Well, it wasn't a very big deal anyway, so I went away with Beetle to Luca in Tuscany, on the advice of a man called Nicolai Rubinstein, who was a great Tuscan historian who had taught Beetle at Westfield. And I wrote, not another novel, not a play, I wrote the book for this musical and lot of numbers for the Footlights. And it was the low road, but I was not entirely averse to taking it – it sloped towards quite interesting destinations.

Anyway, so we came back to England and I... directed the play of Lady at the Wheel at the Arts Theatre and Leslie directed the songs. And he collected lots of very good-looking girls; he was very good at collecting girls. He did the collecting. And with good voices, and all had 16-inch waists and 36-inch busts and 34-inch hips, and all the rest of it. And he was very keen on statistics.
And we did it, and Leslie wanted the president of the ADC, who was an American called Gordon Gould to be in the musical, and would I talk to him? I'm sure Gordon Gould was a Jew, he was also born in Chicago, probably about a month or two, a year or two before me, but he was very solemn and serious, and since he was by this time president of the ADC, he was not disposed to be brought to play low comedy. But for some reason or other I did persuade him and he came along. Pretty damn condescending he was, but I gave him a terrific scene at the beginning of the second act and when the play opened he was immediately, as people can always tell, immediately... an incredible, vulgar success.
The laughs came quickly, the applause was terrific, the second act began with Gordon Gould doing a number being a hungover potentate at a very long breakfast table. And it was all, went like cream and the houses were packed right through, and Leslie said that people wanted to transfer it to London. And the smart people in Cambridge, Karl Miller who was the editor of Granta and Mark Boxer who was the arbiter of elegance and various other people of course were horrified by the utter vulgarity of this musical comedy, which in all truth was a perfectly harmless piece of nonsense. Somewhat like Salad Days had been or was the play which Sandy Wilson had done, a mock-up of the twenties which was a great success in London.
Anyway, we had a huge hit and no-one could deny it. Varsity offered me a column to write every week, which I was perfectly happy to do. A man called Michael Winner was the editor. Michael was... Michael was a completely kind of Jewy Jew and he didn't give a damn and he actually could have spoken perfectly proper, but he didn't. And he was a smart man who'd had a column in a South London paper before he went up to Cambridge and he was... Michael Winner and his father was also an extremely rich man which never hurt anybody's confidence or not always.

So actually, I had a hell of a good time for the next year and the following year I was... the following year, it was my last year, we did... we did Lady at the Wheel and then we did the Footlights. And Leslie at that time wanted to have the Footlights go to London because the previous year Peter Firth had been president, had been offered a transfer to London which none of us knew about, but he was in the middle of a spiritual transformation which took him into the Church and high places like that, and he didn't want anything more to do with that. So that year they didn't go.
Leslie... when Leslie was president the following year, and I was on the committee after the others had been quietly pushed aside, he of course immediately made contact with the people who wanted to take the show to London the previous year, and they came down to see our show which was actually very, very good. I did a number about Graham Greene and Evelyn Waugh, and that was all fun. So the thing ended and Leslie had fixed for us to spend a week in Oxford trying out the revised show, and then we were going to have two weeks in London at the Phoenix Theatre. So suddenly, everything was kind of: okay.
There was only one small thing, of course, which was that what with the theatre and the Footlights and all the rest of it I did not do a great deal of work. Which didn't mean that philosophy was not important to me, it was very important. And it's very easy to skate over the bits which are a bit naive and all the rest of it. But I had the idea, which was not foolish, if naive, that philosophy of a certain kind could eliminate prejudice and in particular religious prejudice by demonstrating that certain propositions had no value and various other things of this kind. And I was very keen on it and was pretty good at it. I didn't have to do Spinoza and Hume and various other people because that was not my bag. I did Ancient Philosophy, Tony Becher did Modern Philosophy, because we both switched to Philosophy. And we went to Renford Bambrough for supervisions. I was good at it, but I didn't want to do a lot of reading and luckily in philosophy in those days, under John Wisdom who was the professor, he didn't believe in reading, he believed in doing it. Wittgenstein was often said not to have read a great deal of philosophy because in a sense we were advocates of the end of philosophy. Philosophy was not a means to reach the truth; science was the way the truth was mentioned, philosophy was the handmaiden of science and made sure that propositions fitted together in a properly articulated and logical fashion. At least, that was the story.
I loved it and I took it very seriously and I, of course, enjoyed all the private language of philosophy which included various kinds of hand gestures and tiltings of the head at things that people said for instance, when people said – well, somebody once said in my hearing, about something, 'It did cross my mind', he said, to which I replied, 'Well, it's not exactly an overnight trip is it?' Which wasn't particularly nice of me, but I can't resist that kind of stuff and, of course, it was very kind of Cambridge-philosophical because we all knew that minds didn't have spaces to cross, didn't we – or did we?

Leslie Bricusse was professional in a way that nobody at Cambridge was professional in those days. Peter Hall was not bad at it, but he was kind of in the theatrical tradition. Leslie wanted to be successful in the world. One of his early possessions was an address book which I noticed had Paris-London-New York. And I said to him, 'Do you know a lot of people in Paris, then?' And he said, 'No, but I will'. And he had a very clear idea of what he wanted to be which was just successful. He'd been in Canada during the war and he had not had a war. There had been no tragic European events which impinged on him. He'd been in the army in his National Service, he was a perfectly decent chap, but he was somehow immaculate.
Anyway, once we were confirmed as having a transfer to London, Leslie said to me – because we had now become chums – it's a bit difficult because I don't think that we should take some people who are in the present cast with us to London because it would be to cumbrous, and I'd like to change some of the material. So do you think that Tony Beecher would mind very much if he wasn't in the cast? So I said, well I don't... I don't... I can't speak for him. He said, will you ask him?
Anyway, Tony... if he was hurt he didn't show it, which doesn't mean he wasn't hurt. But he did say that it would enable him to go on working harder for his tripos and it was okay and not to worry. And after we had opened in Cambridge with the material which we had accumulated during the year, and that had all gone very well, towards the end of the last week of the two-week run, I think, in Cambridge, Leslie said, I want to use some of the material from previous Footlights shows, which was very good, to replace some of the poorer numbers that haven't worked that well in the present show. So I said, well, you know, how can you do that? You should ask the author. And he said, no, no, the Footlights material belongs to the club. I don't know where he got that idea from, but I think that David Frost pulled the same trick out of his... wherever he pulled it out from. I didn't really question that, there were two really good numbers. One was called, There is not a Man on my Ottoman, and it figured a sort of odalisque... all of these things were drag acts, of course – there were no women in the Footlights in those days. Dermot Hall, the man who didn't think there should be Jews in the Footlights, took the part of this Turkish harem girl who sang a song which began, 'There is not a man on my ottoman, and there hasn't been one for weeks'.
And it contained another rhyme, which is unforgettable, which was, 'They came across the Bosphorus and didn't even toss for us'. Good stuff. I don't know who wrote that, I think it may have been Julian Slade, it might have been Simon Phipps. There was another number which they'd done the year before I joined the Footlights which was called Joe and the Boys. And this was a take-off of a sort of vulgar band show, the kind run by Joe Loss in those days. Joe Loss and his band, with the hair all brilliantined back and the grin and all of that. And Leslie said – because they were cutting a couple of things that I had done with Tony Beecher – Leslie said, well you could always audition for Joe and the Boys. But I was pretty sure that a man called Brian Marlborough, who was very droll, but also a Johnian, actually would get the part, and Leslie was just covering the fact that he was going to cut one of the numbers I had written. But I sort of never questioned this. So he said, well come to the Arts Theatre on Wednesday morning, whatever it is, and you know, you and Brian, and we'll see who does what. And I went along and I had no idea what to do. I couldn't sing, I knew Brian could, and I thought really this is all a wind-up. I didn't use the word wind-up because we didn't do wind-ups in 1954. But, nevertheless, I thought it was not... a send-up I think would be closer.

I got on to the stage and Brian was there, and... and the question was who should go first, and they tossed a coin and I was going to go first. You don't really want to take first innings in these kinds of occasions, but there it was.
And I went into the wings and Leslie said, as people do when they're doing auditions, you know, 'When you're ready'. And I don't know what possessed me, but I... I devised a walk which was sort of, like kind of Groucho Marx squared: very low and sort of slithering onto the stage like that. And I did... how did it go? 'Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. How do you do you do? We'd like to do a little number written by one of the boys in the band. It's called, Good Evening, Mrs Robinson, how do you do you do? With a one and a two and a three and a four...' and that was as far as I got.
Brian Marlborough, who was very ambitious and good, said, 'It's not worth my doing it'. So funnily enough I got this part which turned out to be a huge hit when we went to London. So I did Graham Greene, and that was pretty successful, and then I did Joe and the Boys, and that was pretty damn successful. We went to Oxford, and I had a curious experience in Oxford actually, because I met Jeremy Atkinson, the same guy who'd asked me to be the House commander of the Lockite Platoon, who had got the same Holford scholarship the previous year, that I wanted to get the year after. And he was still up at Christchurch.
And he had a girlfriend called Janet. And I don't know how we... I went to Christchurch to have a look at what it would have been if I'd gone there. And I saw Jeremy, and he said, oh this is Janet. So Janet said to me after we'd talked a bit, 'Would you come for a walk with me?' She was a blonde English girl. 'I'll show you Christchurch Meadows, and you know, perhaps you'd like to see the barges, and all of that on the Isis'. So I said fine. So we went out for a walk and there she was, and after a bit she said to me, I was... what was I? 20... I suppose I was 22, wasn't I? Something like that. Yes, I was 22. She said, 'Do you think I'd be a good thing for Jeremy?' And I said, 'I don't know you. I mean... I... what do you mean?' So she said, 'No, no, no, because I know the people who were a school with you, Jeremy and other people, too, and you've got a sort of gift, haven't you?' 'Have I? Well, maybe I have and maybe I haven't but honestly, Janet, you know, I don't know anything about you and I don't actually know much about Jeremy. I spent four years with him at Lockites, I know his father went down with his ship, and I know various other things about him, and he plays football – I think he's a left inside, isn't he? And he's a scientist, isn't he? But, you know, he's not a friend of mine, I don't know him'. 'But', she said, 'he is, he is a friend of yours'. So I said, 'Listen – if you want to marry him, marry him. If he wants to marry you, get married. That's my advice. And if you don't want to marry him, I wouldn't do it. I don't know anything about it'. But it was odd because, of course, I sort of did know something about it. But I don't know what it was. I read people, that's what writers have to do. Not necessarily rightly.

So we went to London and we opened at the Phoenix Theatre, and we were a complete smash. Now, we were a complete smash in particular, though not only, on the account of Jonathan Miller, who in those days was a sort of red-haired person, very clowny, he used to do his one solo act. He didn't like working with other people, he did a little thing with me, but not much. He did his number with pretending to be Bertrand Russell and various other things, and he was very funny and very good and he was the talk of the town, and he got lots of notices. And we got asked to lots of parties and Ken Tyler asked us to parties and that was about as good as it could get in those days. And we went... Beetle and I went to one of Ken's parties, or a party of Ken's, and he took me over to Frankie Howerd who was already quite a successful radio actor. And he said to Frankie Howerd, 'Oh, I want you to meet... Freddie Raphael, he's a very brilliant young member of the Footlights'. And Frankie Howerd looked at me and he said, 'I hate talent'.
Not everybody did. We got on very well with the London smartery and we were asked to do things on the radio, we were on television; 1954 it was quite a big deal. We even devised a special radio programme which Leslie and I wrote and all of that. So I was suddenly immersed in the biz. And it was a kicker, as they say, because one night I walked into Leslie's... was asked to come to Leslie's dressing room and there was a guy there with a hat on, sitting in the armchair, a hat and a coat. And his name was Jock Jacobson. What else? And he was... came from MCA, the Music Corporation of America which was the biggest agency in the world in those days, and also owned Universal Studios. That was later broken up, but that's how it was.
So he was... he'd been a bandsman. He'd been Joe in Joe and the Boys, or at least he'd been one of the boys. And his interest, he said, he said, 'They all said it was Jonathan Miller', he said, 'but it wasn't, it was Leslie Bricusse. So I want you to be my client'. And Leslie said, 'This is Freddy Raphael, I don't want to be a comedian', which he was very good at by the way, in a sort of Bob Hopeish way, 'I want to write musicals and Freddy's going to write them with me'. And Jock said, 'Oh, yeah...' And he never remembered my name. We were his clients for quite a long time and he always used to say, 'Hello there, Leslie and... aahhh', because he couldn't remember my name.
Anyway, he wanted to sign us up for MCA. And Leslie was quite keen to do that. And I thought, I don't think anything about it. And there was a bit of chat and Jock said, 'You know we got a literary department? You want to write books, we got a literary department. Elaine Greene – you know who Elaine Greene is?' I said, 'I know who Elaine Greene is'. 'Yeah, well she's the sister, you know, of that bloke that you did the... what's his name?' 'What, Graham Greene?' 'Yes. It's the sister'. 'Oh, really that sounds interesting. Good'.

Before I left Cambridge that last summer term, Renford Banborough, my philosophy supervisor, said to me, 'If you want to be a writer', which was now fairly well known, 'why don't you apply for the Harper-Wood studentship' – this is very important – 'why don't you apply for the Harper-Wood studentship?' So I said, well what do I have to do? 'Oh', he said, 'you would have to go and see Hugh Sykes-Davies, he lives over there, across Chapel Court'. He said, it's run by John's, he said, you know, we have to announce it to the university, but he said, we do it in very small print, so nobody ever knows, and we sort of run it. So would you like to have it? It wasn't quite true because the previous year Tom Govern won it and he was actually a Trinity man, I think. But anyway, it was in the gift of St John's. So I said, 'What do I have to do?' So he said, 'Well, you have to go and see Hugh'.
Hugh Sykes-Davies was an English don, he was an Apostle of the same year and vintage, though not the same tastes, as Guy Burgess and Blunt and MacLean. And he was a bit of an eccentric and he'd been a communist, and he wrote a book called Rats, a novel called Rats, which ended with the hero deciding that he would leave the human race and go down into the sewers and join the rats on the grounds that they were a bit cleaner in their habits and more just than human beings.
So I went over to see Hugh Sykes-Davies. He had a feud with the housekeeper of the... of St John's, because he kept his curtains drawn during the day, and she said it faded them. So Hugh said all right. So he opened the curtains, but then he always walked around his rooms naked and in full view of the people in Chapel Court. And since he was a very corpulent, red person, of not particularly distinguished physique, the housekeeper eventually decided to allow him to re-draw the curtains. So I went up to his rooms and he said, 'Do you want this... Harper-Wood thing?' And I said, 'Yes, because I did... Because you see, I feel the novel has something to offer to the world which is different from the academic. On the other hand…' And he said, 'Yeah, well, I mean, it's 350 a year – is that OK? So – it'll last you a year, but you'll have to travel. Do you mind travelling?' So I said, 'No, no, no, no! I'm extremely keen to travel'. 'All right then, no trouble. So you're going to write novels are you?' I said, 'Yes, yes', I said, 'Well, the novel which I am ...' He said, 'That's fine'. So I left his rooms after about five minutes with 350 quid, 1954. That today would be I don't know how much, but plenty. I mean, like £5,000. Much more than my scholarship! So actually I suddenly didn't have to worry about what I was going to do. This was even before going to London with the Footlights.
So then I went and did my finals and I did okay. And I'd been told that nobody in the Moral Sciences second part of the tripos gets a First. Two-one is the best you can hope for. So when I went to look at the result with Tony Beecher, I expected to get either a 2.1 or a 2.2, and actually I had a 2.1, but it did not make my day because Tony Beecher, against all predictions, had got a First. And so had a man called Andor Gom, who it is alleged owed his first name 'Andor' the fact that his father wasn't sure which sex he was going to be so he'd said we'll call him 'Andor'. I don't know whether that's true, whether Andor is a proper name for Scotsmen or whoever it was that he was.
Anyway so I came chagrined but not shattered, because I had 350 quid and frankly as between a First in Moral Sciences and 350 quid, I knew which side my bread was buttered.

So by the time we'd ended the Footlights show in London, which we did three weeks actually at £15 a week each we got. I mean, it was a fortune! Beetle and I went out for dinner, people recognised us, I mean it was fantastic. And Victor Gollancz was mentioned in the number which I did about Graham Greene and Evelyn Waugh, and my friend David Conniston and I had this exchange and I, at the end of a list of... of publishers I turned to him and said, 'Victor Gollancz?' And he said, No, thanks'.
And Victor, such was his vanity and, I must say, his sportsmanship, decided he would come and see the show. And Beetle got him tickets because she had worked for him. So he came with his wife, Ruth. His poor wife Ruth – Victor was quite a... chaser of... ladies. Anyway, and then he asked us out to dinner. In the taxi on the way to dinner it turned out to be a) that it was their wedding anniversary, which was a funny time to ask a complete stranger and a pretty woman to come to dinner. He asked me, secondly, what did I want to do? And I said I'm going to be a writer, a novelist. And he said, not a good idea. And I said, well, it's what's going to happen and I'm going away for a year.
So we had dinner and Victor was perfectly nice, it all went well and Beetle again, I mean, in a way which only my vanity and the trust which we had in each other, which was... fervent. I mean, it's just... it's the greatest luck in the world. At times I don't deny that other women have been interesting to me, but actually, I've had the most fantastic experience with... with Beetle. So I mean... terrific. I was going to go away, and she said, you've got to go on your own on this trip. If you go with me you won't do what you would do. And I said, well um, but actually I knew she was right and I thought I ought to go on my own.... with my notebook.

I went down to the South of France because that's where people wrote books: Somerset Maugham, Fitzgerald, Lawrence, that's the place to write books. So I checked in to a little hotel, and I started to write a novel. And I don't... as with 'Art is one of the four things that unite men' – as soon as I'd written the first paragraph, as if it was not me at all. It's a very important aspect of my being a writer, by the way, there's a lot of 'I' in what I say, but there's not a lot of 'I' in the work. I mean I could have, you know, I could fool some people, but it's still true: writers aren't themselves when they're writing, they're writers. And as I began to write this book which was about a popular... pop singer from Putney who becomes... who has a gift, he's a greengrocer's son and he has a gift for spontaneous songs. I don't know where I got it from, but it was a bit Footlights, it was a bit like, Take it From... not... was it? Was it Take it From Here, the thing that Muir and Norden wrote... Take it From Here! There was Ron and Eth, who were a sort of suburban pair. It was a very suburban, condescending piece about suburbia, but also of course it had Jock Jacobson and various people from show biz whom I had very quickly been able to mock. And it was funny, and as I wrote it I thought, 'It's... it's... it's, I'm going to be a published writer'. There was no question, I had no doubt at all. Written on plain paper. And I wrote to old Willie Maugham from my little hotel in Juan-les-Pins, and said could I come and see him? And he wrote back in his own hand and said, well, you may find it a bit difficult to get here, and you haven't dated your letter, so I don't know whether you're still there, but if you would care to come to tea on such-and-such a date, by all means do.
I should have learnt from that, that funnily enough, people are much more accessible than you imagine, partly because they are lonely, partly because they are flattered, partly because they are curious, etc. But they are.

Maugham was a man, rightly or wrongly, and much more rightly than wrongly, I thought, was the model for being a writer. You took it seriously, you did your work, you made notes, you noticed things, you noticed things, all the time. And you wrote as simply and clearly as you could.
So, I went to see old Willie on the bus. 'You should come on a motor bicycle', he said, but I didn't have a motor bicycle, so I went on the bus and went to Saint-Jean-Cap-Ferrat, and I was met by the second class moto and his secretary, Alan Searle, and I went to the Villa Mauresque, and I've written about this so I won't go on about it now, but he was extremely nice to me.
Willie, as you may or may not... people may or may not know, has a rather, I don't know what kind of reputation, erotic reputation for, you know, the way he treated young men when they went to the Villa Mauresque. Well, either I wasn't his type or he doesn't do that all the time. And he didn't, he was actually extremely nice and he gave me tea, although he offered me a cocktail, and he showed me his pictures, and he gave me advice about going to Spain. And when Alan Searle, his secretary about whom bad things have been said in a recent book by a woman called Selina Hastings, who consulted me but didn't give me any credit in her list of acknowledgments, she thinks Alan Searle was a bad man, well he was very nice to me. And Alan Searle said to him, 'How would he get about in Spain?' And Willie said, 'He will take the omnibus'. I've never heard anybody use the word omnibus from that day forward. Anyway, he said, 'But we must give him the name of that man in Madrid. He opens all the doors in Madrid. Give him that name, Alan, and they'll be good for him'. And he loved Spain, old Willie, so eventually he said, 'Shall we... would you like to see the pictures?' In those days, he hadn't yet sold all his pictures, he did that later when they began to steal things on the Riviera, he got very nervous. So he showed me the Monets and the Manets and all that stuff and then we went out into the hall and there was a Picasso and there was a big painting of a man sort of crouched down, and he said, 'Do you know who that picture is by?' Now, I looked at it and a voice in my head said, look at the drawing of a head it looks like Toulouse-Lautrec. But I stumbled, I said, no I don't actually. 'Ah', he said, 'there's only one person who has ever recognised who that was by and that's Kenneth Clarke. It's by Toulouse-Lautrec'. And I said, 'Yes, how nice, excellent – very untypical of him'. Yes, it's untypical. And off I went. That was my visit to Willie Maugham. Actually I had bridge in common with him, because he also played bridge, and I did later in my time organize some bridge games for him with good players in London. So I was able to repay his kindness.
And I went on writing my novel until the fermeture annuelle of the little hotel in Juan-les-Pins which came at the... towards the end of October, I suppose.

And then I went to Spain, in the train, changed trains at Portbou. In those days, the trains had different gauges in France and in Spain. I think that went on for quite a long time, actually. And I was in España under Franco. And I didn't have much of a conscience about it. I didn't really think of the world as something about which I ought to have a conscience. It has there to be observed. None of it made any sense, but it had to be watched very carefully. And I had my pages for the novel and I had my notebooks.
So I went to Barcelona and had a look around Barcelona. I visited all the Gaudi's, did all the sort of things which a proper first visitor should do in Barcelona, except go to the brothels where I was told you could get a women for one and ten pence. But either apprehension or fear of VD or virtue or Beetle or something stopped me, but I went and had a look, just as I had in Paris by the way, when I got there. Tarts in Paris were very sumptuous in those days. They were all around Les Halles which they've since pulled down. Anyway, so I went from Barcelona to Madrid in the train to go to a pension which had been recommended to me by somebody in the Footlights. And then I went to the Prado and had a look at all the paintings, in particular the Goyas, and outside the Prado I was sitting by myself, I think there may have been a letter for me waiting for me in Spain. I hope there was from Beetle, I can't remember. Because in Barcelona I had sat alone at the café in the Plaça Catalunya, and I wrote a very long letter to Beetle in which I said what was implicit in our relationship, but hadn't been said before, which was that we should get married. And I sent if off. She never got my letter actually, but we did get married. So, went to Barcelona and I think there may have been a letter waiting for me at some hotel or some place in Madrid. Anyway, outside the Prado I was sitting by myself and an American guy in a seersucker suit, guy about 30, tall, slim, blue-eyed, fair-skinned, somewhat balding, came up to me and said, 'You're all by yourself?' I said yes. 'Well, why don't you come and have lunch with us?' He was there with his wife and their small daughter. His name was Herb Oppenheim, and as the appointments board at Cambridge they would say, he was Jewish but he didn't look it. And his wife was not Jewish and she didn't look it either.
And Herb was very nice to me. He was very nice to lots of people. He was the son of a rich man in New York and he didn't like to see people on their own, and I don't quite know why but I noticed that he had a habit of asking people to come and join us if they were on their own. Anyway, he asked me, and then after we'd had lunch and I'd talked a bit and I'd talked about Beetle, I tend to do that as people notice. Anyway, he said, we're going to drive down to Toledo and then we're going to Granada and places – there's a place in the car, you want to come?
They had a little Simca station wagon. They were pretty simple in those days, the little Simcas, with a bench seat at the back. And I said, yes I'd love to. So we drove to Toledo, and he was an architect, he'd just got a Guggenheim I think it was, and he had just got a magna cum laude at Columbia and he was a very keen architect as a student and he had a three-dimensional camera with him. You don't get keener than that in 1954.
And he taught me quite a lot about looking at buildings. He said, you know in a modern city don't look at ground level. Look up. That's where you can see what the buildings are really like. At ground level they change everything. You want to see what it's like, look up. In Toledo it was good to look up because we had the glass balconies on the first floors. Anyway, so we travelled together and he was very nice.
[Q] Why do you mention the glass balconies?
What?
[Q] Why do you mention the glass balconies?
It's very typical of Toledo. And I mentioned it because they had the same thing, I found, in Morocco. The Jewish quarter in Fez had windows on the first floor with kind of, not bay windows, because they were squared off, but they projected over a support. The Moorish buildings never had that because of course Moorish houses are not meant to be looked into. So they're all shut up, the Jews were not like that and I suspect the Jews who built the houses in Toledo may have come from Morocco to Toledo rather than gone from Toledo to Morocco, because there were a lot of Jews that came from Morocco into Spain at the same time as the Arabs. I don't know much about this but I think that's how it was.
I was very conscious of the Jews in Toledo in a way that you hadn't been in Barcelona or in Madrid because of course it had been a very Jewish city. And the great church there, I think it's called Santa Maria was actually a synagogue before they improved it.

So we did that and we looked at the Goyas at Illescas, a little dwarf nun held up a lamp as we looked at these El Grecos like that. Then we drove on through Aranjuez and across La Mancha down to Ubeda and then to Cordoba. And my notebook began to be very full of details about all of these things and I've been looking at it recently, and to be perfectly honest, I could see that the Reverend Harper-Wood had actually effected an extraordinary change in my work, because somehow or other the combination of the money I'd been given, the opportunity I'd been given, solitude and the fact that I actually now was confident I was going to be a published writer, quite abruptly I stopped being the rather gauche taker of notes which I had been all the time at Cambridge and became pretty good at it. Pretty damn good at it. By which I mean, looking at it now I think, hmm.
I went from Spain down to Cordoba, then... I loved Cordoba. I read... Ken Tynan wrote something very disobliging about... no, it wasn't Ken Tynan! Trevor Roper wrote something very disobliging I read recently about Cordoba. I thought it was absolutely fantastic. I thought the Mezquita was absolutely marvellous, this Moorish, enormous Moorish mosque, in the middle of which Charles V had imposed a Christian church at the same time as saying, we mustn't desecrate the Moorish site. He actually desecrated everything Charles V, but he always thought he was doing the right thing.
Anyway, went to Cordoba and then we went to Granada and I felt that I somehow belonged in Spain. It went all the way back to that Spanish-Portuguese synagogue on the corner of Central Park West and I somehow felt at home in Spain and I bought a Spanish grammar and I sat down to teach myself Spanish. I always do it with a grammar, very sort of – I don't do linguaphones, I've done linguaphones, but basically I learn languages like they were prep, that's the way it is, quite a good way, too. Anyway. I learned some Spanish. We got to Granada and Granada was amazing, wonderful, whatever appropriate or inappropriate words you care to apply to it. I liked it a lot.
And I tried to get some more money. St John's  College had given me 75 quid and they were going to send me more when I needed it. So I applied for some more to come to the Banco Central and I said that my name was Raphael Frederic. Frederic Raphael. I said, will you please tell me when the money comes in. So the Oppenheims stayed for a bit and then eventually they decided they were going to drive on and I... I wasn't all that sorry that, that they were going to leave me because I had become kind of adjunct of theirs, and I didn't think that was quite right even though I enjoyed having company. So they eventually drove away and left me alone in Granada. And I had a ticket to the Alhambra which enabled me to go there at night and I went, moonlit and tried to read Shakespeare by moonlight and I thought bollocks, Shakespeare by moonlight. It's cold and silly and I can't read the words.
And I kept going back to the Banco Central and they didn't have the money and I began to get quite anxious. And eventually I said to the guy, what are you looking up when you look up whether it's come? And he said, 'Your name is Frederic. Raphael Frederic'. And I said, would you look up under Raphael? And of course the money had been there a long time. He assumed that Raphael was my first name so he thought my last name was Frederic. So I got me money. So I had a last look at the Dutch paintings in the Capilla Royale, which astonishingly they've got very nice Dutch painting in there, I don't know how they got there. I had been to see the Gypsies on the Sacro Monte with the Oppenheims, it was fantastic. The thing about flamenco was, they always tell you in Spain, they told me then, they told people in the time of Washington Irving and they're still telling them that of course there's no real flamenco any more.
Actually, there never was any real flamenco I discovered, because young singers can't sing flamenco because they don't have the soul, and when you're old enough to have a soul your voice is gone. So actually nobody has ever sung flamenco. So I went down to Algeciras on the bus, went to Malaga then to Algeciras and then I caught the ferry over to Morocco.
I went to Tangiers which in those days was an enclave, a sort of internationally run enclave with British police boxes and... pillar boxes and I think British policemen, I can't remember, anyway, it was also, of course, an international homosexual kind of haven because you could do those thing in Tangiers which you could not do in South Kensington. Not that I had any inclination to do them.

So anyway, I went into the Kasbah, I met a young Arab boy who said that he would take me to a place where they smoked opium, well he called it opium. So we went to this café and I was given this pipe of kif which is marijuana, I'd never smoked it before, never even knew it existed before. I never heard of those things. Nobody did drugs in Cambridge, nobody. Not in the Fifties.
So I started smoking this thing and then when it was finished you go blow and it goes pop and pops out and falls on the floor. And while I did that I looked at an Arab guy who was lying on the bench and as I went pop like that he just rolled of the bench and went whack on the floor. Another Arab sitting over there said, 'Too many pipes'. So the little boy said, have another pipe, have another pipe. So I think I may have or I may not. I was quite high quite quickly with this stuff but it wasn't... I didn't feel very mad. So the little boy – I think he was about 12 – the kid said, 'Tonight I come to your hotel', I was staying at the Hotel Bristol in the European quarter of Tangiers, 'and I'll take you to the brothels, okay?'
So I said fine, fine, excellent, terrific, good. So I was quite exhausted by this point, so I walked back to the hotel with him, he showed me the way back to the Bristol, I don't know whether I gave him any money or whether I didn't, I don't have any particular memory of it. I hope I tipped him something. Anyway much it matters. Went upstairs to my room and just – pow – collapsed. When I woke up it was eight o'clock but it wasn't 8 o'clock that night it was 8 o'clock the following morning. I'd slept for about 16 hours! And I didn't have any dreams, no headaches nothing. Except the little boy never showed up and I never went to the brothels.
I set of to Morocco on the train. And did a lot of stuff in Morocco, went to Fes and to Meknes and I had dinner in Meknes with an Arab prince called Moulay Ta-ib, he invited me to dinner through the owner of a book shop in the European quarter, whose name, who was a Russian princess, she said, a refugee, she won prizes in some French publishing house. Anyway she introduced me to them and I went to have dinner with Moulay Ta-ib and of course there were no tourists because there was a crisis. The French had expelled the Sultan Mohammed V because he was trying to get independence and they put a puppet in his place and the tourists weren't going because they were always frightened, and the place was sort of under a curfew and martial law and all the rest of it. But I was Freddy Raphael, you know, I came from England and America and things. And nothing was going to happen to me. I was there to have a look. And I had a look. It was fantastic, fantastic. I loved it. And I wrote pretty well about it. Well enough for me to copy pretty well word-for-word, what I wrote then into what I'm writing now. Anyway, I had dinner with Moulay Ta-ib and he said that he was in mourning because he supported the Sultan who had been exiled, so here wasn't going to be much dinner. Upon which dishes and dishes arrive and it was all, you could only eat with your right hand, your left hand you must not touch food. When you put the food from the kebab into your mouth you mustn't touch your lips with your fingers. It had to go like that.
He was very nice, he was a philosopher. He knew Spinoza, he knew Hobbs and he was very intelligent, evolué French-educated Arab. I don't think we mentioned the Jews. I wasn't really very concerned about the Jews. But he was very keen that the French should not desert Morocco when the Sultan was restored, when he would be able to shave his beard and have a better meal, and the friend that was with him as well. But he talked as I say in a thoroughly intelligent way about wanting the French to say behind and administer, teach the Moroccans how to administer the country, but in a role underneath the Sultan, not as it had been until now as the masters of the Sultan. And that was a kind of perfectly sensible liberal position. And then he said, alternatively the French can kill all of us. And that of course was better still, because then salvation would be assured if we died as martyrs.
And one suddenly thought, as one did talking to communists, up until the point where it all goes completely crazy, it's all absolutely fine. That's the way life seems to me to work quite often.
I had actually been in the train coming to Fes with a guy in a big brown suit and a homburg hat. Looked like William Wiseman or Joseph Wiseman, what is it, in Viva Zapata. There was a sort of fanatical communist who attended Zapata. And this guy sat with a young Moroccan guy and he was actually English, and he was a Jew because when he took his hat off he had a skull cap on. And he was a Zionist who was out to gather in the many thousands of Moroccan Jews who still live in the Maghreb.
I mention him because when I was in Meknes here was a whole encampment of many, many Jews and they wore black djellabahs black robes and they had these houses with the windows opening onto the open. And they were not, I think, ill-used that time, they were apart. I didn't think I ever spoke to any of them.

Meknes... I finished dinner with Moulay Ta-ib about 01.15 in the morning, and I then walked out into the Kasbah – the medina as it was called – and I had been brought by his friend who had left earlier to go home. One fifteen in the morning I was all alone, pitch dark in the maze of the Kasbah. The lady who ran the bookshop had said to me, I just want to give you one piece of advice in Morocco: never make fun of a French Legionnaire's kepi. I thought, it's really quite improbable that I would ever do that, but when I heard marching feet coming towards me in the night, I thought to myself, you know, let's hope it's the French Foreign Legion in a kepi. And round the corner came a sergeant and two or three men on patrol and, of course, they halted me rather brusquely because I had broken the curfew, but again I was an Under Officer in the Charterhouse corps and a British subject and an American subject. So, 'Bonsoir'. 'Bonsoir, monsieur. Vos papiers?' 'Ah. Mes papiers sont á l'hôtel et moi je suis en train d'y aller. Si vous voulez bien m'indiquer le chemin, je serais trés heureux'. 'Bon. Voyez là-bas? La lumière?' Yes, but I don't know how to get out of the... 'Je sais pas exactement comment sortir du Kasbah'. In the end they escorted me to my hotel. 'Bonne nuit, monsieur'. 'Bonne nuit, merci'. Off they went.
Well, I bought a lot of stuff – this is going to go on for ever, is this is too long for you?
[Q] It's fascinating.
I bought a lot of stuff in the souks, for Beetle I bought her a mantilla, a lovely mantilla, and various pieces of brass which had not actually been made in... they had all been imported from India, as you peeled of the piece of stuff from the bottom of the thing, but I'd done it. It wasn't much money and anyway it was the Reverend Harper-Wood's money, and I had quite a sack full of stuff. So in addition to my suitcase and my haversack, I had this sack.
And I sat on this platform at Meknes for the train to go back to Tangiers. Whether it went all the way to Tangiers, it may just have gone to the Spanish border, the Spanish-Morocco border, and then you took another train I think, anyway – much it matters. I sat there and the train eventually came in and there were lots of Arabs with parcels and packages on this platform, and I jumped up and hurried to the train with my haversack and my heavy suitcase in order to get a seat in the compartment. I sat down, oof, got the corner seat and off we went.
And after about half-an-hour I said to the woman opposite, 'J'ai oublié mon sac avec tous les cadeaux dedans', and she said, 'Ah oui! J'ai vue votre sac. Sur le banc?' 'Ah oui'. 'Ah bon'. So anyway, this was supposedly a very tense time in Morocco, but didn't feel very tense. And I said to the conductor of the train, 'J'ai laissé mon sac sur le banc à la gare de Meknès'. So he phoned them when we stopped at a place called Pierrelatte which is an oil refinery and he said, 'Ah oui, monsieur. Le sac est toujours là'. They will put it into a taxi and drive to where you are. I don't know how far it was, it was hours train trip, so it was 60 miles or so. 'Bon. Vous attendez ici, trouvez votre sac, rejoignez le train, etc'. So, I didn't, okay... so I got off the train and it was a long wait and the taxi was supposed to come. Eventually I went back to the conductor and said, will you call them? So he called them and he said, 'Ah, oui! Ah bon, je comprends. Ah oui'. The taxi is still actually at Meknès, but it's taxi 39 and it's got your sack in it, but of course the train was going to leave.
And I had booked a steamer ticket before I had left Algeciras – or was it Gibraltar – to go in the USS Constitution from Gibraltar to Naples on December the whatever it was, second or third, I think, and now it was the end of November. I could see myself missing the boat literally, missing the boat. And I... you know, I, bloody idiot, had left his sack behind that's all! So I sat there and I waited and it got dark and the petrol lights flared on the thing and the taxi didn't come, the taxi didn't come and it was dark and eventually taxi number 39 from Meknes drove up! 'Bonsoir, monsieur'. 'Bonsoir'. It was an Arab driver, of course, 'Bonsoir. J'ai votre sac'. 'Ah. Tant mieux. Où est le sac?' 'Dans le coffre'. Voulez le voir?' 'Oui'. 'Ah oui. Voilà'. 'Oui'. Yeah, there it was, so I put my things in the... the other things in there with it, took the sack out to sit with it so as not to forget it, got into the taxi. It's now half-past-eight, he said I can take you to the border of Spanish Morocco, but I can't cross the border. Will there be a train? Who knows.
So, we're now crossing... whether it's the Sahara or whatever it is, we're crossing the bloody desert in a taxi, pitch dark. I'm with an Arab and he's come all the way from Meknès with a sack of stuff. So as we're driving along he said, 'Qu'est-ce que c'était dans votre sacqui était tellement important?' which was a perfectly reasonable question. What kind of an idiot rents a taxi cab for thousands of... of francs and then takes him on again for another 8,000 francs which was of course, was only about five quid, but it was plenty of money to this Arab guy. 'Oh, c'est quelques cadeaux, c'est sentimental... c'est pour ma fiancée'. I'd never used the word fiancée about Beetle before; I used it to this Arab as we were crossing the desert. So he said, 'Ah, bon'. So we're driving along the main road and suddenly we're turning off down a track. And we arrive at a little village and I think: he's going to kill me, or if he isn't going to kill me he's certainly going to take the sack! And then what the hell do I do even if he doesn't kill me? So I said, 'Qu'est qu'on fait?' 'Il faut que je vois mon cousin. J'ai mon cousin ici'. So we stopped. He did! He had his cousin, so went in and got whatever it was he was going to get from his cousin, rejoined the main road and we drove to the Spanish border.
So I said, how am I going to get to Tangiers? So he got out of his taxi, he walked over to a huge limo and talked to the guy inside and then he said... so I paid him off. There was an old Moroccan guy sitting in the back of this very big limousine, and it's some very, very rich crook no doubt, I mean, he was clearly not hostile to the French otherwise they wouldn't have had him there, and he was going to Tangiers. So he gave me a lift to Tangiers, and I entered Tangiers en beauté, in this guy's limousine, and I caught the ferryboat to Gibraltar and I got on the USS Constitution and I was home free and furthermore I'd sort of reached the end of my, as the French say, périple, I was on my way towards Italy, to Naples first then to Rome, Paris where Beetle was going to be waiting for me so suddenly everything was good.

So I went to Naples and I shared a cabin on the Constitution with a guy called Knight, and it put me off the idea of sharing... sharing bedrooms with men. He had a very rancid smell to him. Anyway, got to Naples, I went to... went to Pompeii, I went to Herculaneum, I went to the Naples museum, and I was enjoying myself a lot more now that I was moving towards Paris and Beetle. So that was pretty good.
I then went to... went to Paestum, took an excursion to Paestum, Pompeii, all that stuff which shows all... in those days the obscene paintings in the brothel of Pompeii were... had little cupboards over them, and the women weren't allowed to come in to look and you had to go in and then he would show you the various things that he showed you. Wow. I went to Rome, stayed in a pension, I went to all the things you should go to in Rome when you first go there. And then and then and then eventually I went back to Paris, and Beetle wasn't coming until after Christmas so I stayed in the little hotel we stayed at and booked rooms, and then on Boxing Day, I think it was, she flew in and I met her at the Invalides, and we've pretty well been together ever since, actually.
So then there was the question of getting married and I... I wasn't particularly keen on being married because I thought it was unromantic. I liked the idea of being a writer with a mistress and all that living in the garret. I don't think Beetle was very bothered about whether she got married or not, but we came back to England for reasons which I have to ask her, I can't remember why we did, some time in January, and my parents and hers, I think, were rather keen that we should marry, and... and we did.
So we got married and then we went back to Paris the same night. Back to the Hôtel du Continent. And a friend of ours had rented a little... part of an apartment in a district called Crimée, in the 11e arrondissement which is sort of a working class area, somewhere out there beyond the Bastille. And this very nice woman, called Jackie Weiss who we'd been in a play with in the synagogue, a research biologist, gave us the room that she had in this little flat in Crimée on the first floor. And we had three months in Crimée during which I wrote the novel which I has started in... in Juan-les-Pins, I rented a typewriter with an English keyboard and away I went.
And we went to the opera and we went to the movies and we cooked very simple meals and everything was absolutely terrific. Except very cold, but very cold.

And eventually the time came when we had to go back to England, sometime I think, in... probably in early April. The book was finished and typed out. And we went back and we took a room in Vicarage Gate with a gas fire, a gas ring. Very simple. And we stayed there and I met up again with Leslie Bricusse. Now Leslie Bricusse had been transformed, as I had been, but by no means in the same way, because during my absence he had been, thanks to Jock Jacobson, he had been in a show on in the West End with Beatrice Lillie. Now Beatrice Lillie in those days was a very famous comedienne from the 30s and probably the 20s as well. She had... did a one man show, but she couldn't be on the stage all the time so Leslie had to do the bits in between. Her show was a great success, and Leslie received the worst notices anybody could possibly imagine, because of course, in the somewhat sophisticated world in which he was suddenly plunged, the jokes that had worked pretty well in Cambridge, which we had both written, no longer worked quite so well with a smart audience. So time and people had turned against him and the extraordinary thing about Leslie was that he showed absolutely no sign that anything was wrong whatever. Because, of course, it wasn't. Because he a) did not wish to be a performer and b) by the time I got back to London he had met Noel Coward, Connie Carpenter, he had met all kinds of people, Binkie Beaumont, he knew everybody in the West End of London. And he had a car and he had some money. And I had a little money too because I had written one or two of the pieces that he did, for which I was paid £6, I think, for as long as the show was in London, which was quite a long time.
It sounds as I tell it as though everything that happened to me was just incredibly fortunate and lucky, and, you know, there was the stairway to paradise and I took the steps and actually I suppose it's a bit true. The fact was that I could be morose about the lot of the world and the Jews and various other things fairly easily, and I wanted to be a serious writer and serious writers did not write jokes or know Binkie Beaumont, they went away and wrote serious books about the state of the world.
But in fact, Leslie had been asked to write a film for Max Bygraves who was a client of Jock Jacobson's. Max was then quite a big star, and was going to do a movie directed by Guy Hamilton, and Leslie was commissioned for, I think, £1250 which was quite a lot of money to write this film. But of course he was having a bit of trouble with the dialogue. So I can't remember how much of the £1250 he gave me, my memory is it was not half of it, but he'd done some work and he was writing the songs and it was the usual arrangement. But he gave me some money.
And it got better than that because they actually in those days made films as well as wrote them. So this film was going to be made, directed by Guy Hamilton, who later directed Bond films. And when Leslie said, can you write filmscripts, I said, all you have to do is show me one. Because of course I can write Greek verses and Latin verses, show me what it looks like and I'll reproduce the form. So he did and I did. I never went near the camera or anything like that. And that went quite well, they were going to make the film. So then, Leslie again through his connections and Jock Jacobson's – I think Jock's quite particularly – had contacts with the Rank Organisation.
So in the... towards the autumn of 1950... what was it? Still 1954? No, 1955. The Rank Organisation offered Leslie and me a contract for two films to be written in a year and we got £1250 each. Well. £1250 in 1955, I mean that's a lot of money. And Beetle and I were able to buy the lease, not the lease but the key which entailed the lease of a little flat in Chelsea Embankment. Actually, it was a basement flat but I wanted to live in Chelsea, because Chelsea was where artists lived. Never underestimate the naivety of people who think they're very smart, or anyone else.
Anyway, so we took this little flat and we had £1250 for a year and I delivered my manuscript of my novel to a man called George Greenfield who was a friend of my father's and an agent to quite a lot of people that he knew. And I also gave it to Elaine Greene, who was this agent at MCA, because in my innocence I thought they would enjoy reading it. So George Greenfield read it – he was a friend of my father's – and he liked it and he said he would represent me. He hadn't read it when I first gave it to him because his son was ill and... five-year-old son called Georgie, who then died, and it was a symptom of the times and the vanity of writers or ignorance – it never occurred to me that this child dying would stop him reading my book. One learns as one goes along.
Anyway, there was a bit of a cold atmosphere at the MCA building when I told Elaine Greene that I was actually going to go to George Greenfield because he wanted... he thought he could sell my book. Because she said, why did you ask me to read it and I think I could sell it, and I said, well he's a friend of my father's. And funnily enough, I couldn't really understand why she was upset. But she was upset, because about 35 years later, a friend of mine was coming down to France, a man called Stanley Baron, who was a publisher at Thames and Hudson, and he was travelling with Elaine Greene and he asked if he could come in and see us in our house in France which we had then. And I said, yes of course. And then he had to cancel because Elaine Greene still was not going to speak to me because I had done this terrible thing to her. It wasn't very, very terrible...

George Greenfield went to Victor Gollancz with my manuscript, called Victor Gollancz Publishers, and it was read by Hilary Rubinstein who was then about to take over, although he never did, and who had worked... for whom Beetle had worked, and I think he was rather jealous of the fact that Beetle was with me. Anyway so they turned it down. We then went to Macmillan who bought it. And they were going to pay me I think £100 advance which was not bad, actually. So I was suddenly at the age of 23, I wasn't yet 24, that's right, I had a book accepted. That's not bad going, really. In fact, it was pretty amazing. But of course it wasn't a book which had any of the things in it which I wanted to become a writer in order to say, because it was just a frivolous little book about a pop singer and romance and all the rest of it, and it was a sort of send up of show biz, a very naive one, it was quite funny. And Jack Squire a famous figure in the 1930s particularly praised it for Macmillan and said, you know you must take this man on. He's got lots of funny books ahead of him. And my publisher at Macmillan was a man called Alan Maclean who was Donald Maclean's brother. Donald Maclean recently, not that recently, had departed to Moscow, and Alan who'd been in the Foreign Office, had to find another job. So Harold Macmillan found him, who was completely innocent, another job.
And I was about to be a published writer.
[Q] You'd done a hell of a lot, hadn't you, by the age of 23.
Yes. So my good fortune was that all the time that we were under contract with the Rank Organisation to write two screenplays, nobody called us, nobody asked us to do anything, we just got monthly cheques. It seemed a very, very good arrangement. At the end of the year, I had written most of another novel of course, called The Earlsdon Way, in fact I think I must have finished it because that's what I did all day apart from playing bridge in the afternoons while poor Beetle just sat in the dark in the Chelsea embankment.

As soon as the contract had lapsed, the producer at Pinewood rang Leslie and me up and asked whether we'd write a film about Cambridge. So, of course, the contract had now lapsed, so now there had to be a new contract for the other film, for which we were going to get paid another £1250. I mean, it didn't seem like a particularly painful activity, writing movies. Not least because you didn't have to write most of them. Not that that was true later.
Anyway – so that was good. So I now, I bought, I went to buy a car, at Lex Garages for £250, a Ford Anglia. We had a car, a flat, and you know, we had a bit of money, it was... it was just fine. I finished my book called The Earlsdon Way, which was not funny. The Earsldon Way was a book about English suburbia and terrible people and... think of a model boat club which was sort of based on a golf club, where they didn't like Jews and all the rest of it and it was quite a solemn little book. Not bad actually. And I delivered it, I'd said to Alan MacLean, I've written this, I've finished the new book. Oh, he said, I can't wait to see it. Will you, will you let me have it? And I said, well I've only got one copy, because in those days you typed books, and I couldn't type with carbons if I was writing – some inhibition, I just couldn't do carbons with original writing. And I'd written some of it in long-hand but not... not much of it. I said, I really haven't got a copy. And he said, well I'll take very good care of it. I really want to read it. So I delivered the manuscript to... to Alan, or I handed it to Alan, and he said I'll call you whenever it is. I went up to play bridge one afternoon a couple of afternoons later, and when I came back Beetle looked particularly distressed. And I said, what's happened? And she said, well, Alan called. He doesn't like the book? No. It's not that he doesn't like the book – the manuscript has been stolen. Macmillans in those days, they all went out to lunch and they left the doors open in offices in London, I mean there was no security of any kind. Somebody had come in, and it was in the briefcase that Alan had, and they'd obviously taken the briefcase from his desk and buggered off with it. Now, my not entirely frivolous belief is that it could well have been MI5 who took the briefcase, in which case they were sitting there trying to work out what the hell The Earlsdon Way was telling them about the, you know, the British nuclear secrets, or whatever else it was that Alan was suspected of passing to the Russians – if he was. On the other hand, probably it was just nicked by somebody who stole the briefcase.
He hadn't read the book, and I was pretty upset, but you know, you're supposed to be a gentleman and all of that. So he said, well I'm really sorry, have you not got a copy? So, I said, I've got a bit of a copy and I don't... you know. He said, well I'll give you £50 if you, you know, just write it out again. So I got in the car with Beetle and I was furious and we drove and drove and drove and we got to Bath, and why we got to Bath I don't know and then Beetle said, you know, how much further are you going to go? And I said, I don't know, I think I'll kill myself. And she said, no you won't kill yourself. Just go home and write the book again. Which I did almost word for word, as far as I can remember. Because again, the strange thing about being a writer is, that the brain doesn't have emotions. It just does stuff. And don't get in its way and it will be all right. Get in its way and eventually, you know, it will say you know, come on, what are we doing here? But otherwise you just do the work. It's what... Graham Greene called it, and it has been said of me, it's the chip of ice in every writer's heart. If you haven't got the chip of ice, you can't do the stuff. If you have got the chip of ice, I'm afraid, you can always do the stuff. I've never had writer's block. I shouldn't say it, I don't even know what...why you could possibly have writer's block. Willie Maugham said, 'When I find it difficult to write, I go into my office, my room and I write my name, W Somerset Maugham, W Somerset Maugham. And do you know', he said, 'by the time you've written it about 10, times it's so bloody boring you find you're going to write a story instead!' And that's... I've never written, Frederic Raphael, Frederic Raphael, but there we are, it's not a bad name by the way. A bit of luck that is!
So I sat down and re-wrote the book and... Macmillans turned it down, because it wasn't a funny book like Jack Squires had promised I was going to write, it was a rather solemn piece of social realism about the state of England. So I went down the road to Cassells and they agreed to publish it and they gave me another £100 so everything was okay. And I worked with Leslie Bricusse.

We moved from Chelsea Embankment because Beetle didn't like being in the dark, and I did understand. We moved to a little house in, behind Knightsbridge in a place called Rutland Street, a little tiny house, and we moved in, little tiny house – Beetle wanted to have a baby by then, she'd waited a long time, and she was going to have a baby. And we moved into this little house, and I parked the car, there was no room in front of our little area, so I parked in front of the next house; this was a row of terraced house – cottages. And I then got a little note through the letterbox which had a printed thing, and it said at the top, 'From Mr Justice Hinchcliffe', and it said, 'Would you please remove your car from the position which it is in since it is blocking the light and air from the downstairs room and causing great inconvenience to all'. It's a symptom of what London was like in 1956 or so that I obediently moved my car. He didn't say anything about, I hope you enjoy being in Rutland Street or anything, and I thought all sorts of things, but I didn't say any of them, because in those days you didn't say, 'Fuck you' to judges.
The funny thing is that Mr Justice Hinchcliffe, whom I regard as a bad thing, was in charge of a libel action which was brought by my friend Brian Glanville, the guy who was at Charterhouse with me and is now, and has been for a long time, a famous football journalist and a very good short story writer and, in his day, a novelist as well. Brian was in a libel action against a man called David Kossoff, who was a Jewish actor in those days, who'd accused Brian... one of Brain's books of being written for money and being... taking an anti-Semitic line about Golders Green Jews, of which Brian was, of course, one. And Brian sued him for libel on the grounds that he was trying to do him harm, and Mr Justice Hinchcliffe was the judge and Brian won his case. So, which Hinchcliffe do you want to have, is always a good question.
Anyway, we moved into Rutland Street, and in... previous to that, actually, while we were still in Chelsea Embankment, Obbligato as my first book was called, was published in May of 1956, and had very nice notices, not immensely enthusiastic, but very nice and Guy Ramsay said, be grateful for the amount they write about you, don't worry what they say. Pretty good advice on the whole. Not always easy to take.
So by the time we were in Rutland Street I had the second book already accepted by Cassells, and Leslie and I were writing the Cambridge film for a very nice man called Vivian Cox who had been a triple blue and played hockey for England, and who was gay and I didn't know it at the time, a sort of virile gay man, of whom there were quite a few. Very nice, too. I... I wrote that, and then the Suez Crisis came and I felt then that I had somehow not written the book I should have written. It was all too light, and that's when I started writing other things and then I decided to do a big book about Jews in London, about which I didn't know very much actually, because we lived in Putney and I didn't know anything about North London, but various people including Brian Marber who'd been in the Footlights with me and so on, I got an inkling of it and also working with those Jews in the drama society, they all tended to come from North London, I'd been to a lot of their houses. I was fairly well informed.
And I started writing a book called The Limits of Love, which was a sort of Wittgensteinian title because Wittgenstein said the limits of my language... the limits of my world means the limits of my language, the limits of love is the limits of life. It sounded good at the time. The epigraph of The Limits of Love was: my object in philosophy is to show the fly the way out of the fly bottle, Ludwig Wittgenstein. Number two: the Jew is underneath the lot, Thomas Stearns Eliot OM. I don't let them off unless they threaten to break my head.
Anyway, I wrote this book at the Oxford and Cambridge Club where I had joined, before playing bridge with a lot of judges and magistrates and people who were nothing like as clever as I had expected them to be. But they were perfectly nice to me.

1950s England... our son, Paul, was born in 1958, in February of 1958, and we moved soon afterwards from Rutland Street to Highgate where we took a flat, a ground floor flat. We paid for the key and the furniture and moved into this flat. And the lady who owned the building promised that when the rump of the lease was finished, she would give us a new lease, and she loved children, and Paul could play in the garden, whereas previously we hadn't really got much of a garden. So Beetle was very happy that we should be there. It was a long way from the bridge club, my only complaint about it, but I used to drive in to play bridge, in those days a guy at the RAC you gave him sixpence and he parked your car in Pall Mall for you. So it wasn't too bad.
One day, I went up to the bridge room and I saw on the way up when I looked at the notices, that a man called whatever his name was, a Ghanaian name, had not been elected a member of the Oxford and Cambridge Club. And I though the only qualification to be a member of the Oxford and Cambridge Club was to have been to Oxford or Cambridge. So I said to a very nice man who was always very polite to me, called Guy Coleridge, who was a partner in Knight, Frank and Rutley, and a member of the election committee, 'Guy, why', I think I called him Guy he was quite an old person, 'why haven't they elected that guy, Ateo?' or whatever his name was – I don't know what it was. So he said, 'Oh well the... it was decided that we... we didn't really want him'. So I said, 'He's black, isn't he?' So Guy, 'Yes, yes. That's got nothing to do with it'. So I said, 'Well, actually you know I really like it here and you're all very nice to me, I'm going to have to resign from the club. I can't... I can't be member of a club that won't have a black member'. So he said, 'Freddy, you don't understand. It's not because he's black, it's just the kind of judge he is'. So I resigned the Oxford and Cambridge Club which I was actually quite sorry to do because it was very convenient and they had nice stationery with light and blue headings according to which allegiance you had, so I resigned and I played bridge at Crockford's. I played quite a lot of bridge in those days. I played bridge with my father, also.
And in 1959 summer, I met a man called Tom Maschler who was a young publisher in those days and he was very helpful to me, very helpful. He got me... he got me into Penguins, The Earlsdon Way was in Penguin which was quite an accolade in those days. It's quite an accolade now, I suppose, although I don't look at the Penguin list much any more. And he became very friendly with me, and he wanted me to do stuff with him, rather like Leslie wanted to do stuff with me. But I'd had enough of Leslie Bricusse and I won't even bother to say why, but it was all to do with The Lady of the Wheel, he'd taken the script and given it to somebody else to re-write and all the rest of it. I was displeased and I... I broke with him. He never understood why, he couldn't imagine why anyone would not want to be with somebody who was going to be as successful, as indeed he was and has been, and he continued to be extremely nice to me, but I didn't want any more to do with him. I wanted to be a serious writer.
And I met Maschler and he was, I think, at MacGibbon & Kee in those days and then he went to Penguin, that's how he got me into Penguin, and so on. And he sort of believed in me. He didn't think he did but then he did. And he sort of became very, very friendly in a very kind of aggressive way. I mean intrusive way. He was like that. And very sort of amorous with Beetle, I mean not in a successfully amorous, but he was... like that. He wanted to share everything with you. He was fine.
So we had this house, this place in Highgate and the time came when I was to go and see the lady upstairs, Miss Pearce, about renewing the lease. And I went upstairs and said to Beetle I'm sure it will be fine because you know she said she was going to give us a new lease and she said she like us. I went up stairs and she said, yes I know, I'm terribly sorry but I can't give you a lease for the flat because my sister has just been widowed and she's going to come and live in the flat. So I'm afraid you can't stay. And I said, but we bought furniture and everything, you know. It was quite a lot of money because you told us you were going to give us a lease. And she said, yes I'm really sorry. I'm really sorry. So I went back downstairs and I said to Beetle, I don't know what we're going to do.
We'd... I think finished with the film that Leslie and I were writing for the Rank Organisation about Cambridge, and they were going to make it by the way. And I went out actually to see Sylvia Syms who was a big star in those days. And we went into see Sylvia Syms and Leslie by that time was a practised showbiz guy and he embraced her and everything else and I was not quite used to that stuff. And I said, I admire you very much and I'm glad you're going to be in the film and all the rest of it, and she sort of looked at me like that. That was alright. And in the end, they did make the film with Sylvia Syms and Hardy Krüger, a most unlikely casting, and all the rest of it.
And many years later, I wrote a play in which the director thought Sylvia Syms, then a mature person, would be good at playing the mother. And we went to see her, again it must be 30 years later, and she said, 'Oh hello, we've met before haven't we?' So I said, yes as a matter of fact we have, because I remember coming out to see you when you were, you know, going to be in that Cambridge film that I wrote with Leslie Bricusse. 'Oh yes', she said, 'I remember, and you wouldn't kiss me'. As Alberto Moravia would say, beh le donne - you never know with the ladies. I thought I had been correct did and she, of course, had thought that somehow or other, I'd been too grand to kiss her.

I might just mention that before we actually left London to go to Spain, I had written a little book at the suggestion of Tom Maschler which was called The S Man. And the S Man is Mr Success. This is 1959, I think, I finished it in 1959 before we... before we set off for Spain. And it's a sort of epigrammatic book of... sort of episodic book, a sort of parody of Wittgenstein's Tractatus actually, about how to succeed in the... the burgeoning world of... of post-Suez England when Macmillan said you'd never had it so good. And... it was pretty funny actually, pretty good, I thought. Full of cynicism which I didn't really feel. In other words, there's a sort of split in my attitude towards the world which is persistent, a sort of public doubt about the virtue of almost absolutely anybody and everything, and an inner innocence, probably based on the fact that I'd been with the same woman for as long as I have, but not only that. A sort of inner sentimentality. If I made a list of things that brought tears to my eyes, they would be very disparate and curious. One of them would certainly be the Marseillaise, particularly as played in Casablanca. A number of things. But I like to give the impression, mainly because of my influencing, my being... mainly because of my being influenced by Somerset Maugham with 'I was a man of the world' who was not taken in by anything and was fairly dry-eyed and cynical about most matters. That is still my sort of public posture. It's a posture which is brought about, I think, by the Classics, Juvenal and Tacitus, and... who all else, liked to give the impression that they were beyond being shocked, and they regarded human foibles as a source of wry comedy, not anything to be morally indignant about, though they did do a bit of moral indignation or some people thought they did.

Looking back on 1959, it was a great watershed in my life. I had finished, before I left London, a book called The Limits of Love which was a very long book about... about Jews in North London, as I think I mentioned before. And when I'd finished it, I... I went to see the publisher, a man called Desmond Flower who had the MC. In those days, a lot of people that one knew of a generation older than oneself had decorations from the war. And it instilled, and still instils in me, a certain respect. Courage is all very well if it's to do with being rude about powerful people in print, but real courage is, to my mind, courage which is physical. And of that I've always had doubts about myself. I haven't been put to any great test, but I'm quite glad I haven't been.
Limits of Love is quite a long book and I had put into it a number of the things about the Jews which I had rather tactfully not broached in the first two novels I wrote. And I went to see Desmond Flower at Cassells, and he was an English chap. And he said, we very much like your book – they published The Earlsdon Way before that – and I'm sure it's going to do very well, but I do feel it's a bit long. It was actually 600 double-spaced pages of whatever it was in those days, foolscap, A4. It was a long book. And, my romantic attitude to being a writer, which did not apply itself to matters like the musical comedy or numbers of the Footlights or things of that kind, but in my fiction I was determined that I had become a writer in order to say exactly what I wanted to say, and I wasn't going to be told how I could make it lighter, more interesting, or make people like me. So, we'd been through that. So, Desmond Flower said, I do think it's a bit long. I immediately said, I'm not cutting out the bits about Auschwitz and Charterhouse and various other things which were more or less well embedded in the piece. And he said, oh, no, no, no. I don't want you to do anything like that. I just think it's a bit long. So, well, you've obviously got some idea of where you think it's too long and I think you should actually now tell me what that is. And, he said, but I don't. Here's what I think you should do, he said. I think you should take this manuscript home with you, 600 pages, and cut 10 words from every page. You'll find you can. And, it will be a much better book if you do. So, I did, and it was.
And, I think, again, mechanically speaking, the best advice is always, indeed, mechanical. It doesn't have much to do with whether or not you should describe more wild flowers as the English used to do to a fare-thee-well at the time when I was first writing, or that one should intrude more sex or less sex, but the bonier the text the more liable it is to endure. Hemingway said something along those lines and now so have I, so that pretty well covers it.
I don't mean I'm incapable of being flowery or various other things, either through an excess of homage to certain models, whether it's Proust or whoever, but in principle the trick is to put it down in such a way that nobody can say, why does he say, 'He answered furiously'. 'He answered' is plenty. 'He said' is plenty. And, quite possibly, 'He answered' and 'He said' can be omitted, because the reader can then import his indignation or something else into the text.

As it happened, we left England for Fuengirola in the October of 1959, and I never again have started a work of fiction in England. It's neither an accusation against England nor a boast about myself, but it has something to do with the fact that what I have done in England has always seemed to me to be affected by my sense of... of not really wanting, frankly, to be there and not very much being wanted to be there. Very unfair – in certain respects I've been deluged with scholarships and God knows what not and all, and nobody has treated me with any conspicuous ill feeling. But there is a sort of emblematic thing which happened just before we left England. And, again, it's just worth mentioning, for comedy's sake.
Bernard Levin, in 1959, was at the peak of his powers at The Spectator and he wrote a famous column called Taper which was a take-off of the proceedings of the House of Commons or a sour comment on it. In the style, of course, of Junius and various other people of an earlier epoch. Bernard was the sort of Jew who wrote slightly florid English very well in a persona which was not entirely his own. One of the things that he wrote in The Spectator was, in 1959, that he was glad to say that he didn't think there was any anti-Semitism left in England. Well, I was conscious of Beetle having been at the appointments board in Cambridge which had been, as they say nowadays, systematically anti-Semitic. Have I mentioned this, Christopher?
[Q] Briefly, but it doesn't hurt to…
So, although I... I remembered that a lot of the secretaries, not one for whom Beetle worked, but the others were just routinely and almost casually anti-Semitic and probably didn't even think that they were being anything but truthful. After all, who likes Jews? There's a good story about that, by the way. There's a man called Charlie Lederer who was a rather posh, elegant half-Jew, I think, in California, a screenwriter in the 1930s and he mixed with the crowd that went up to William Randolph Hearst's place in San Simeon. And Charlie Lederer was quite a smart guy. During the war, he was sent by Roosevelt, since he didn't look Jewish and was a smart guy, to India as some kind of diplomatic role. And when he was in India, he went to a big party at one of the British grandee's houses. I don't think it was the Viceroy but it was some big person. And his hostess was a fine lady and she had a great collection of jade, which was in a tall cabinet. And when she was talking to Lederer she said, 'Oh Mr Lederer, how are you enjoying India?' And he said, 'Well, it seems fine. You know, it's really nice, it's really interesting and, you know, I'm really... no, it's really interesting'. And she said, 'What a shame you weren't here before the war. So much nicer before the war'. And he said, 'Oh really, in what way was it nicer before the war?' And she said, 'A lot of funny people have come, you know, during the war and since the war. I mean, there are an awful lot of Jews around the place'. 'Oh', he said, 'don't you like Jews?' So, she said, 'Well, I can't think anybody likes Jews, do they?' And Charlie Lederer said, 'Got a reason?' And she said, 'Well, I don't think you need a reason'. And he reached up to the top of the cabinet with the priceless jade in it and he pulled the whole thing down – gadonk! – onto the floor. 'Now you've got a reason'.

Anyway, I wrote to Bernard Levin and said: you think there isn't any anti-Semitism, you know, I would like to show you the evidence that you are completely wrong. I don't care, I don't want you to do anything or you may not want to do anything, but you're wrong. So – we were living up in Highgate in this flat which we were evicted from in effect – so he said, would you… perhaps you'd like to bring it to The Spectator office. So, I went down to The Spectator office, which was then in Gower   Street. I'd published a couple of books, I'd done the Footlights. I was a little unknown, sort of not entirely ignominious person, well, quite a tall one, actually. So I went in and I was made to wait in the usual way and eventually this small Jewy Jew came out with the specs and the curly hair and all the sort of things that Julius Streicher didn't like and he said, 'What... what do you do?' And I said, 'Well, I've published a book or two'. 'Well, what is this stuff?' So I gave it to him and by the time we got down to Fuengirola, he had become quite excited about it and he published a lot of the stuff in The Spectator in his column, and he contacted a number of people and he wrote to me and said that Lord Rothschild was interested and there were going to be changes and we would see. But of course what we saw, in the end, was absolutely nothing. What we also saw was that journalists are interested, excited and eager advocates for 10 or 20 minutes and then, unless there is cheering in the streets and bonuses from the boss, their interest lapses.
Bernard did write to me. We became, sort of, friends. And, incidentally, years later, not 20 but about 17 or 18 years later, I wrote a television series called The Glittering Prizes which created quite a storm at the time. And I went… I was then invited to parties again which I had not been invited to for a season or two, because we were back in London by then. And, Bernard came up to me and said, 'What does it feel like to be the most famous man in London?' To which I'm glad to say I replied, 'I was just going to ask you, Bernard'. It was quite a nice little revenge. He meant no harm. The strange thing about Bernard was that he destroyed all of his correspondence at the end of every year. He sort of didn't want to be weighted down with the boxes, I suppose, of stuff. And, in the end, very bravely, when he was dying of Alzheimer's, or he contracted Alzheimer's and he lost his memory... So, in fact, of course, in a strange kind of way he destroyed what his brain itself destroyed later. One can smile or not smile, and one can admire the mysterious ways of God, but that's what happened.
So, we got down to Spain…

Beetle had worked at the appointments board while I was in my last year at Cambridge and she had access, of course, to all the records of what the secretaries, as they were called, for men, said about various people who came looking for jobs in industry, the foreign service or whatever it might be. And these men treated the undergraduates who came to see them, or the young graduates, with apparent paternal interest and asked them questions about stuff and all the rest of it, but afterwards, like the sly novelist, they made notes about these people. And Beetle discovered, to her considerable surprise since she encountered virtually no anti-Semitism in her life, mainly I suspect because of the charm of her character but also because girls didn't do that stuff at school so much. And, she was quite shocked and told me about it, and took some copies of these things which Victor Gollancz, at first, was going to get very excited and busy about, but then he didn't do anything about it. And, they lapsed from our minds for about five years until Bernard wrote this piece in The Spectator saying there wasn't anti-Semitism. And I still had the pieces of paper on which were written, 'looks Jewy' and 'wears Jewy clothes', and various charming things of this kind. It was no skin off my nose – off my Jewish nose – since I had no intention whatever of seeking a job with appointments board and never went near the place. I was just somewhat outraged. I do outrage. So, I sent them to Bernard, I took them to Bernard, and so it went. He wrote to me quite a lot while we were down in Spain.
It was lovely getting the mail in Spain because Spain and southern Spain in those days was an incredibly long way away from England. There was Franco. There was a sense of living in a Fascist society but the consequence of that was you paid your maid 300 pesetas a month - £4 or £5 - and she came early in the morning and she cooked the meal and all the rest of it, and you weren't allowed to pay her more because it would spoil it, of course, for the other ex-pats. So, the great moment in the morning was when the cartero arrived – the postman – used to open the little gate to the back of the little cottage that we rented. 'Bueno dia', and if there were letters that you wanted, you could recognise, of course, by the envelope, you gave him the peseta and if there were things that you'd particularly been waiting for and wanted, you gave him dos pesetas.
So, on £10 a week, which I just about had, we could live passing quite well and drive a little Ford that I'd bought at Lex Garages and we had our little boy, Paul, with us – Pablo – who was well looked after by our extraordinary maid Salvadora who was always in black, always scowling, 'Bueno dia, Bueno dia'. She had four daughters and no husband who'd been drowned at sea, a fisherman, and of course there was no compensation or insurance. So, we were her way of making a living. And, although we did pay her indeed very, very little money, we did at least not have much, she was fairly good at arriving with a great deal of lunch. She cooked a great deal of lunch as well, put it on the patio table between 2 and 3 o'clock in the afternoon. 'Señorito, comida'. And we used to sit there and she would stand looking at us like this... 'Todo! Eat it all – todo!' But, of course, we couldn't actually eat it all because she'd cooked for four people. We could eat for three, but four was a bit too much and, of course, there was a bit more in the kitchen which was ready for seconds or whatever. So, Salvadora used to leave in the evening with her black bag and it was not empty; it was fine.
She was actually wonderful and she was a wonderful cook, even though Spain in those days was fairly destitute of luxury, so she would arrive and say, 'Que comida? What do you want for lunch?' So we'd say... I was typing away on the patio, of course, so we would say 'Boquerones, linguados, vamos a ver'. She had no teeth so she couldn't pronounce certain words and certain letters so... anyway, she would go off to the thing and then she would come back and she would say, 'Linguados, linguas' [sic] she used to say, 'no hay'. 'Boquerones, no hay. Pero...' and then you would find out what you were going to have for lunch. She made things called rizzoles which were with tuna fish, with sort of potato and some kind of... I don't know, delicious. I mean, she was a fantastic cook. So we lived very well and I wrote. I wrote one novel, I think it was called... yes, it was, A Wild Surmise. A Wild Surmise was set in a sort of Hispanic republic, excuse me, in the... in South America, which I'd never been to, and it was actually based on Malaga and what I had seen about life in Spain. I hadn't been there for more than three or four weeks when I started the book. I wrote a play first which was called The Roper House which was based on a, sort of, fascistic genius architect, a sort of English Frank Lloyd Wright, not that I'm saying Frank Lloyd Wright was a fascist. It was kind of Ayn Rand-ish actually; I don't know whether I'd read The Fountainhead, but I feel as if I probably had.
So, The Limits of Love was, by this time, I think, in proof. I can't remember, but I think it must have been and it would come out in the following summer.

So, I wrote this book and I was very conscious that DH Lawrence, whom in those days I admired very much, and I don't not admire now, though he doesn't get any nicer as time goes by in terms of his behaviour towards, in particular, Frieda's children, or Frieda and her children. Anyway, Lawrence had written a book about Australia called Kangaroo, apparently after being there for only six weeks. And he got Australia right in the essentials because... I don't vaunt myself on it, it's just one of those things: if you are a real writer and a novelist, you can get it very quickly. Old Willie Maugham made the point when he said, in order to write about the taste of roast mutton it's not a… in order to write about the taste of roast mutton, it's not necessary to consume an entire sheep, but it's a good idea to have eaten a lamb chop. So, the lamb chops in Spain were pretty accessible and I watched and I listened. I learned Spanish fairly quickly and read it with some facility because of my fortunate experiences with the Classics.
So, I wrote A Wild Surmise, and pretty damned good it is too, and sent that off to my publisher. And, the day after I finished A Wild Surmise, or rather, I finished it on a Friday and on the next Monday morning I started another novel. A little novel called The Trouble with England, which was based on a little episode which I'd... we'd experienced in a pension in southern France soon after our son Paul was born and we'd had a short holiday there. And the man had come in with a lot of water colour, small water colour post cards and he had painted them with his mouth, holding the brush in his mouth and he was a… he was or said he was, and I believed he was, a concentration camp survivor. Why he was unable to use his arms, I don't know. He may have lost one or two, I don't know. It stuck in my mind. So I had a couple who were sort of sensitive and... like me and Beetle, and another couple who were very British and I sort of, in the character of Joe, I was indignant at the way in which this man was treated and the way that the people in the pension didn't buy his postcards and all the rest of it. And the other guys say, well, you know, never mind and I, through this character, said, 'You don't think there's anything wrong with England, do you?' And he said, 'Oh, the trouble with England is the weather!' A fairly laborious irony, but it worked pretty well.
So, I did that and, I think also at that point, very strangely, I don't quite know why… Yes, of course I do, we had written… Leslie and I had written this Cambridge film which was being made, or had been made, I think… I never went near it when it was being shot, but I turned my back on Bricusse and on the world of show biz, in particular musical comedies I did not want to write and films I thought were pretty crappy. But, one has to live, so I was rung up by, or somehow or other I got in touch with… it must have been a telegram, I couldn't have been rung up because, of course, we had no phones, by a man called Fritz Gotfurt who was a Jewish refugee of very early date who had gone to England and now worked for ABC, and he wanted me to rewrite a screenplay or do some writing on a… yes, rewrite a screenplay which starred Dickie Todd who was then a big star, as well as having actually been a very brave man in the war, a colonel and so on, but he was a well know, randy little... little actor and the film was called Don't Bother to Knock and it was about some… I think it was an airline pilot or something and he had women here there and everywhere – anyway. So, I was going to get a £175 a week for three weeks of rewrite and, frankly, that was an absolute godsend and would keep Salvadora cooking rissoles more or less in perpetuity. So, I don't think I went back to England. I think they just sent it to me and I... I did it very quickly and, because I didn't give a damn about it, I actually did it quite well. It can happen. Not always, but it can happen. So they were very pleased and I was also very pleased.
And... we stayed in Fuengirola until the following... we arrived in October and I think we stayed until March, and in March I had a telegram from my agent, George Greenfield MC, who had been at Alamein when he was led through a minefield by a dead officer, or at least he always believed that he did, and he wasn't much of a fantasist – who shall say that he didn't have this experience? You know, lots of weird things happen. Anyway, George cabled me to say that Lippincott in America had bought the Limits of Love and they were going to pay $2,500 and they were going to spend $2,500 on publicity. I'd won the Lippincott prize. So, I thought it would be the first of many, but it wasn't.
Anyway, suddenly, we were in somewhat different case from anything that we'd been in before. Where were we? Yes, we were in 1960, and also we were a different case because Beetle was pregnant.

I wrote one novel and then I wrote another immediately. People often suggested there's some kind of rapport between sexual energy and creative energy and Hemingway had the idea, not alone by the way, that if you took away one you lost the other, and so that, you know, every time you had sex that was a book loss. I don't think that was Hemingway, Balzac or somebody, I don't know. Balzac died at the age of 54 having written 800 books, so it doesn't seem to have done him much harm, and it probably wasn't him. Much it matters.
The strange thing was that being a writer somehow established my right to be at all. I was with Beetle and we were happy and we had a good time in Fuengirola. We met a lot of Americans which I greatly enjoyed because they were not… They were with you when they were with you. The English always look at you as though they wonder where you came from and where you're going and what you think of them and all the rest of it. I've never trusted the English. I like their language, I appreciate the generosity of a kind of their society, all the rest of it and, you know, I have been English and my father was certainly pretty British, but I have never felt easy here. I like to hide. And, when I went away on my own, thanks to the Reverend Harper Wood, I discovered that being alone so far from being a condition in which you discover what you're really like, is a condition in which you almost vanish. And, the great thing about being a writer on his travels is that he doesn't have anybody that he has to see on Wednesday or Friday or anything else. He's just there watching and listening. And I like that. It's a comic assertion, because I, of course, understand that I'm inclined to talk, to… seek to amuse the people, and in some people's minds, to impose myself on them. But, in truth, I like the state of, kind of lightness which comes with being a writer. And, as soon as I sit down in the morning to do it, that's all I do. I don't worry about whether it's going to be successful. I hope it's going to be amusing when I wish to be amusing. I hope it's going to be hurtful when it hurts, I hope it's going to be truthful. All kinds of stuff. But I disappear. So, it's the best possible therapy because something actually comes of it, as opposed to therapy with people to whom you confess your troubles and then you pay them £200 for the hour you've spent with them, and where are the troubles and what have they turned into? Wastepaper.

I liked the Americans that I met down there – painters, writers, it was a small village, Fuengirola, in those days and we used to play tennis on a court owned by a German who was never there, who was doubtless no better than he should be. And it was a tiled court, which I've never played on before or since, fantastically fast and most enjoyable and there was a pool next door, and all the rest of it. And then in the afternoons we used to play soccer. There was a bunch of various people, including several black people that I had not known. I didn't really know any black people before that, except for a few West Indian writers that I'd met in London. So, it was... it was a liberation. I don't know whether I felt more grown up, but I felt less grown down, by which I mean I did not feel rooted by some kind of obligation to be either more British than the British or something of that kind. There's a comedy in all of this which is one of the reasons why the tone that I take about myself, and to some extent about life, is sort of camouflage; it's... it's serious but I'm conscious also of the absurdity. My life as a Jew, whatever that means since I don't actually go to synagogue or take any great interest, at least not until recently, in a purely historical way in Jewish… in the Jewish past. Nevertheless, I sort of think it comic that I should have what has been, after all, a pretty enjoyable and easy life, and at the same time be very conscious of injustices and scandals, not only in regard to Jews, by the way, although they do accumulate, I confess, and if I was very solemn about those things I would be false to the happiness which, thanks to Beetle and my children and good luck, I have been granted. So, oddly enough, although I grumble a lot, I don't like to grumble about my own condition, because that ain't actually all that terrible. I can do it, but it's not all that terrible.
But, it was a liberation to be in Spain, and I did not look forward to going back, but once I'd won this Lippincott prize, which was quite a lot of money in those days, and I also had a small advance from the book which was going to be published, the same book, in London so I looked forward to that. So, I felt quite good, so in the end it was decided that Beetle would fly home with our small son, Paul, from Gibraltar and I would drive back to England. So, I left them at Gibraltar and set off to drive in the car which was not, at that point, at its best. First of all, I discovered later that it actually had been two crashed cars that had been put together, which is not, I don't think, any great scandal as long as it works, and, it did work pretty damn well but I had rusted effectively the silencer, as the Americans call it, and the little guy from Fuengirola who soldered things together, he did it pretty damn well, you know, only could do so much with it. So, I drove more or less 25 miles an hour from Gibraltar all the way up through Spain into France and across Les Landes and all the way up to Paris. And it took me a long time and I was... I had terrible migraines in those days and I remember I was crossing Les Landes and I had such a headache that I got out of the car and parked it and just lay down, literally in the ditch and went to sleep. And I lay there for four or five hours. Nobody gave a damn, of course, or even noticed that I was there, and then off I went again.
And, I got to Paris and I met a man called Julian Jebb who later became quite a sort of posh little person in BBC television. I'd known him in Cambridge because I wrote a number for him which he… well, not for him, but I wrote a number about Somerset Maugham: 'Willie, Willie, Willie Somerset Maugham, you're at the top of the literary form, you'll be going on fine till you're 99, Willie, Willie Somerset Maugham', which Julian Jebb performed in the Footlights after the one that I had been in with Jonathan Miller and Leslie Bricusse. So, I met him and I met a woman called Gillian Tindall and somebody else. I think they were all Catholics, I'm not sure. I don't really know whether people were Catholics or not, I didn't much care. And I had that sort of sinking feeling, which I never fail to have when I meet people that I know in foreign places and when I know that they are somehow part of the London establishment which I'm not a part of. I don't think I could never have been a part of it. I suspect I could easily have been a part of it, but there's a wonderful story that Kafka wrote about a man who goes to an office building and there's a waiting bench, or a chair outside an office that he wants to go to. And the door is half open and light spills out from the office into the dark corridor. And the man sits there and he sits there all day and eventually a man comes to the door and says to him, from inside the office, 'Have you been waiting long?' And he says, 'Yes, I've been waiting all day'. And the man says, 'Ah, because this door was open all day, but now I'm shutting it'. Whether that's the Jew dans ses oeuvres or what, it's something which has certainly happened to me a good deal. I've been very foolish about reluctance to push myself forward, as my father would say. I can imagine wry smiles on this topic in certain quarters, nevertheless, it's actually quite true.
So, I drove north and I met these people and I had this sort of awful premonition of what it was going to be like to be back in England. Not that they weren't perfectly nice to me, and all the rest of it. I just felt completely reduced by their company, even though they doubtless find me amusing or domineering or anything else that anybody may or may not say about me, much I bloody care.

So, I got back to England and we traded in the little rusty Ford for a larger, I think it was a Standard Ensign of a grey, rather nice car, and we went to live in a cottage owned by somebody I was at Cambridge with, down in East Bergholt. The Old Mill House, which was where Constable's father had lived. It's in the Constable country. Langham is on one side of the A12 and Dedham is on the other side. Langham was badly hit by the Black Death and was depopulated and only recently recovered, whereas Dedham for some reason was not. Anyway, much all that matters, Constable did Dedham more than he did Langham. But, he did actually paint Langham church.
And Beetle really liked it down there. We had a garden, we had asparagus, we had all kinds of stuff. And Beetle was pregnant, and our daughter Sarah, the painter, was born in Constable's cottage, or Constable's father's cottage. I used to mow the lawn and all the rest of it, and in June of 1960, The Limits of Love was published in London. And, poor little Freddie Raphael – rubbish – actually what happened was that I had a whole page in the Daily Express, which in those days was not run by some kind of gutter merchant but by, of course, the Lord Beaverbrook, who had his whole private gutter, but rather better furnished. Anyway, a guy called Peter Forster was the critic and he emblazoned me on the page and said, this is a book in which the characters step off the page into life, which wasn't a bad thing to be said about a book written by somebody in his late 20s, or anybody else if it comes to that. Anyway, it was a big hit. Now, just before the book received this big piece of publicity, Wolf Mankowitz, who in those days was quite a well known writer, he was an East End Jew who'd been to Cambridge and was actually a Leavisite at one point, a kind of a radically austere English pursuer of the... good taste, but he also had a business in Piccadilly selling Wedgewood, in which he was an expert, and although he'd come down from Cambridge with appropriate honours and all the rest of it, he had sort of turned back into a kind of rough, tough, East End boy. So, I went up to see him because he had written a... bought a book called Memoirs of a Cross-Eyed Man, which he wanted to turn into a movie. So I went in and talked to him and he said, 'Well, I don't want any of that Cambridge crap. You know, I don't want any of that fancy stuff. I don't know whether you can do it, you'll probably... you'll probably... I don't suppose you'll manage it'. So, it was sort of one of those funny... he had a big box of... previously it had those big matches that people had in those days, sort of showy matches, and he opened the box. I don't know why he opened it, and I noticed it was fully of rolled up £5 notes; £5 notes were quite valuable in those days. Sort of strange man, Wolf, actually, because he was... he was very, very aggressively Jewish but also very English with it, very East  End, and smart. Too smart. He thought it was really easy to write films. It's fairly easy, but not very.
Anyway, so he sent me away. So, then this piece came out with Peter Forster saying that I was… I'd joined the major league, he said! So, I had a thing from... a call from Wolf… 'I suppose you want to come in now'. So, I went in and I got a job writing this film for Peter Sellers, Memoirs of a Cross-Eyed Man. Peter and Wolf had got a partnership going. Well, by the time I'd gone half way through the script Peter had been told by his clairvoyant that he shouldn't work with Wolf. In other words, his agent had bribed the clairvoyant to tell Peter not to work with… or whatever. So, in the end the script was written and I delivered it and Wolf, I think, paid for it, yes. Because I had a new agent by that time, Richard Gregson, who was very good at his job. So, again, I collected the money for the script and nothing happened. But, another thing happened. Which was that a woman called Stella Richman had been made the head of scripts at Associated Television run by Lew Grade – a Jewish conspiracy reared its head, of course. I wish. Anyway, my agent, Richard Gregson, arranged for me to go and see Stella. And I was, at that point, incredibly lucky.

I was incredibly fortunate, when I went to see Stella Richman because independent television had just started. The good fortune is this: if you're interested in doing anything, you want to do it at a time when people want more product than they can get hold of. Then, you can write not only good stuff, but you get paid for it, and it's accepted, and all the rest of it. So, I went there and Stella said, what do you want to do? And I said, I haven't any idea. What's a television script look like? I think I might have written one for the BBC which was turned down, even though they said it was the best script they'd ever had. Yes, that's quite true, before we left England: best script we've ever had, unfortunately we can't do it, which means the word 'Jew' appeared in the script. Anyway, that was that. Stella said, well, I think, you know, I'd like you to do some things for us. She was actually assembling a stable of writers. A lot of them lasted pretty damn well. I mean, Clive Exton, and a number of people whose names I'm sorry to say I can't now recall but actually were very famous in their day. Anyway, she sent me off to do a screenplay... 45-minute screenplay – ideal – of a little short story by Truman Capote called Answered Prayers, which contained a kind of Leslie Bricusse figure in it, too, as a sort of fixer and smart arse around this place, and I managed to do all of that stuff quite well and transferred it to England. And she liked it very much. Now, the great thing was, in the 1960s, you wrote a piece… I wrote these plays in three days. I wrote three days to write 45-minute piece, one day to correct it, and then on Friday I sent it off to Stella. She did have a script editor who occasionally raised perfectly sensible, or not sensible points, but basically they were in such a hurry that they just… Well, I did good stuff and she liked it.
So, I began to be regularly employed by Stella so it would arrive on her desk on the Friday afternoon. She might ring me at the beginning of the week to say, do you think you could... and the week after that you'd be in rehearsal. So, I had during those months of 1960, beginning of '61, I wrote, I suppose four or five what were, in those days, called plays for ITV. We got very good casts and I had the priceless experience of going to rehearsal and working with professional actors regularly. And I was very innocent and somewhat amazed, I mean, I remember I went… I wrote one thing called A Well Dressed Man which was a very nice plot. I'm not good at plots. I tend to rely on imagining what your life is like, what it was like, what it will be like, what the woman that you told me about who'd… etc. That's what I'm keen on. But in this case I thought of a plot which was of a man who was so lonely that when the police advertised for a well dressed man who might have seen somebody accused of murder in a pub at a certain point, that he should come forward, my lonely little chap comes forward and secures the acquittal of a manifest murderer. And, the second half, I think there were always three halves with the commercial break, the second half began with a knock at the door, and he opens the door and this huge guy played by an Australian actor called Ken Warren says, 'Hello, friend'. And in the end, the poor little guy has to poison this man before he completely ruins his life. Anyway, I remember that because I used to type these plays out. I used to, occasionally, smile at my own jokes and all the rest of it; basically I just did the stuff. It was easy. It was easy.

I was incredibly fortunate, when I went to see Stella Richman because independent television had just started. The good fortune is this: if you're interested in doing anything, you want to do it at a time when people want more product than they can get hold of. Then, you can write not only good stuff, but you get paid for it, and it's accepted, and all the rest of it. So, I went there and Stella said, what do you want to do? And I said, I haven't any idea. What's a television script look like? I think I might have written one for the BBC which was turned down, even though they said it was the best script they'd ever had. Yes, that's quite true, before we left England: best script we've ever had, unfortunately we can't do it, which means the word 'Jew' appeared in the script. Anyway, that was that. Stella said, well, I think, you know, I'd like you to do some things for us. She was actually assembling a stable of writers. A lot of them lasted pretty damn well. I mean, Clive Exton, and a number of people whose names I'm sorry to say I can't now recall but actually were very famous in their day. Anyway, she sent me off to do a screenplay... 45-minute screenplay – ideal – of a little short story by Truman Capote called Answered Prayers, which contained a kind of Leslie Bricusse figure in it, too, as a sort of fixer and smart arse around this place, and I managed to do all of that stuff quite well and transferred it to England. And she liked it very much. Now, the great thing was, in the 1960s, you wrote a piece… I wrote these plays in three days. I wrote three days to write 45-minute piece, one day to correct it, and then on Friday I sent it off to Stella. She did have a script editor who occasionally raised perfectly sensible, or not sensible points, but basically they were in such a hurry that they just… Well, I did good stuff and she liked it.
So, I began to be regularly employed by Stella so it would arrive on her desk on the Friday afternoon. She might ring me at the beginning of the week to say, do you think you could... and the week after that you'd be in rehearsal. So, I had during those months of 1960, beginning of '61, I wrote, I suppose four or five what were, in those days, called plays for ITV. We got very good casts and I had the priceless experience of going to rehearsal and working with professional actors regularly. And I was very innocent and somewhat amazed, I mean, I remember I went… I wrote one thing called A Well Dressed Man which was a very nice plot. I'm not good at plots. I tend to rely on imagining what your life is like, what it was like, what it will be like, what the woman that you told me about who'd… etc. That's what I'm keen on. But in this case I thought of a plot which was of a man who was so lonely that when the police advertised for a well dressed man who might have seen somebody accused of murder in a pub at a certain point, that he should come forward, my lonely little chap comes forward and secures the acquittal of a manifest murderer. And, the second half, I think there were always three halves with the commercial break, the second half began with a knock at the door, and he opens the door and this huge guy played by an Australian actor called Ken Warren says, 'Hello, friend'. And in the end, the poor little guy has to poison this man before he completely ruins his life. Anyway, I remember that because I used to type these plays out. I used to, occasionally, smile at my own jokes and all the rest of it; basically I just did the stuff. It was easy. It was easy.

So, anyway, we came back to England and I did my stuff with ATV and The Limits of Love was published. And then I... I sort of thought that I… I don't know, I didn't quite know what I was going to do and I then wanted to go back to Spain. I think it was partly because of the friends we'd had there, partly because I'd sort of had enough of trying to be a writer in East Bergholt. East Bergholt... I remember very well I met Paul Jennings on a train. Do you know who Paul Jennings was? I met Paul Jennings who, in those days had a column in The Observer and he was a fairly bumptious little Catholic man. And I met him on the train and I'd just bought the Penguin Pocket Dictionary. And the Penguin Pocket Dictionary for some reason had those catch words at the top of each page, and the ones that they had were very comic, actually. I don't quite remember. And I remember pointing that out to Jennings and he wrote a column using what I'd pointed out to him, but although we lived in the same village he never gave me a ring to thank me for telling him or drop me a note and I thought, as we say in the business, bugger you. And, I thought that about quite a lot of people who don't have any manners. I'm quite keen on manners, partly because of my father, partly because of Winchester, to which I didn't go, and manners makyth man. But, also, because I suspect manners as a sort of wonderful device, English good manners, for showing respect for people you don't respect. And, I've always been very good at that really. So, I'm very correct when roused. Very. Also, very grammatical.
So, we hung around England and then said Stella Richman said… I said to Stella Richman, I really want to get back to Spain. Do you think I could go on doing stuff? Oh yes, she said, fine. So, I was able to go back to Spain with some ideas or some books, I can't remember, to do into television plays. And, I went back and then I wrote another novella while I was down there which was called The Graduate Wife. In those days it was quite a thing in the posh papers, The Observer and places – Katherine Whitehorn used to write about the, you know, the problem of the graduate wife. I don't know what the bloody problem with the graduate wife was. I mean, I had a graduate wife and she didn't seem to have a problem, but apparently graduate wives were not being properly treated by graduate husbands or non-graduate husbands, and it all had to have something done about it. The English always think something can be done about absolutely everything, especially those things that nothing can be done about. So, The Graduate Wife is funny. The Graduate Wife is based, actually, on a couple who had come to see us while we were in East Bergholt, in our little cottage, and the couple was composed of Jeremy Atkinson and Janet, the wife that he had married after she had solicited my advice back in Oxford in 1954. And, they had a child or two, we're now talking about 1960. And, they came and stayed with us because they were on a circuit and I wasn't aware of the fact, and again, I say 'the English' as if I wasn't part of them. Of course, I am part of them, because I don't want you to say I'm not. On the other hand I observe them. They are very good at cadging.

The English upper classes and upper middle classes, and middle classes if they have a chance, I've discovered as I go through life, are extremely good at finding reasons to come and see you if you've got a place they can stay in for nothing. Friendship is apparently rediscovered with great ease by people who need to have a break. And, not only English people because I had an experience recently with some Americans that wasn't too hot, either.
Anyway, Jeremy and Janet arrived at our house and we were poor. I mean, I talk as if we had plenty of money, we had plenty of money to live on, we ran the car, we ate, all the rest, but we weren't… not rich. And, it didn't occur to them to bring us any presents or anything when they arrived, except, of course, their presence. When Beetle told Janet what was for supper, her way of saying thank you was to say, that will be all right. The comedy was that I had heard a number of stories about the fact that Janet was not quite the little English, innocent English rose which had been presented to me in Oxford and at a certain point she had apparently, before getting married I think, run off with some rather seedy man – I don't know who he was – and had been pursued by Jeremy's band of friends from Charterhouse who had retrieved her and brought her home. I don't know whether that's true and if it's true, it's true, we all have comedic element... comic aspects to our lives. Anyway, by now they were married and they had the children. And when we went back to Fuengirola I wrote this book called The Graduate Wife which was essentially about Janet, the graduate wife, and this couple and their incredible good opinion of themselves. Now, it's a funny thing about writing books. I don't know whether people get lots of fan mail, old Willie Maugham said he got a lot of fan mail, but I don't get a lot of fan mail. I get some, not much. The only letter of applause which I received for The Graduate Wife, which was very droll, was from Jeremy and Janet. So, shows how subtle my treatment of them was.

We went back to Fuengirola and things didn't go so well. I don't know why it was, but I began to get very short of money. So, I wrote to the bank in the way that English middle class people do, saying to the bank manager, Mr Webb of the Midland Bank, Sloane   Square, would you please send me £250. And Selwyn Lloyd had just introduced the first of many British crisis budgets, and the bank manager wrote back and said that he would send me the money when I was in funds. I don't know why it had all gone, but it had. Which was a shock. I was okay. I somehow got by. I don't remember. Perhaps Stella sent me some money. Anyway, she arranged to see us in Sainte-Maxime when we left Fuengirola early the following summer.
It wasn't the best time of our marriage. We had two small children by then, Paul and Sarah, and we lived in a small cottage. I don't know. It... it was a low period between Beetle and me. There haven't been that many, but it was. And, in the end I was glad to get out of Spain in this Ford... in this Standard Ensign.
We drove up to Sainte-Maxime where I was going to meet Stella Richman who was on holiday there with her husband who ran a restaurant called the White Elephant which was very famous in London in the 60s, in Curzon Street where all the people used to meet. We drove up to Sainte-Maxime and when we got to Sainte-Maxime, there was a message from my agent in London, Richard Gregson. It may have been his partner Gareth Wigan, who later became quite a big shot in one of those US studios. Anyway, would I call? So, I called, and one of the plays that I had written for Stella Richman, was called Nothing But the Best, or it was called The Best of Everything when it appeared on television. It was a short story by Stanley Ellin, an American short story writer, and rather a good one, which I had transposed to England. It was about a guy who wasn't very smart who gets involved with the Ivy League people in New York and betters himself eventually to his own ruin. I made it a sort of working class oik in England who gets involved in an estate agent in London, and then eventually turns himself into the sort of person who can marry the boss's daughter and all the rest of it. And that was that. A man called David Deutsch wanted to buy the rights of my little playlet and turn it into a film, and he wanted me to write the script. So, very suddenly, and not for the first time in my life, which is why it would look very bad if I pretended that I was some kind of victim – not much of a victim, really – suddenly, from nothing, everything was fine. Stella said, oh, by the way, while you're doing that, you will do a couple more plays for me, won't you? She was very nice. Her husband was a chef and brought wonderful picnics in Sainte-Maxime, we had a great time. So, instead of thinking we were going to have to go back to England and find somewhere to live, and all the rest of it, we did go back to England in order that I should see David Deutsch who just… I said, well, I want to go write the script in Rome, and he said, fine.
His father was Oscar Deutsch who'd founded the Odeon cinema chain. He was a Manchester Jew and Manchester Jews, like Glaswegian Jews, are a slightly different race from North London Jews, if they're of a single race, which they're not, of course. In the sense that they'd often been in Manchester for quite a long time, like my father's mother's family, the Bebros and they were what the English used to call unapologetic Jews. Anyway, David had always obviously had a bit of money, he wasn't rich but he had a bit of money. He had a very, very pretty wife, called Claire, who was not Jewish. And, they were really nice. So, he said, they were going to pay me quite a bit of money which we could live on easily in Rome. So, we changed the Ford – why do I keep calling it a Ford? – the Standard Ensign for a Standard Vanguard which is a much bigger thing with lots of room for luggage in the back and the children could lie down and go to sleep while we drove up and down Europe, which we actually did quite a bit of. And, we drove down to Rome.

I had the idea we would go and stay in Anzio, which I took to be somewhere like Fuengirola in Spain, but it wasn't. In the end we went back to Rome and we found a house, or not a house, we found a flat, thanks to a… I suppose he was an Arab or he may have been an Iranian called Mr Awad. In those days, all those foreigners were just kind of all those foreigners. I never knew one from another, frankly. He was very nice. And he found us a flat with a Contessa in the flat. There were Contessas of all kinds in Rome. I mean, there had always been a plethora of Contessas. Our Contessa had a Fiat 1100 driven by a chauffeur with a proper uniform and a cap. And she was also, because she was Italian, I suppose, quite indulgent with the idea of having two small children in this furnished flat. And in we moved.
And I wrote a film which was later called Nothing But the Best. And, once again, I'd had a bit of experience with Leslie and with writing the thing for Dickie Todd, but this was an original. The story of The Best of Everything was ended with the bad guy being discovered. David Deutsch had suggested that perhaps it could go a bit further than that and I could find a new plot, and I did, where the guy actually… he actually survives by various nefarious means. It was sort of against the ethos of morals in film at that time.
Anyway, I wrote the script and I created two very good parts. In particular, one very good part, later played by Denholm Elliot, of a sort of remittance man who stayed at home. The son, in fact of the boss of this great agency who had gone off with some money and all the rest of it, and he was paid… he was the guy who turned out to teach Alan Bates how to be a gentleman.

I wrote the script of Nothing But the Best, I sent it off to my agent who said it was the best screenplay that he'd ever read. He was an agent, of course, but it was pretty good, pretty good. David Deutsch liked it very much and he then hired a man called Clive Donner that he had known in the Rank Organisation who had edited a great hit of the 1950s called Genevieve about the Brighton car rally with Kenneth More and various other people. So, would we come back to England and have a conference with them about that? So, we loaded everybody into the Standard Vanguard and drove all the way through France back to England and it didn't seem to take a minute and we stopped at lots of nice little restaurants along the way and all the rest of it. And I had conferences with Clive who talked and talked and talked and talked and never seemed to finish a sentence, but he was a very sweet guy. And he wasn't entirely stupid. David was very nice. Claire was very pretty. And I went back to finish that and then we were in Rome until beginning of '62. This was now 1961. In '62 we were in Rome so I said to Beetle, I don't really want to go back to England. Let's go to Greece.
So, we loaded the kids in the Vanguard and drove to Bari on our way to Bridinsi, and in Bari I became quite ill. Not seriously ill, but I mean I had a very high fever and we're in this quite fancy miserable hotel in Bari and I remember I said, tomorrow morning we're going to go. I haven't had a temperature today, I'm going to go tomorrow and the following morning I took my temperature and it was 101, and Beetle said, what is it? And, I said, it's normal, let's go. I left the temperature behind and we went down to Brindisi and, like Cicero and many other famous Romans, we took ship. We took ship, actually, to Igoumenitsa in Epirus in northwestern Greece. And, that's where we got off because I thought we should have a look at as much of Greece as we possibly could. And, once again, I had that feeling at the age of, now 31 or so, that I'd actually made a complete balls of my Classical education or the Classical education was complete balls because, of course, it was very much to do with texts and learning antique languages and not about the culture and all the rest of it. We went up to the oracle of Dodoni, up in Epirus, is the oldest oracle in Greece and the priests were famous because they never washed their feet. I don't know why, but they didn't. And they used to hang things in the... in the sacred oak trees they would hang questions and then they would rattle and they would divine what they meant. And it's still a sort of extraordinary and numinous place. But, you can only take so much numinosity at a time.
So, we drove down to through the western side of Greece until we got to wherever it was and took the ferry across to Patras, and then we drove along the top of the Peloponnese and eventually wound up in Athens, where I went to see, or we went to see, a travel agent called Thalia Targa just off Syntagma Square. She'd been recommended by Dilys Powell in one of her articles. Dilys was a great Helenophile, the film critic of the Sunday Times. So, I made a quite bold suggestion to Thalia Targa that I was actually a friend of Dilys's although, truth, I don't think I knew her at all. But my Hampstead friends always did that kind of thing. Guy Ramsay knew her, so I thought it would be fine. And it was. We were in Thalia's little office. We said to her, where should we go? We don't know where to go. We want to go to a Greek island, you know, and a beach and I want to finish the book, which I was halfway through, which I had started in Rome after I'd finished the script. I mean, I don't piss around with not working. Because if I do I get depressed. Anyway, I'd written the book… I was in the middle of writing a book called Lindmann. So, she said, you could go to Skiathos, which is an island actually in the north, towards Thessaloniki. And, then the phone rang and it was a man called Artemis Denaxas and he was an old politician who had, actually, administered the Marshall Plan, the Greek bit of the Marshall Plan for the Americans, so, as you can imagine, he was not at this point a poor man. But he was very British. When we eventually met him he had a dog called Dick and another one called Rover, and he subscribed to the British way of life. And on the telephone he said to Thalia, why don't you get them to go to Ios in the Cyclades. I am the Kyrios, I am the Lord of Ios. He had certain delusions of grandeur although he was fairly grand, and he did own an awful lot of the island. He said, they must go to Ios before the Germans and the French get there. He wasn't stupid, old Denaxas. So, tell them, if they will go there I will take care of them when I come, I'm coming later. I will take care of them.
So, a few days later, maybe the next day, I think we went to see the treasures of the Athenian museum, the mask of Agememnon, or the supposed mask of Agememnon and Schliemann stuff. It was fantastic and there was all this Greek written everywhere. I bought, of course, I bought a grammar and I found it fairly easy to start learning enough Modern Greek to get by because I had all the Ancient Greek words as a back up. In Modern Greek the most common words are the most unlike Ancient Greek because, of course, they've been corrupted in usage by Italians and by Turks and various other folk who've come and gone in Athens. The longer words get, the easier it is to decrypt them, if you've done all that stuff.

So we went down to the Piraeus and so there was a boat called Despina which was an old British channel ferry – very old. Made in Glasgow, I think. Would it be Glasgow? Yes. Fourteen hours from Piraeus to Ios. We left Piraeus at whatever time it was, which led us to arrive at Ios at 3 o'clock in the morning. There were two boats a week, each of them arrived at three in the morning at Ios which was an island, as you can imagine, which not many people went to. Therefore, it didn't matter when you got there, it went on to Santorini which, even then, was a fairly desirable destination. So, we got first class tickets on the Vespinar. We got on the boat and Greek ladies with cardboard boxes were sick into the cardboard boxes before the boat had even set sail for the Piraeus. It was pretty rough, actually. Beetle and Sarah, Beetle and … no, it was pretty rough actually and Beetle and Paul were just fine and Sarah and I felt very seedy. Sarah was then a baby, I mean, a very small baby. Beetle was incredibly practical, able and uncomplaining, toting these small children around. And I have to say that, we've always been together. I don't mean that I've changed a lot of nappies, though I've changed a good many, I mean I don't have any shame about cooking. One of the things that DH Lawrence taught us – if he did – was there's nothing shameful about domestic work. I've always thought it perfectly ludicrous to suppose it's unmasculine to help washing up. So, I'm pretty good with all that... I hope.
So, we set off and we arrived at Ios in the middle of the night. We heard this voice saying, 'Ios, Ios!' Into the darkness, nothing. And, then you'd see a little, tiny, red light waxing and waning and it's the man rowing out, several men sometimes, with cigarettes – the Greeks smoked a lot, they still do – rowing out from the harbour because there was no jetty in those days. The ship dropped its anchor in the harbour and the people swarmed up the ladder, rope ladder, to the thing and started taking the bags as well as the things of course which had been sent from Athens to Ios. There we were with the two small children. Not many other people got off at Ios at all, no foreigners, and Beetle climbed down with the baby and one of the Ios people took the child in the way that islanders, who're used to these sorts of things, do. We all got into the boat and we arrived on Ios, March 1962. Beetle's birthday, March 20th. We stayed at a little hotel and thought… tried to find somewhere to live. I mean, you cannot imagine just how primitive the Cyclades were in 1962. They weren't as primitive as they were when the Athenians sailed into Milos, but it probably wasn't much better, actually. And there was a Romanian guy – there's always a Romanian guy – who said, 'I find you, I find you'. I wasn't quite sure whether he was going to do it or not, but actually he did! People who say, 'I find you', sometimes find you. And, we found a little cottage owned by a man called Nikos which was just up from the beach onto the harbour. And, that was, I think… I think he may have really screwed us. I think it was £2 a week, I think. It had a bed with planks on it, and a straw mattress. But we had brought a bed for Sarah who was 5 months old, and another for Paul, I think. Oh, perhaps Sarah was in a cot of some kind, I think, and a cot for Paul, that's right, which went in one room. There was a little bedroom with this brass bedstead. There was a kitchen and there was a terrace outside with a grapevine which would flower when it did, but it wasn't yet out, of course, in March. And that's where I sat and finished Lindmann.
But, the islanders had never seen a typewriter before, so, every now and again, somebody would come… the owner of the cottage, actually, Nikos, and he would just stand there watching me typing. His father used to wear Turkish trousers in the way that they did in those days, in the 60s, and he used to bring sheep's milk for the children which he left there. And it was really very primitive. We had an earth closet on the other side of the field and a well for the water. And it was fantastic. The cottage had a roof of earth, so in March, when it rained, all the flowers grew on the roof. When it rained very hard, rain came through the bamboo support of the earth on the top of the roof and straight down into the room where the children slept, but it missed them. There was one deck chair that was the only comfort in the house - a deck chair, which reminded me of Wittgenstein's rooms in Whewell's Court because he had a deck chair there because he didn't approve of stuffing. And we listened to the news in special English on a radio we'd bought on the way down, and it was all about people being killed in Algeria. And, it was broadcast in special English from Akrotiri air base on the island of Crete. So you heard, 'Three men broke into the hospital in Oran yesterday and shot eight French soldiers who were lying wounded'. Something very macabre about the special English which I wrote a little story about, and rather a good one, too, actually. And, I wrote Lindmann.

Lindmann brought out even more than The Limits of Love what I felt about the Jews and England and the whole damn thing – owed a great deal to a couple we had met in Fuengirola. She was called Juliana and she was the daughter of what was clearly a Nazi businessman who had then removed in good time to Buenos Aires. And he was a man called Johannes Piron, or so he said, who was a Jew who had lived in Holland all through the war and who, he said, had been in the Resistance. An America, who took a less charming view of Hans than I did said, 'What he means by the Resistance is that he stole coal'. Nevertheless, he survived. He was a charmer, and we used to play mah-jong with them. They went very quickly into Lindmann.
The essence of Lindmann was that I had heard, I can't remember when, a very famous story about a steamer called the Struma. The Struma had set sail from Constanta in Bulgaria in the south of the Balkans to go to Istanbul in 1943, '42 or 3. It arrived in Istanbul and it was rusty and it contained a great many Jewish refugees whose last hope it was to get on this boat. The British, of course, had tried to stop them doing this but we won't say anything more about that. Anyway, the ship got to Constantinople, Istanbul and docked, and it was completely unseaworthy and it was overloaded anyway, and the captain asks the... Turks for permission to disembark these people so that they could travel overland to Palestine. And the Turks, I don't know for what reason, but probably under pressure by the British, said that they wouldn't allow them to disembark unless the British would give them visas to enter Palestine. I suspect they knew very well that they wouldn't. And they wouldn't. So in the end, the Turks obliged this steamer to sail, even though she was unseaworthy and had engine trouble, all the rest of it; she sailed with however many hundred Jewish refugees onboard into the Black Sea and disappeared without trace. Some people think that the English torpedoed it, some people think that the Russians torpedoed it, some people think all sorts of things; it's very likely it just actually just fell apart. The storms in the Black  Sea are quite vigorous. Anyway, I took this as the donnée for my piece and I postulated that there had been a survivor. There had been, I think, a survivor from the Struma, one or two.
I postulated the survivor was a man called Lindmann, and he arrived in England and began to play bridge with some of the people I'd played bridge with in England and all the rest of it, and he in fact of course was not a survivor at all. He hadn't come off the Struma – he was an English lower civil servant who had been the man who sent the telegram telling the British ambassador in Istanbul that they were not going to grant visas to the Jews on the ship, so in a kind of guilty paroxysm he had transformed himself into 'the survivor' that he wasn't. That was the donnée, and in the course of the book there is a screenplay, sort of a pretty full screenplay, which is a false reading so to speak, and then a dramatised, not that false reading, of the Struma affair, which is written by a man called... Oh God, I can't remember, which is based very much on Tom Maschler.
Anyway... so, I mean, I used people a lot. Willie Maugham always did, and I always have, and I think writers often do; I transform them a bit, and I sometimes find I like them better on the page than I like them in person.

I finished that book on Ios and we were then going to go back to England to... we weren't quite sure what... buy a house actually because I had got a bit of money now because of this thing, and I had to go back to see the people about Nothing But the Best. So, we went back to England in 1940... 1962, and before going I really said I would like to buy some kind of a property on Ios. And we had an old man, well wasn't that old actually, but he seemed old to me, an old donkey guy who looked after us – rather a rogue, but he was our rogue, a guy called Georgos – who used to take the children off on the donkey up into the mountains and Christ knows where. It never occurred to us that he was any danger to two small children with a funny Greek guy, and I don't believe that there was any either. But we lived in a very innocent world in the 50s and 60s in terms of what people get up to, or what people we know get up to.
And every time I wanted to buy somewhere I would go with Georgos and look at it, and there would be a ruined house with a well and a fig tree and all the rest of it, and I'd say how much do you think this is? And he would say, 'Deka pente chiliades', a hundred pounds or something, or whatever it was. Oh, that doesn't sound too bad. Would you, sort of, fix that? So, of course, he would come back and say, 'Ti na kanoume?' what can we do about it? They want 30,000 drachs. And you could never, ever close a deal with anybody; over and over again I kept trying to do it. Now, we had a girl, a woman called Flora, who used to come down from the village with pastitsou, which is a sort of form of pasta which is done in the oven in the village, and various other things. She did the laundry for Beetle and she was a very sweet woman, and she had a couple of children and a drunken husband. The Greeks always do this. Mediterranean people don't like drunks. I mean, they don't like people who can't keep control of themselves, so... I don't mean they dislike the person, they just despise them, but quite keenly. That was the gesture.
We had one day before we were going to catch the boat to go back to Piraeus and back to England, and well, two days, and Flora said to me, after I came back again from seeing a house, which wasn't now going to be available because it was going to be 60,000 drachs... So she said, 'Do you really want to buy a house?' So I said, 'Well, I was hoping'. She said, 'Den pirazei', don't worry, 'Echo spitia'. Really? Got a house? So she led me over the high ridge where the village was posted high up above the harbour to avoid pirates, of course, and then down the other side to a beach, which was like... Well, it reminded me of Woolacombe Sands, which has been near where I was evacuated to during the war: a huge golden beach with nothing on it except a little place at one end and another little place at the other, a little hotel, a little kind of taverna. So I went down with her – I think Beetle stayed with the children first time I went – and she led me along the beach, and up through several terraces of olive trees and things, and cactus, and there was a little cottage, very low, like that, with a tree on the top as the roof, with a calami – that's bamboo – on top of that. Homer had depicted Odysseus in a house which had a tree on its roof to hold the bamboo. So I said to Flora, how much of this is for sale? So she said, well, this terrace and this terrace and this terrace, and the little house, which was kept... which was used for donkeys. It had been her grandmother's house, it wasn't really used anymore, but donkeys occasionally used to be stalled there. So I said, what do you want? So she said... I think she said... Yes, I think she said, 'Deka pente chiliades', she wanted to send her children to school at Santorini. Like the Jews, the Greeks believe in educating their children, and she needed the money because her husband...
So I said – that was about 150 quid – so I said okay, and I thought she would say I'll have to speak to my husband, and then it would… but actually her husband was not in the case; it was her house and she said fine, it's yours. So we went back down the terraces, and there was a big piece of land right on the beach, on the Aegean. Sikinos was on the far side – there was the beach. Large piece of land! I mean, football size, no, two football pitches. So she said, oh, this is mine too. So I said, oh yeah? She said, want that? So I said, well, how much is that? 'To idio', the same. Because of course the house didn't really mean anything to her; it's the land that the Greeks care about. Peasants care about land. They didn't mind you living, whether it's in France, Italy or anywhere else, as long as you stick to your house; if you start buying land they get very nervous, they don't like that.
So I said, okay, because she wanted the money. So we then went up to see the Eirenedikes, the justice of the peace, and he wrote out in longhand the purchase of the property and I gave her the money, and we left Ios two days later having bought a little cottage with eleven olive trees and a fig tree and some almond trees, and a big piece of land on the beach, on the Aegean. The comedy of this I can count rapidly to the conclusion: for 50 years we improved the house up above: we put the proper roof, we built new rooms, we did various things. But the piece of land on the beach... We just had a piece of land on the beach. Meanwhile, hotels and villas and all kinds of things sprung up all along this golden beach, unsurprisingly as the 60s went on and the 70s came in and all the rest of it, and we still had this big piece of land, and a few years ago we were told that if we didn't build on this piece of land within a certain amount of time we would never be able to build on it because, although it was as big as it was, it wasn't big enough according to the new regulations for building permission to be granted, so it was now or never. So we're now, after 50 years, my son Steven and his brother, you know, are building three houses on this piece of land, and they look absolutely wonderful, and what a fool one was not to have done it earlier, but we had sat as lords of the bay upon our shelf, and down there it was a lot noisier and all the rest of it, so it's all fine.

Anyway, we came back to England in 1962, and Nothing But the Best was in production, I think, within a year two. In those days you could get films made... David Deutsch worked for a company called Anglo-Amalgamated run by... Nat Cohen and Stuart Levy, who actually preferred racing horses – they won the Grand National, I think – to making films, but that was the business they were in and they left it to David really to get on with the nuts and bolts stuff of... of the production. So I did a bit of rewriting on it and then we got together to have the read-through with Alan Bates and Millie Martin who had just been doing... That Was the Week That Was, and I took her to be rather a 'toffier' lady than she really was, but she's terrific actually – I really like Millie, and Denholm Elliott and I don't know who all else, and I... Did I...? Yes. What's his name? These things do happen to one. Alan Bates, Denholm Elliott... very good old English actor, a homosexual of great dignity and virility who used to play sergeant majors and people. It will come to me presently. Anyway, this guy who was a very old pro, said to me, 'Have you written a lot of screenplays?' And although I had, of course, done a bit of this and that I said, 'No, this is the first one actually', because it was the first one I'd written on my own, and he said, 'Well, you'll write a lot more', which I was pleased. I love working with actors – it is the best fun in the world, best fun with your clothes on as the Americans say.
So suddenly I was writing a screenplay, and then everything happened very quickly because I met a man called John Schlesinger. I met John Schlesinger, who was doing a film for Matt and Stu which was the follow-up to A Kind Of Loving – Billy Liar. And he and Joe Janni had been in... living in the north of England doing both of these films and they were sick to death of the north of England and all that pudding and everything, and they wanted to do a smart film about degenerate London, because although swinging London had hardly come in yet, it was already somehow felt that there had been a change, largely to do with the DH Lawrence, you know, the Lady Chatterley trial and of course the pill, so things were changing in a big way.
So they said would I do a film with them. And I went to see Joe Janni and he lived in Burton Court by Chelsea Hospital, and when I went in I said whatever I say, good morning or whatever, and Joe said, 'Do you remember the first time you ever met me?' And I said, 'When?' He said, 'I remember when you were working for the Rank Organisation and I had a script which needed some work on it, you know, called The Big Money, and I sent it to you and I think... What is his name? Leslie Bricusse, that's it, to look at to do some work, and you came on your own and you walked into my flat, this flat, and I remember the first thing you said to me'. And I said, 'I expect I said, “Good morning, sir”'. He said, 'No, that's not what you said. What you said was, “What you want to make this piece of shit for?” You were quite right', he said, 'it was a piece of shit'.
And he had changed, Joe. He had been a refugee because his mother was a Montefiorian Jew in Milan. They'd been very, very rich in Milan and he had many funny stories, which I'm not going to tell now because it's not directly relevant, about his youth, his pampered youth in Milan. With the anti-Semitic laws his father was dispossessed and Joe had to come to England, but he had known a lot of the movie people in Milan at that time, the young movie people like the young Antonioni and various others, and he loved the cinema, even though he was actually trained as an engineer.

His grandfather had been involved in building the first tankers for Shell, so he went to see Marcus Samuel, a founder of Shell who also had a bank in the... in the city, because he had told the Jannis that he would help them. So Joe arrived and Marcus Samuel himself came down – unlike people nowadays who send their assistants when they aren't anybody themselves anyway – Marcus Samuel himself came down with his assistant and he said to the young Janni in 1938, 1939, 'What do you want to do?' So Joe said, 'Well, in many ways I would like to be in the cinema'. So Marcus Samuel turned to his clerk and said, 'Do we have any film producers who are clients of the bank?' And he said, 'Oh yes, sir, we... Yes, my lord' – because he was Lord Bearsted by then – 'yes, my lord, we have three'. So Bearsted said, 'Well, do any of them owe us money?' 'Oh yes, they all owe us money'. 'Well, who owes us the most money?' A man called John Sutro, quite a famous person actually, and a very nice one, too, by the way because I had some contact with him many years later.
So Joe got a job with John Sutro. He was then interned eventually released, he worked for the Rank Organisation and did a couple of films, particularly a thing called A Town Like Alice, which was quite famous in its day, with Peter Finch. And then he broke away and he formed a company to make advertisements and things, you know, sort of commercials for commercial television, and did very well with it, and now he wanted to make a movie about the swinging London in many ways. So John Schlesinger and I met and talked, and they had a piece of paper which had been written by Godfrey Winn, who was a very famous journalist in those days, who was covertly gay because that's what gays were in those days, and he thought he had a great sympathy with women – again, not an unknown facet of being gay. And we went to see Godfrey Winn about a thing which he had called Woman On Her Way, which I didn't think was really a title to set them alight, but never mind, one thing at a time. And they were going to pay me a bit more than I got on Nothing But the Best, which had very good notices and all the rest of it, so I was quite well placed. And I said various things to Godfrey Winn and he said to them, 'He frightens me, he frightens me!' I don't know why I frightened him, except that I sort of had a kind of aggressive idea of what ought to be in a film; there should be more what I still call 'stuff'.
We talked to him and then I said to them it's no good, I'll do something. And we had bought a house in the Constable country quite near where we did before, near Bergholt, but slightly nearer London, in a place called Langham, The Wick. Nice country house, but we had no central heating and it was the winter of 1962-63, so we decided to go down to the south of France, and I said I would write the script there in the south of France, whatever it was going to be, about this woman on her way. And I had one of those moments of... I think it's nothing to do so to speak with me, but a kind of million dollar moment, and I said to John it really ought to be called Darling. I mean, you can't buy that. You can't rent people to think of things like that, and you can't even God knows for sure you'll do it yourself, but it was, to say the least, the word. And I wrote a screenplay down there and John came down to stay with us. Very sweet, very nice, took us out to the Hotel de Paris in Monte Carlo where the roof opens in the middle of your dinner and... lots of laughs. John was in many ways a person with whom I had some quarrels, disagreements and all the rest of it, but as the dead can be, you know, where is he now? Because he was such enormous fun to be with, very funny, very good mimic, and also a great sender-up of himself, except of course when there was a bigger gallery than two or three and then he would become a rather bigger puss. Not that he was ever very large, except in circumference.
So suddenly I was, sort of, in the movies. But of course I was also not in other movies, like John had enemies. Tony Richardson didn't get on well with John, so one was conscious immediately of all the little schisms which of course apply in the arts and in life everywhere. But quite candidly it was going pretty damn well and the central heating was being put into The Wick. We stayed in a little place called Le Rouret, and one of our neighbours across the road was a very quiet person and I was sitting – I don't know what I was doing, reading or whatever it was when the weather improved in the garden, although we had snow – and this very quiet person came up and said, 'What are you reading?' And it was Peter Churchill, a famous secret agent in his day who had had this great affair with Odette, and it so happened that in the period of our time in England between 1955-1959 when we left, I had not only ghosted a book by that man called Jacques Doneux, of whom I began to tell this protracted story, but also I ghosted The Memoirs of Maurice Buckmaster, who was the head of the French section of SOE, and Peter Churchill had figured in it quite a lot. Buck was an Old Etonian. He had been accused of having betrayed a number of his agents, or not looking after them well enough, but his view of all of that was very British, very British officerish. I think he'd been in the Secret Service for a very long time, although he played the sort of amateur role, and he said, I commanded, you know, a very dangerous unit that was constantly exposed to danger. Everybody knew it and I think that my casualty rate was something of the order of 40%; no commander in the field hopes to do much better than that. And he was a man... I don't think he had no conscience, but he wasn't riven with guilt. And he told me that Peter Churchill and Odette had been captured, and she had been tortured, although Churchill had not because his name was Churchill, even though he wasn't actually a Churchill at all in the Winston sense. Buck said, well of course the reason they were captured was that they were in bed with a look-out posted at the bottom of or outside the hotel where they were staying, but they made so much love-making... they made so much noise making love that they didn't hear him whistle to warn them the Gestapo were arriving. These are the things that don't tend to get into books, and it didn't get into the one that I wrote either.

The funny thing is that I've very rarely seen anybody reading in public any book of mine. In fact, I can't remember ever noticing anybody doing it, but we were in Guatemala once in 1974 I think it was, and we were on a bus going to a place called Chichicastenango, which is way up in the uplands of Guatemala - wonderful market - and in this bus were a lot of tourists. And the bus kept stopping for ten minutes by the stall which the cousins of the conductor were selling various Guatemalan articles, as well as to let people pee and all the rest of it, and I got up and was walking out of the bus and I saw there was a book open on the seat, and the book was They Fought Alone by Maurice Buckmaster, the book which I had written. So when we all got back into the bus I went up to the man who was reading the book and I said, 'Funnily enough, I wrote that book', and he said, 'Oh, are you Colonel Buckmaster?' And I said no, no I'm not Colonel Buckmaster, but my name is Raphael and actually he employed me to ghost his book. And the man said, 'Oh, you're name is Raphael?' He was American. 'Your name is Raphael?' Yes. 'That's funny, so is mine'. He was Dr Raphael from San   Diego. So he said, 'Listen, any time you're in San Diego, you know, come to my clinic, I'll give you a rate'. But I never took him up on that.

Anyway, I met Peter Churchill. He was very nice. He was a little bit creepy, but then he probably would be, wouldn't he? God knows what he'd seen and all the rest of it. So we stayed at Le Rouret and I wrote this screenplay, which was not right yet, but it was based on a very good premise which they didn't accept because it was a bit bold, and true, because I had heard about this, that there was a situation then, which of course now couldn't possibly apply, in which you could form a company more or less for anything, and you then had special rates of tax and you got lots of expenses. So five rich guys, I heard, in London got together and rented together a kind of superb courtesan, the most beautiful woman they could find, and they instituted a company of which she was, I don't know, the servant or whatever, and they rented a very large apartment in Park Lane where she was kept in good style and it all got paid for by the tax man. I thought that was a pretty good story for a movie, but they didn't think so.
So in the end we worked and worked and worked and worked and worked. I used to go up to London to see – from our house in the country – to see Joe and John, and we used to sit there and talk about this and talk about that and re-cut all of their previous films and did all the things that people in the movies do, and Joe was maddening and not stupid, and John was funny and persistent and tiresome, and I was excited. I was in my early 30s, I was working with bright people. I got quite well paid, and the movies was problem-solving. It was very like writing Latin verses, only better paid. I didn't know much about cameras or anything else, so I would propose various things and John would say, well, how do you do it, dear, how do we do it? And I'd say, well, I don't know, you could just go like that, and then you, if you went through black you would get back to that again, and John would say that might work, yes. He was always very worried John, very worried, and very concerned about himself, and slightly crazed. He used to live in Park Street off Kensington Church Street, and he said that every now and again he open his windows and shouted abuse at his neighbours. I don't quite know why he did that, though one has had neighbours that one would like to do that with I confess.

So I did Darling and while I was doing Darling I had an idea, because we'd driven up and down from Rome to London and back again several times, and we'd done that trip when we were young in the bus and we'd done it and walked lots of ways, and I said the Beatle on one of the trips imagine if we overtook ourselves like we were when we were hitchhiking down to the south if France? And at that point it was a movie. And it really was a movie because of course it depended absolutely on several journeys eventually being cut together in a way which only cinema can do, and I thought that was a good idea and I mentioned it to Joe, and he said, yes, it's a good idea but, you know, we do the Darling first and... And the Darling thing took quite a while to set up, and I was fairly impatient with them, and I was asked to do another movie by an American director that I... he was fine, but I just couldn't stand the topic that he had raised, and I said to him, I know you're going to be really upset and I may never work in your kind of movie again, but I can't do this movie. And he said, 'Oh, listen, you don't want to do it, don't do it, I mean, that's okay'. He said, 'You know Stanley Donen?' I knew of Stanley Donen, I know Singin' in the Rain. 'Well', he said,' 'because I was at a party the other night and Stanley was saying he'd seen your movie, you know, Nothing But the Best, and he said, you know, he loved it. He loved it. He said to me they say it's the director, but it's not. It's the writer. So listen, why don't you go see Stanley?' So I said, I couldn't possibly, I don't know him, you know. I got... rather British. He said, 'Well, I'll call him'.
So he said, 'Listen, I got Freddie Raphael here, the guy who wrote... uhuh... he's got an idea I think he'd like to talk to you about'. So Stanley said, 'Oh, well, he should come over'. So he had an office in Hamilton Place in those days, quite near where I used to play bridge at The Hamilton Club, with all his movie posters up the steps as you went up to his office. And there he was, about six or seven years older than me, but also of course a hundred years older, because he'd been in Hollywood for a long time, and he worked with all those people, and slept with quite a few of them by the way. However, he was now married to a woman called Adele, who had previously been married to Lord Beatty, as well as having had affairs with Frank Sinatra and various other people, and as I got to the top of the stairs I heard Stanley saying, 'If I can't get the Duke of Westminster would the Duke of Marlborough do?' His wife was quite a keen socialite. So I went in and Stanley said, 'You know, you got any ideas for movies?' And I said, well, yes, I've got this idea about this couple who are driving down to the south of France and they overtake themselves, and then we see them, but it's all done with the journey going south and the time going back and forth, and I thought we'd call it Two for the Road. So Stanley said, 'Well, let's do that'. So I said, oh, but, you know, what do you mean? So he said, 'Let's do that'. But I don't want to do it in England. I'll go away and write it. So he said... I said, you give me some money, and I will go away and write it, and he said, 'The last time I did that I never saw him again'. So I said, well, that's your decision. You'll see me again, I promise you, and if that's not good enough for you I won't do the movie with you. So he said, 'Okay, I'll talk to your agent'.
So he talked to my agent and I got 40,000 dollars, I think, which was not a fortune in those days, because things were booming in California again, but it was plenty, wasn't it?

So we loaded everybody into the car, and we drove back to Rome and rented a slightly bigger apartment in a slightly more... a suburb, actually, called Vigna Clara. It was a very nice flat, and I settled down to write Two for the Road, which I did on cards. I did every scene on a card, and then I cut the whole film together on the floor before I actually typed it all out, and that's pretty much what... the montage really never changed, and I eventually finished it and Beetle read it and I read it again, and I sent it off to Stanley Donen. And the phone rang latish one night and the voice said, 'Freddie?' and I said, yes. 'It's Stanley. Freddie, it's the greatest thing I ever read, and it will be the best movie I ever make. I would've called you halfway through, but I thought that would look stupid. So would you come back and talk about a couple of things?' So we loaded everybody in the car again and drove all the way back to London and Stanley put us up in an apartment in his... in his sort of duplex place in the Hyde Park Gardens, and what he wanted changed was almost nothing, so he said, 'I'm going to try and get Audrey to do it'.
Audrey [Hepburn]had actually been sent a little treatment and she said, I can't do this film because I've just done one which is rather like it, which has been a flop, and I'm sorry, but, you know... And Stanley said, 'Well, we're going to do it anyway'. So he said, 'I'm going to send Audrey the script'. So when I'd finished doing the changes he sent Audrey the script and I went back... we went back all the way back through France, eating quite well on the way to Rome. And the phone rang and Stanley said, 'Audrey says would we go to Bürgenstock and see her? She wants to do the movie'. So, there was a sort of... it was all utterly fantastic what was happening, because meanwhile they were shooting Darling, and that was going very well.
So Stanley said, 'If you're coming from Rome, would you go to a store in the Via Condotti? There's some jewellery that Adele would like you to bring'. So I thought, I'm going to get caught in smuggling £20,000 worth of stuff into... into Switzerland and it's all going to... all going to turn bad, so... actually, in the end, I don't think it happened. She didn't want the jewellery or whatever. Anyway, I flew to Geneva, Stanley met me, and we drove to Bürgenstock where she was living with her then husband Mel... what was his name? Yes, she was living with Mel Ferrer – not all that happily actually. I could tell, because when Mel came into the room when we were talking she said in a very strange voice, 'Here comes Melchior', and I thought, that doesn't sound quite right, but then I say here comes Beetle, and you may think that doesn't sound quite right, so what do we do then?
Anyway, Mel was, of course, a very conceited man. All he wanted to do was to show us the stills from the film that he was preparing about El Greco, and the only thing that Audrey said to me about the script was, 'I'm not going to say anything about the script because I don't want Frederic to be too pleased with himself'. Those were indeed the days.

So it was extraordinary. We then left and we went down to Zurich, Stanley and I, which was nearer Bürgenstock, and Stanley said, 'Let's buy some watches'. I never heard 'watches' in the plural as something that you were going to buy, so I said, oh, you know, it's fine, I've got a watch, I'm OK. 'No, let's buy some watches'. So we went into this store and the guy produced watches and put them on this kind of tray with the felt and the surround, and Stanley said, 'Which ones do you want?' And, you know, you discover what kind of a tart you are according to what it is that you're willing to take or not take. In the end I said, oh Stanley, I can't, and he said, 'Of course you can! Don't be so stupid. It's nothing. It's nothing!' So I... he gave me I think two watches, one with an alarm with a sort of pendant thing and all the rest of it. I've got it – I haven't used it for years anyway, and I flew back to Rome; at this time they were shooting Darling and everything was just fine.
One day while they were shooting Joe Janni rang up at one o'clock in the morning from London because they were shooting scenes in London as well, of course, as in Italy, which they did do eventually. So he said, 'Fred, I'm very worried about the scene we're shooting tomorrow, you know?' I said, 'Joe, do you know what time it is?' So he said, 'What? Where are you?' So I said, 'What number did you dial in what country?' 'Oh yes'. 'It's one o'clock in the morning in Rome, and we're in bed, and I don't want to talk about a fucking script'. 'Look, I understand, I'm sorry, you know? I didn't realise'. 'Yes you did, you did'. 'Alright, I did. But never mind that, Fred for God's sake, you know? We have to shoot the scene in the morning. Now, this scene doesn't work. I want you... have you got the script there?' I said, 'Joe, I'm in bed! I haven't got the script'. 'Have you got the script in the place?' 'I don't want to do this now!' 'Yes, please do'. So I then embarked on an even more elaborate form of abuse with various C and F words liberally distributed, and Joe said, 'That may very well be true, but on the other hand, have you got the script?' So I said, 'Wait a minute'. So I went and got the script, so he said, 'If you look on page whatever it is you'll see… Read the script, read the scene Fred and tell me honestly is it good enough?' So I read the scene, and I said, 'No, it's not good enough, Joe, so why don't you and John rewrite it?' I said, 'because you're the people who really create film, are you? You're the people... John does all the interviews and he's the great creative person on this film, and I'm a little nobody that you've done a good turn to by allowing me to be your secretary. You write the fucking scene, or get John to write the fucking scene and we'll see if it's any better'. So he went, 'Fred, for God's sake, I thought we were friends?' 'Yes, well, perhaps we were, but actually, in view of the fact that you're trying to get credit on writing this film with me in some way or other, we're not friends'. 'Fred, listen – the film we are doing is the film we are doing. It's going to have your name on it, you know very well it's going to have your name on it. Will you look at the scene?' So I say, 'I'll look at it in the morning'. He said, 'You can't look at it in the morning! We're shooting the scene in the morning', and he said, 'the hour is different in Italy', so I said, 'I know the hour is different in Italy'. 'Look, for God's sake'.
So I get up now, 01.15, 01.30 and I go in the other room and I start rewriting the scene and then I call him and I phone it through, and he says... and I say, 'Don't ask me any favours ever again, because I'm out of favours with you! I've worked for months now without being paid, you know that'. 'Look, for God's sake, we make the film, I mean now, what's the rouble?' So, that was what was going on. So of course I dictated the thing to him, and a couple of days later the phone... the front doorbell rang at the flat, and a man came in with a copy of Lattimore's translation of The Iliad, and inside the book was a card in Joe's extremely difficult to read writing which said, This is the story of a much bigger war, at which point, of course, it was impossible not to be reconciled with him. He was very good fun to be with.

Then I got offered another big movie by the Woolf brothers, Jimmy and John, a version of Iris Murdoch's... what was it called?... I can't... A version of a book by Iris Murdoch [A Severed Head], and my agent said to me on the phone... I said, what are they going to pay me? So he said, well, they'll give you 75,000 dollars for a draft and a set of changes. I said to Beetle: 75,000 dollars? Is that really enough? Because the thing about money, which I'm sure everybody who has the luck to have a bit more than they ever thought they were going to have, whether it's thousands or millions or whatever it is, that it becomes a joke the more there is of it. It ain't much of a joke when there isn't any of it, but it's a joke when there is, and you just think, fine, okay.
So I became embarked then on this whole thing, and Jo Janni was very upset that I had done Two for the Road with Stanley Donen, or was doing Two for the Road with Stanley Donen, so he immediately offered me another movie through Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer for a 150,000 dollars I think it was, a version of Byron. And then John didn't want to do Byron, he wanted to do Far from the Madding Crowd, so we switched from that to doing Far from the Madding Crowd, and for a period – quite a long period – I became a very well paid screenwriter, so we had a house in the country and we had a house in London, and we had our £150 shack in Greece, which the children loved and have always loved more than anywhere else we've ever lived and so do I actually.
And it was kind of wonderful because I knew that if things went bad – and when things go good you always wonder when they're going to go bad – I don't mind a bit, and I still feel that, although it's a bit of a schlep up the hill now at our age, you know? I'll go to Greece and I'll sit in my little cottage and I'll write a book and knock your fucking eye out, and I don't really care whether you think I'm the sort of person who ought to be in the New York Review of Books or not. A certain kind of resentment is a very good fuel, as long as it doesn't begin to clog the works, and I've always had that, a certain kind of... resentment, I don't know, a certain sense of 'I will show you'. That's really what it is, and I do, that's what I do. I show them.

Then came... Darling came out, and I won the Oscar and John and Joe didn't. That was quite nice. They were fairly nice about it, and the first person to call me up and congratulate me was, of course, Leslie Bricusse. Leslie Bricusse and I, the authors of Lady at the Wheel, were actually the only two people of my generation who won Oscars. I won mine for screenplay of Darling, and he won his for a couple of hit songs which he had written, so it's quite comic really, but I never spoke to Leslie for... for many years. He did phone me up, as I say, to congratulate me, but I... I'd had enough of that.
And that went on for a bit, and I wrote... I wrote Far from the Madding Crowd, which went well, but it was a... it was a retro move, because Schlesinger and I got on very well with Darling, and it had many ingenious, doubtless dated, but lively things in it. Far from the Madding Crowd fell back on the great English habit of what one might call 'taxidermy as a form of cinema': lots of stuffed historical figures. It was quite fun and people keep telling me how good the screenplay is, as if I gave a shit, because I don't. And I... it was all right. And then John wanted to do a thing, which he did eventually do, which turned into, I think, A Midnight Cowboy, which I just couldn't do, about the gay world and all the rest of it, and he offered it to me and I said it's just not... I can't... I can't do that, I don't know how.
So we were sort of quite good friends actually and we all liked each other; whenever we saw him we got on really well, but I had finished with John, and Stanley made Two for the Road and it was... with Albert Finny, and it was wonderful. It was just I imagined it and just as he wished it to be for my sake. Stanley is like that. Stanley is one of the few people in the movies who loves working with very bright people, and he doesn't try to take their credit at the end like Janni and Schlesinger did. He likes being with people and he is okay, so. Stanley and I were trying to work out something else to do, which we unfortunately never ever did, not for want of trying.

The whole of my life, actually, from the time that I first got involved in showbiz through Leslie Bricusse, and I don't, as I hope I've made clear, deny that it was a fortunate moment. Because there was a yellow brick road and I did walk along it and I picked up quite a few yellow bricks on the way, and very useful they are too. But my idea of being a writer is being alone and doing things that nobody has commissioned and quite possibly nobody will want to publish.
In recent times, writers have had the feeling that we've reached that point because, of course, the net and various other things has made publishers very nervous, and they only publish, or publish a high proportion of crap, an even higher proportion of crap – they've always published crap – but my idea of being a writer was not collaborating with anybody else, it was not in being involved in the collaborative activity of the cinema, because that's what it is: I loved making up the stories, fitting the pieces together and delivering the first draft. After that, could we make it a bit more this? Do we have to do that? Could we possibly...? What about...? I get progressively more and more pissed off with that. I don't want to spend time with other people in a room having a conference. I don't believe in conferences – they waste my time. They don't waste the time of executives – they get paid to have them. I don't want to do that.

So, all the way from 1965 until 1969 I was writing screenplays in our little house in Chelsea in Seymour Walk. The children went to Bedales, which may or may not have been a good idea, and the greatest grace of all was that Stephen, after a seven year gap, after the birth of Sarah, sort of crowned our marriage and I was old enough to... to think that we were very lucky to have this other child and so did Beetle, and he has actually been a sort of second only child with us, but he's immensely sociable and doesn't have any of my chips on his now very broad shoulders, because he takes a lot of exercise.
So it all went very well, but during the late 60s some friends of ours we'd known in Fuengirola and in New York on a visit came to London, the photographer Lee Friedlander and his wife, who's since become a very famous photographer, and a man called Harry Gordon and his wife whom we had known in Fuengirola. We went out to dinner with him and Jimmy Dine, who's a very famous painter, and his wife Nancy. We went to a Trattoria or whatever it was over on Fulham Road, and I don't know why, but I suddenly thought: I actually don't want to live this life at all. I don't want to be in showbiz. Lee is a photographer who goes off on his own and does his stuff, develops his own work and whether he sells it or not he doesn't give a shit. He does sell it, that's why he doesn't give a shit, and the same might apply to writing screenplays by the way.
You know, you write a good book and they don't publish it: fuck them. You write a screenplay and they don't make it: it's a waste of time, except for the money. That's not a good arrangement. It's not the worst of all arrangements, but it's not a good one.
I did quite a lot of reviewing by the way when I was in London, and one of the people who gave me a job – a plumb job actually – was a guy called Jack Lambert on the Sunday Times, and he was the literary editor. This was back in '62. I thought I would like to review books for no very good reason actually, except that at Cambridge we thought that people who wrote criticism were very important figures. Of course reviewing isn't criticism in their sense, but who's counting as they say.
So I went to see Karl Miller, whom I'd known at Cambridge, who is a very, very grand First in English, dour Scotsman who manages brevity without wit, and he was the editor of the... literary editor of the... of the New Statesman. I wrote later that he came a very long way down the mountain to avoid seeming condescending, and I'd written several books and they had been quite well reviewed, not least by Peter Forster, but also by a number of other people, because of course I hadn't yet publicly transversed, if it's a Rubicon – I don't know whether it is or not – the boundary which led to showbiz. So Karl said, 'Well, what makes you think that you can review novels?' So I said, 'What has to? I mean, I've written four or five. You know, I thought it would be fun to review novels'. And he said, 'I'm not sure that you've got the qualifications'. So I said, 'Oh great, goodbye', and about 10 minutes later I was phoned up by the Sunday Times, a friend of my father's actually who was a managing editor, who was an anti-Semite by the way. He thought that the Jews had killed Christ and that everything that happened to them was because of that. The three people in London that he admired most were Brian Glanville, Peter Schaffer and me. Anti-Semites often actually don't know what a Jew is. They think they don't like Jews, but actually it turns out they haven't got that much problem with them individually, and even the great Mr Eliot, of course, was renowned for never being impolite to Jews, which shows what a cowardly little shit he was, but we mustn't say so, because, of course, Christopher Ricks admires him.
Anyway, so I went to work at the Sunday Times and reviewed lots of books, and then when I began to do all these movies I said to Jack, could I not do fiction, could I not do the odd book for you? And he said, 'Yes, of course... two people that I've ever had on this paper that I want to have again, so I'll give you books, Freddie, and you do it when you can and how you can' and all the rest of it.

In 1967, we were living in Seymour Walk and the Six-Day War broke out. I'd just won the Oscar the previous year, and when the Six-Day War broke out the antique dealer on the corner, who was ex-commander RN said to me, 'Well, I must say you people have done very well. You've done very, very well'. He said, 'It was an absolute master stroke, that strike through the Sinai, and of course the other thing was the bombing of the Egyptian airfields, so I really have to congratulate you'. So I said, 'Honestly, it really isn't anything to do with me. You know, I don't have anything to do with Israel'. 'No', he said, 'I know, I think... you know what I mean, very very good tactics, very good tactics'. And actually at the time of the Six-Day War I was convoked by a man... the culture man at the Israeli embassy with a number of other people, including Harold Pinter, George Steiner and I don't know who, to form a, sort of, writer's committee in support of Israel, which at that time looked to be on the verge of calamity. It actually wasn't, but it certainly looked like it, and so the English press thought.
So we had this committee, and I remember very well discussing what would happen if the war went well, which it quite quickly did, and we were then told by the people of the Israeli embassy that Israel had no intention whatever of expanding its borders. David Ben-Gurion was very keen incidentally, although by that time not in power, that the Israelis should immediately return to the Arabs all of the land which they had conquered. I think he didn't think that about Jerusalem, but he thought that about the rest of it.
Anyway, I was actually on the Nine O'clock News in a deputation to Wilson, the only time I ever made the Nine O'clock News, and I don't think what I said was very witty, but anyway, there we were. And when the war was won and the Israelis perfectly understandably were not in a great rush to give back what they had won with their blood, and which after all had been a war which had been forced upon them... I remember Harold Pinter saying to me after the war, 'Well, we've given the Arabs a bloody nose'. I don't think Harold would particularly wish this to be very well known, because he later became virulently anti-Israel because, of course, like many people, he was a great moralist about everybody's conduct except his own, which was not always of the highest order. But, 'il faut pas le dire' as the Frogs say.

After the Six-Day War, Jack Lambert took me out to lunch at Scott's to discuss whether I would do some review or other, and he then said, 'Of course', he said, 'this Oscar that you've won... you do realise, don't you, that you're never going to get spoken of well again as a writer?' And I said, 'Oh, Jack, I mean, really'. 'No, it's true. Your reputation as a novelist in England...' I thought: very nice of you to tell me. 'Yes, another thing by the way', he said, 'I hope you people aren't going to get above yourselves now'. So I said, 'Which people are those, Jack?' 'Well, I mean, this Israel business, I mean, it's all very well, you know. One can admire it up to a certain point, what they've done, but I hope it's not going to lead you people to feel that you can strut around the place'. I said, 'I never strut, Jack. I don't do strut'. Those sorts of things are perfectly legitimate and part of the rich comedy of life, but to deny that they happened is ridiculous.
Anyway, '69 came and Beetle said one day when we were in our house at The Wick, what do you think about a house in the Dordogne with... a farmhouse in the Dordogne with white shutters? We'd been to the Dordogne actually once because we'd gone to the caves at Lascaux in the days when you could down and look at the caves. A couple of times actually I've been there, and I liked it very much, and we were going to have an Easter holiday, so we put all the children in the car in the usual way. It was a Mercedes by this time, but it was the same deal. I never drove a Mercedes – anything but a Mercedes – since the Standard Vanguard when it stalled on... it didn't stall, it boiled on the slopes of the Pass of Thermopylae actually, and when I got back the person who'd sold it to me said, oh yes, there's a design fault. So I thought, well, what cars don't have design faults? And the answer was Mercedes, so there I was and there I still am luckily, though the Mercedes is getting a bit old just like I am.
Anyway, we put everybody in the car and drove down to the Dordogne in April 1969, and we went to see this house which was owned by an English cameraman called Don Long, and it did have white shutters, but it was a sort of bungaloid, three buildings knocked into one on the top of a... of a nice hill with a very nice view of the woods and everything else. Didn't have any garden. The only... most of the garden was covered in what the Frogs call ronces and brambles and stuff, and he wanted £19,000 for it. Well, I was earning good money in those days and £19,000 happened to be exactly the same amount of money that William Somerset Maugham paid for the Villa Moresque when he first bought it, I think, from a bishop or someone, whenever it was that he bought it. It wasn't a reason for buying La Gardelle and nor was it my reason, but it was one of those funny coincidences. So anyway, it seemed like small change – it's neither vanity nor anything else that leads me to say it, it's just the truth. It didn't seem like a lot of money so we bought the place and I thought we'd go there for holidays when we weren't going to Greece.
And after I had this dinner with Harry Gordon and his wife and Lee Friedlander and Jim Dine – Harry Andrews was the name of the actor who said to me, 'You'll write a lot more screenplays'. Terrific man, lovely man he was. We went down, we bought the house after a certain amount of difficulty, the usual kind of difficulty, and when we had bought the house and handed the money over to the previous owners, the English couple, I said to them, now you can tell me why you're getting rid of this house in a hurry, because you haven't had it long, have you? And Don said, well, first of all I'm a cameraman and every time I got down here I used to get a job and I kept having to go back to England, and we couldn't afford it and all the rest of it. Yes, I said, and anything else? Yes, he said, the woodworm. So I said, okay, got it.
The place was riddled with worms, but it could be treated and it has been, and it hasn't... that was the main problem. Also, it had no cupboards, it had, etc. So over the years, we have spent a good deal of money, like Willie Maugham did on the Villa Moresque, as we had it to raise the roof, to restore it as it had been in the Perigord years ago, which is much steeper than the bungalow roof that we had before when we first bought it. We had a guy come in and plant the garden, we cleared the ronces and all the rest of it, and I started in the autumn of 1969 to write another book, which was called Like Men Betrayed, which was a novel about Greece, in particular about the colonels or the effect of the colonels, which had... they'd taken power in 1967. I didn't call it Greece.

Incidentally in the book Lindmann, which I wrote about the Jews in the ship... the word 'Jew' does not appear in the book. A sort of arrogance, a sort of disdain, a sort of humour impelled me not to do it. The word 'Greece' doesn't appear in the Greek book either, nor does 'Hellene' or 'Hellenic' or anything, but they are Greek.
It had a scene... it began with a scene with a group of young men going to a brothel... 1922. And... I thought it would be fun to go to a brothel, because, you know, I didn't actually... don't go to brothels myself because of missing the appointment mainly, but I thought it would be an entertaining beginning and then, you know, I could take it from there. It would kind of goose me into living the piece. And there were two particular people in this... who were going in this party. One was a man called Artemis, the same name as Artemis Denaxas who had taken us to Greece, and the other was – I can't remember his name now – who was a, sort of, right-wing rich man, and Artemis was an intellectual. And on the way to the brothel, as I was writing I thought, oh well, I don't know, is Maria here tonight and, you know, 'Hello, darling, what can I do for you?' and all of this. I don't really want to write that scene.
So the two young men realised before they got to the brothel that they desired each other more than they desired anybody in the brothel. I didn't write a homosexual love scene of any descriptive quality whatever. I kept to the dialogue mainly because that's what I tend to do in these cases, but I found it perfectly easy to imagine this homosexual... I wouldn't say love affair... yes, it was a sort of love affair and sex, though I had never taken part in anything like that. I had known John Schlesinger. I mean, I'd heard quite a lot of stuff. I didn't find it... I just thought I'd just do it. I did it. And there were other things, and there was the woman of course with one of the married, who had the affair with the first one, so it was about the fact that Greece... not about the fact, but it reflected the fact that Greece, like the Jews, has always been divided between various factions who both love and hate each other and often – or sometimes – kill each other or whatever.
I was very deeply into that book. I was so deeply into it that the telegraph man arrived from the village in St Laurent – we didn't have a telephone – knocked on the door of my little study which I... wonderful room where I do immense amounts of work, and I opened the thing and said 'Kalespera?' because I was, sort of, actually in Greece at the time and this guy saluted and said, 'Bonsoir, monsieur', and handed me the telegram. And La Gardelle over the years has turned into the place where I have done nearly all of my serious work and written a great deal of stuff. I don't deny that I have finished things in England. I have no wish not to write in England; I just find that mysteriously enough I'm a kind of journalist or I'm a showbiz person or something when I'm in England, and when I'm in my house in France I'm a writer.

I've written quite a larky book... books previously and when Nothing But the... when Like Men Betrayed - I sent it to Tom Maschler, who was by this time my publisher, and he said, well, I don't know how to publish this, and I said, just print it, that will do. And when the book came out, several of the reviews said that it showed that I have no sense of humour, and since I'd been fairly larky in my previous work – not all of it but in some of it, particularly the first novel which I kind of wasted that shot by being merely light-hearted and funny and obbligato – I thought it was quite a tribute that The Times should say that I had no sense of humour. A man called Vernon Scannell, who was quite a famous war hero of a kind and also beat up his wife and did various things which is now earning the bad press – he was also a poet – and he said Artemis's experiences, both straight and bent, come across with heart-stopping clarity and urgency, or something of that kind, which I thought was a pretty nice notice. The book was not well thought of, except by Paul Theroux, who was in those days a Sunday Times reviewer, but I knew it was really good, and it is really good and the thrill was that it was printed. Lippincott took it but they never took another book of mine after it. They'd not a great success with The Limits of Love.
I then wrote another book, which was funny, about Greece, but... well, Jack Lambert came to stay with us. It's quite a typical story of literary life. Jack Lambert, whom I'd done all these reviews for The Sunday Times, became a sort of friend. He'd been a war hero, and that always is slightly chastening – well, considerably chastening – and, having another book coming out I asked him and his wife whether they would like to come and visit us in... in France. And they would, because they were on their way to see somebody else and in this time-honoured English way a few free nights was quite an attractive prospect.
So they came down and saw us, and I said to Jack when we were talking, Julian Symons, who is a... used to be quite a literary figure in London has reviewed my last two books in The Sunday Times, both disobligingly. Do you think you could fix it... would it be terrible to say... could he not review the book I've got coming out in October? So he said, 'I never send a book by the same author to the same reviewer three times in a row'. So I said, that's very reassuring to know, Jack, thank you very much for that, you know. He said, 'By the way, you know you said we could kindly stay for a week?' So I said, yes? 'Will it be all right if we stayed 10 days?' What do you say to somebody in that situation? I would like to say, it would be better if you left now actually. That's the person I would like to be, but I'm not that person. So I said, well, you know, of course. I mean, we do have some people who might actually be coming and, you know, if they are coming they would be staying in the bit of the house that you have got. He never spoke to the three of our children who were with us, by the way, the entire time that he was at the house. I mean, he literally didn't speak to them. He was 54 years old. He wasn't actually an old gentleman and he didn't have Alzheimer's. His wife did, a bit. Anyway, they wrote wonderful thank you letters – God, the English are good at thank you – wonderful thank you letters, and then they eventually buggered off.
And in October the book that I had been talking about was indeed published, and guess who reviewed it? The same man who had reviewed the previous two, Julian Symons, and he didn't like the one because it was not funny, and he didn't like the other because it was funny, and I was, as my mother would say, fit to be tied. And we went down soon after that to La Gardelle and we'd had the garden done, and we had paths and we had the pool, and I said to myself, fuck them forever. This is just fine... if you don't like the book, don't like the book.
So actually in my graceless way I became somewhat philosophical about the fate of my work. Tom actually continued to publish it for quite a long time, and he never did much with it, and my reputation did suffer for winning the Oscar, because of course they thought that I didn't, as they say, need them. When you don't need people, they're quite likely to put gravel in your tank.

So I became a sort of... whatever I became. I don't know. And then I thought – the movies were drying up – I thought I would write a series of plays about people at Cambridge and what happened to them later. So from 1972 on until '76, '75 actually, I wrote a series of plays which is called The Glittering Prizes. In those days the BBC was not the dirigiste place that it is now.
I met somebody who... through my friend David Deutsch I met the head of plays, a man called Gerald Savory, who had one hit in the West End called George and Margaret, who was head of plays. So Gerald said, what do you want to do? And I said, well, I'd like to do a sort of lifeboat series of people at Cambridge, some do well, some don't do well, sort of based on various people I know but not entirely, and he said, well, let's open some champagne, that's fine. Thos days are gone forever, but by God, I do miss them.
So I set about writing [The] Glittering Prizes, and then... and I did. I wrote them in France, and the first play we were going to do in England I came back for the read-through, and then I went back to France again, because by that time our son Stephen, I think, was going to school in France, because we had a... the teacher at the village school had been born in our house, so he said of course I'll take him, so...

The writing of Darling lasted a very long time, because I began working with John and Joe, I suppose, some time... well, it has to be sometime early in... late in 1962, and the film was eventually shot in 1965. That's not unusual now, but it was a very long gap, and I didn't get paid because I didn't ask for money, which was foolish of me, but I've got this, sort of, terrible British-Jewish hang-up about asking for money. It's really stupid, but there it is.
Anyway, I got quite tired of it, and eventually John kept saying, 'They don't like the script, dear, they don't like the script, dear', which people always say that when they don't like the project or whatever. Always, the writer is the scapegoat in the movies. And we buggered off to Greece and then we came back to Rome the second time, when we went to live in Vigna Clara, and they had got somebody else in to do some work on the script, and since I hadn't been paid in a very long time I took a rather sour view of them having got somebody in to do some work, which was dreadful and none of which scarcely appeared in the movie, but I was disillusioned because I thought we were friends, and of course there aren't any friends in the business and I should've known that, but I still don't really know it, because I expect people to love me. Some do.
So I was fairly disillusioned. I did go to the shooting of Darling, when they were shooting in Italy, but previous to that I had seen the rushes in London and I said to them that they were dreadful and that they were wrecking the whole film, and I was right, and most of the stuff I'd seen was actually never in the movie, the terrible scenes at Lords with Julie looking like God knows what, and Dirk looking like a sort of suburban hairdresser, it was all dreadful. Anyway... Dirk was actually very good in the movie by the way, very good. He did say to me on one occasion when we were doing Darling, 'I find... I find this character very weak in this scene', and I heard myself say, 'Why the fuck do you think we asked you to do it?' So I wasn't always the mellow figure which sits here now.
Anyway. We sort of got over it with success and all the rest of it and I, Julie was extraordinary but not interesting. She couldn't say a line to save her life. Chat was just beyond her. I mean, she... if she could mispronounce anything or mis-emphasise anything she would, but in that movie she does have an extraordinary quality. All the rawness of her back story, whatever it is – I know a bit of it and I certainly don't intend to rehearse it in case I am wrong, or indeed right – but she was... she was that girl. Ken Tyler rather disobligingly said, 'She's an identikit girl', and the answer is: so? It was put together from a number of very good ideas, but actually it was pretty damn good. One or two of the two very good lines which live. I remember, when she had an abortion Dirk comes to see her, and she says, 'Look after the fishes, poor little things!' which I thought was quite nice.
There are a few good lines. One of them I have from a friend of mine actually, when she was... when he discovers that Julie is being unfaithful to him with Larry Harvey, and they're on the escalator and she's saying, we should take a taxi, and Dirk says, 'I don't take whores in taxis'. And Julie then says to him in a very kind of strained Cockney voice, 'A pound's not enough!' And he said, 'Oh, shut up'. 'A pound's not enough!' That was all taken from the story. It was... Guy Ramsey's wife was angry with him because he played too much bridge and pulled this particular trick on him in the Piccadilly underground, and I lifted it. If you keep your ears open you hear quite a lot of good lines. There were some good lines in Darling. I really like the film and I've seen it several times since, and it's held up pretty damn well. Ned Sherrin said it was a very bad script – that shows how good it was.

Two For the Road was a completely different thing. Audrey was divine, and I had a great moment with Audrey, a very chastening moment actually when we were shooting in the south of France, and I read the scene we were going to do that day, and I rewrote it because I didn't like it, and I said to Audrey at lunch, 'Audrey, I think we should do this scene this way tomorrow if you don't mind, this is much better'. And after we'd finished she said, 'I like the first scene'. So I said, 'I promise you actually, the second one is much better. The first one didn't actually make any sense; this is, you know, makes sense'. So she said, 'Well, would you read them with me?' Yes. I consented to read it with her, so we went into her caravan and she said, 'Which one should we do first?' So I said, 'Do the first, the old one first because I think you'll see when you do it...' I don't know what the first line in the old script was – it was something like, 'Hello'. I said, 'You're quite right, Audrey, it's fine'. She was terrific.
Albert only made one mistake. Again, I can't help feeling it's a sort of British mistake, a British provincial mistake, and that was, it somehow never occurred to him how terrific it was to be with this woman. He loved her, and then he didn't love her so much, and then he loved her again and... but, you know, he didn't understand that he was with this woman. When Audrey saw Beetle, she said, 'Oh, I get it now'. She called Beetle 'Legs', which coming from Audrey wasn't bad.

No, Two For the Road was – although I didn't know it – in terms of movies it was... you don't get it any better than that. You get a director who loves the script; it's wonderfully done. It was not a great hit, but it's a famous movie. I'd sooner it was a hit and a famous movie, but I still get 20p a day so to speak from the screenings, and anyway, it's made. They made a movie with no plot, could never get it through today, as my grandmother would say, 'on a bet'.
Anyway, the movies slumped badly by 1969. Joe Janni and I actually went out to Hollywood in '69, and it was a desert. I was going to direct a movie for Fox, and then the people who were at Fox got sacked, and we came home and I really thought there was no hope, so I eventually... put together... this idea for The Glittering Prizes.

It took me a hell of a long time to write the first episode. I thought it would be easy because it was only television. But I also, as usual, somehow wanted to do it much better than one could and I put a lot of quite cinematic things in which the producer was very worried about until he realised that there was a way of doing it. Anyway, it all seemed to go okay. And I went back to England from France to attend the read-through, the first one, and it seemed okay. And then I went back to France and I didn't go back again until they were about to start shooting. I don't... can that be true? Oh yes, that's exactly right. I went back and it was two or three weeks later. They'd finished rehearsing and they were... they were about to shoot and they did the technical run.
And when I saw... I arrived from France and I saw what was shot in the technical run, I said to the producer, Mark Shivas, it's absolutely hopeless. It's a total and complete disaster. Tom Conti behaves like a kind of demented Eastern European tinker and that's not my idea of what an English... educated English Jew would behave like, and everything. And he said, well, but we're shooting tomorrow. And I said, well then in that case, we're going to re-rehearse now. So he said, well, we can't because Waris Hussein, who's the director, will be very upset. So I said, well, get him in here and I'll upset him because it's an absolute disaster. If you don't know it, you don't know much.
So they got them all together and I said, there's just a hopeless misreading of the entire script. Just all trying too hard. It's not the way to do it. Let's read through first and then we'll re-rehearse it. I said, the positioning and everything is all fine, the cameras is all fine. Just... it's just the performances that are no good. So they were all a bit, kind of... but I rehearsed them very gently and actually very nicely and it all came down because you don't shout on camera and you don't wave your hands about and you take it very easy. Not as easy as people take it now, by the way. But nevertheless, that's another story. Let the words and the value of the words do the work.
So that's what we did. And it worked pretty well. And from that moment onwards, curiously enough, everyone listened to me quite hard. Until eventually we came to the fourth of the six plays. And I was again in France and there was a character in it based on a sort of Frank Lloyd Wright/Oswald Mosley figure – a slightly bonkers kind of genius. Not that Mosley was a genius, by the way. And we had difficulty trying to cast it. They tried to get Paul Scofield who always nearly said 'yes' and then he said 'no' in the way that a lot of actors do. And gradually, gradually, gradually it was getting nearer and nearer shooting and we hadn't got anyone to play the lead in this particular episode. It was the third one, actually.

And eventually they got... that actor who had been in The Forsythe Saga. Can you remember what his name was?
[Q] Eric Porter.
Yes, eventually they got Eric Porter. And they told me that he was going to do it. And I was due to go back in order to attend the rehearsals, but I had not attended the first one. And one of my habits is to put at least 18 lines in all my sonnets. And the scripts tended to be a bit long. So the script editor had suggested a few cuts and in the end we had cut them, but it was on the page which had already been done. In those days you didn't press buttons for printers so, you know, it was like that.
And Eric Porter was rehearsing. Oh, it must have been the second or third day when I got back. Conti, by that time, and I were very good friends and he kind of went like this as we went in. And I walked in and there was Eric Porter, sitting at the table with the script. So he said, 'Oh, it's very good to meet you at last'. So I said, 'Very glad to have you in the show, Eric'. So he said, 'Yes, well I'm not likely to have been the first person you asked, am I?' They always know when you haven't asked them first, and Eric Porter's one of those actors who never got asked first because he was a prize pain in the arse actually, though not bad.
So he said, 'Well, now you're here – now you're good enough to grace us with your presence – would you mind explaining to me what that means? Because', he said, 'I was talking about this passage to my accountant last night, and neither of us could understand what it meant'. And he pointed to a place on a page that was crossed out. And all the actors were, kind of, listening to see how this was going to go. So I looked at the passage and I said, 'Tell you what, Eric – why don't we rehearse the show and then, when that's done, we can rehearse the cuts?' 'Very good to see you, very good to see you'. Sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn't. He actually did give a very good performance but he was a pain in the arse.

The Glittering Prizes was a huge success except with Clive James, who thought that the lettering was wrong on the Cambridge rooms that my character occupied because they were done with Letraset whereas in the 1950s, they would have been painted by hand. What a terrible thing! Actually, he was...well. Our daughter, Sarah, the painter, became quite friendly with Clive when she was 18 or 19. She was not... she did not sleep with him because he... she didn't fancy him, but she liked him a lot and he liked her. And when he first began to be very nice to her, she said to him, 'Before I talk to you, I would like you to explain how on earth you could have written the things about my father's plays that you did'. And he said, 'Well, everyone else liked them'.
Clive and I actually, through Sarah in a way, have become... yes, we've become friends. It doesn't happen often with critics and their victims, but it did happen with Clive. I like him actually. And he writes... he's written too much and he's done various things, but he's all right. And we... we are friends, thanks to Sarah.

Sarah... was a wonderful person. And she had all the nerve – and the... and the anxiety – but she had all the nerve which I haven’t had.
And one time when we were going to a screening of a... Academy Award screening in those little theatres in Soho, we all had drinks first and then we went in to watch this film. And about 20 minutes before the end of a very long film – it was The Verdict with Paul Newman – two, rather drunk chichi people in leather coats came in and sat in the stalls with us and began to talk very loudly during the movie. It was a fairly tedious movie but we had been there for two hours and we had reached the climax of it and they were sending up the film and they were talking and all the rest of it.
And the lights went up. And Sarah still had her half a glass of orange juice which she had not drunk from the buffet before. And without a moment’s hesitation, she turned round and she threw it straight onto them. And all this orange juice – and there’s always more orange juice in a glass that’s been thrown than a glass that’s being drunk – went all over them and dribbled down all the fringy stuff they had on. And she said to me, ‘Charlie Lederer’. She remembered, pulling the cabinet down with the jade in it.
Sarah had the nerve to do that and the looks. She was a wonderful painter and a person of extraordinary qualities. She loved Greece more than... the island of Greece – the island of Ios – more than anything else in the world. And she was a great painter. And the response to her work in this country has been extremely grudging. But there it is.

Anyway, we did The Glittering Prizes and then Mark Shivas, the producer, asked me whether I would do a screenplay of Rogue Male. Because if I would do it, BBC would do not only that one but two others ones that he wanted to do. I don't know why and I don't really care. So I said, well, I'll do it for you, but I have to choose the director. And they... and they... he said, okay. When you have power, you have power and when you don't, you don't. You better know when it's one and when it's the other. But anyway. So I actually got Clive Donner a job which he hadn't had for a very long time, since doing Nothing But the Best, because things had not gone well with a movie called What's New Pussycat? which resolved Woody Allen never to let anybody else direct one of his... one of his screenplays. And I fear nobody ever has. Anyway.
I wrote... I wrote the Rogue Male script in six days. Really good fun. I've always loved the book. And we... we had Peter O'Toole and we had, in particular... and John Standing, Peter's pal. A very nice man, very, very nice sort of slightly toffy actor who played the villain. And I wrote a little part for a sort of Jewish solicitor called – I can't remember what his name was – anyway, Jewish solicitor. And Clive Donner had directed Harold Pinter in a... in a version of... I can't remember what actually. Anyway, some... one of his movies – The Caretaker, I think it was. In a little room they shot it and Noel Coward came in and said, 'Very good for groping'. Of course, you're not allowed to say that now because people grope you and they go to jail. I mean, oh, for Christ's sake.
Anyway. We all met to read the screenplay and sat round the table. It's [unclear] in television and you first read the script. So we read the script, read the script, read the script and read the script. And eventually we came to the little scene where Peter O'Toole, having had his nails pulled out by the Gestapo, having crawled through the sewers of Europe and all the rest of it, has arrived back in London pursued by the Fascists who are trying to get him because he tried to kill Hitler. And Peter O'Toole is supposed to walk into the room and Harold then looks up from his desk and says, 'Harold?' And Harold leant down the table and he said to me, 'Freddie, you've written here, “Robert, what is the matter?” Would you mind very much if I said, “Robert, what's the matter?”' So I gave it a beat or two and then I said, 'Are you going to rewrite the whole fucking script?' So he said, 'Seriously'. And I said, 'Seriously, Harold, if that's what you want to say, why don't you say that?' So Peter came to the door. Harold said, 'Robert, what...what's the matter?' And the read-through continued.
And then, the next stage, of course, was that you get up from the table and you, as they say, walk through a piece. Tape's on the floor, there's the room, there's your office, there's the window and everything else. So we go all the way through, and now Harold is sitting at a little desk in his office and Peter O'Toole does appear in the doorway and Harold looks up and he says, 'Robert, what is the matter?' The cast did notice and we were not greatly intimidated by Harold Pinter and he didn't give us any more trouble. But there are lessons to be learned from this. One of them is, when you're full of shit, you're full of shit. The others are, of course, to do with veneration and its excesses.

But Harold did something which I've never managed to do: he was never self-deprecating. He never pretended for one second that he had read books which weren't worth reading. And I edited a book in the 1970s to try and raise a bit of money for public lending right so that we actually got some money back from books being lent in public libraries which in those days happened quite a bit. And I asked a number of famous writers, including Harold and Arthur Koestler and Iris Murdoch and who all else, to tell me what books they would be made of if, so to speak, they were a stack of books. And some people answered one thing and some people answered another. And Maurice Cranston said that he had been totally besotted with Racine when he was young. And there were... there were sort of interesting and uninteresting contributions.
And Harold Pinter had, of course, to be Pinteresque because that's what Harold Pinter had to be. And he began his very short, terse account of what he would be if he were a library by saying, 'In my teens, I read Jules Laforgue'. Now Harold Pinter was brought up, as far as I know, if not in the East End, certainly in some not greatly favoured part of London. And the idea that Harold Pinter in his 20s read Jules Laforgue is, to say the least, very unlikely. Or, as Jules Laforgue might say, et ta soeur, mon vieux– what a load of bollocks.
[Q] In his teens not his 20s.
What? In his teens he read Jules Laforgue. I don't think Jules Leforgue was translated in Harold Pinter's teens. So he not only apparently read Jules Laforgue to the exclusion of, whether it was Biggles or anything else that people might read in their teens, he also read it in French. How could I possibly doubt that this was true? I don't doubt it's true. But get off.
Of course, the fact that Harold couldn't take himself anything but extremely seriously is not the only reason that he is renowned, but it don't half help. I don't think TS Eliot spent a lot of time pretending that he was actually a bit of a clown, which he in some ways quite definitely was and rather a displeasing one at that, actually. Funny, all that. Willie Maugham, however, who was a bit of an outsider, was perfectly capable of being somewhat self-mocking and I'm afraid that I caught some of that from him and I'm sure it's done me no good. But there we are.

The Glittering Prizes went very well. They repeated it once, very quickly, and never again. And I then wrote a film for the BBC, a man called Jim Cellan Jones, whom I happened to have been at Lockites with at Charterhouse. And it's called School Play. And it's about a bunch of people at a public school not 1000 miles from the one which Jim and I went to – Charterhouse – who never leave. They get older and older in the House and they become monitors and various other things, but they never leave school so that actually it's all played by grownups, all the boys, because they're all quite senior. And again we had Denholm Elliott, who was fantastic, and a number of very good actors – Michael Kitchen, who was okay. But it was quite a smart satire on the England where school is the place which, somehow or other, you never quite leave or never want to leave. I mean, the most famous incidence was Cyril Connolly who wrote about... wrote about Eton and he said about himself – self-deprecation again – by the way, that was a cue for a lot of people to deprecate him, too – 'He was at Eton with Orwell, at Oxford with Waugh. He was nothing much after and not a lot before'. Harold Pinter would never dream of writing a piece like that.
Anyway, I wrote this thing called School Play and it was very good. And Jim did it like it was his revenge on Charterhouse, too, because he had, as they now say, issues – oh dear, do they ever? – with Charterhouse. And the BBC showed it and it was a great success. That's to say, lots of people watched it and it got very good reviews, but they never repeated it because somebody at the BBC realised, so they said, what I was really doing which was satirising them. I was also, of course, satirising just about everything else that there was in England. That's what satire does, chum. But it was not well regarded. I've never actually done anything for the BBC television from that day on. So there. Now who hasn't left school?

Everything went, actually, pretty well in my life. I wrote several more movies. A lot of them didn't get made, but nobody seemed to mind because, funnily enough, in America they quite like my company. I amuse people in America and I'm more American. I do that. I'm quite a kind of chameleon figure in terms of taking on local colour. And it amuses me to be toffy with toffs and academic with academics and various other things.
I don't know where the years went. Sarah grew up, Paul grew up and Steve went to school in France. And we had a great time. All the time that there was a disaster with dreadful things like bell-bottom jeans and national catastrophes of that order in England, we were in France and Steve was at the local school and we led a very, very simple life and we were very happy. Sarah began to do very well with her work when she left Bedales. And she didn't do very well, she just was very good. And the years went by. And they do, don't they?
I don't know what my reputation was. I was told by somebody not long ago that I had made a mess of my career in the 1970s by leaving England after The Glittering Prizes. To which my honest answer is, I don't have a career. I didn't know that writers were supposed to be careerists. I thought they were supposed to write. I thought exactly the same thing then as I thought after I told the people at Macmillan that I didn't want to make friends with my work, and I think it now. I would like to be a very well selling writer and, like Henry James in the theatre, you know, I've done my best in the commercial world. Henry James was once asked why he thought he had not been a success in the theatre. And for once in his life he was very monosyllabic and he said, 'I don't know. I tried so hard to be base'.

I've tried fairly hard to be base without being gross. Now, I'm quite willing to be gross if gross is what I want to be. I've done a lot of stuff and I've had a lot of luck of one kind and another. And they've made quite a number of my things, some of them pretty well. I did another television series at Granada after I did The Glittering Prizes in the late 80s which was called After the War which I actually thought, in terms of scripts, was very much more sophisticated, clever, funny and biting. But the leading actor was not Tom Conti. The leading actor was a good actor called Adrian Lukis. He's good but he's not a star. I liked him. I still like him. I like Tom, I like Tom also because he was a star and The Glittering Prizes made him one, but he filled the space.
I don't know what stars are exactly but you know when you've got them and when you haven't. And I know Audrey's a star and I know that Liv Ullmann is a fake star. Liv Ullmann's the only person I've known who appeared in a film of mine and then didn't do what she said she was going to do, i.e. have a love affair with another woman, because she said she wasn't going to do that sort of thing in an English film. Then don't take the job. Unforgivable. I don't mind people not being as good as they should be, but not doing their best is insufferable. That's what you have to do, including screenwriters when hired to do screenplays. If you didn't want to do it, don't do it. Otherwise – shit with sugar.
Story of Joe Janni. He was in Venice at the film festival and he'd just done a film with Renato Castellani – I think it was Romeo and Juliet – and this was in the 50s. And in the Hotel Excelsior lift a man came up to him, an Italian, and said to him – I'm sure in Italian, but the version that I heard was in English – 'Mr Janni, I would like to make some films with you'. So Joe said, 'Listen, I'm sorry but, you know, I don't know what kind of films you make'. And the guy said, 'Listen, I tell you. To tell you the truth, I make about four films a year. Two of them are low class shit. One of them, high class shit. But the fourth, merda con zucchero – shit with sugar'.
Shit with sugar is quite fun to do. I don't think I've consciously done that but, you know, one does the best one can. It's all like writing Latin and Greek verses to me. You get the story – it doesn't really matter what it is – will it make into a film or not? Yes, it will. Everything can. Eisenstein said he was going to make a film of Das Kapital. Not much chat, of course, in the original but you'd have to flesh it out, wouldn't you? You can always do it. You can always do it if the money's there and sometimes you do it when the money isn't and they don't want... don't want to do it.
All through the 60s and 70s, when other people were having multiple love affairs and I don't know what or going down the drain, we just went on living the way that we actually have always been lucky enough to live in the later years. And so it went on, and so it went on, and frankly, I don't even know what happened to the years. It all seemed to go fine. I did a lot of stuff and I wrote a lot of books. I wrote a lot of books. And those are the things that I really cared about. And I wrote a lot of short stories because the radio did short stories in those days, and it wasn't that the market paid well, it was that the space was there to fill and I filled it and I loved it.
I did lots of short stories. So did Willie Maugham for a long time. He said whenever he thought of something, it came out as a short story. So did it for me for a long time. Until eventually the guy that I was doing stories with and had done them for probably 10 years, sometime in the early 90s, I said to him, why don't I do a series of stories on the BBC radio? Fifteen minutes and each one of them is a trilogy – five minutes of each one, like that. And he said that's a terrific idea. So he went to talk to them and he didn't call me. And as we all know in showbiz, whatever the topic, if they don't call you, it's not good news. So eventually I called him and said... 'Derek', I think his name was, 'what's happening?' So he said, 'Listen, not good news, I'm afraid'. Oh yes, quite – what? 'Well, I went to the meeting and I told them the idea'. You know, it was Liz Forgan and some other people. I don't know who it was. And they said it was terrific. They love the idea. So I said, 'You mean they actually don't want me?' 'So what she said was, couldn't you get a woman to think of that idea?' So I've never written a short story for the radio since that day. That's not true. I have done some, actually, not long ago, but it was in a slightly different register.

But I wrote a lot of stuff and I did another television series and all the rest of it. And so we went on, frankly, in our lives as if, curiously enough, we were living in a kind of... not exactly isolated, but a... but a kind of blessed condition – Beetle and me and our children. The children were beautiful. They didn't do drugs – well, certainly didn't do drugs that I knew about. And they didn't propose to do drugs. They didn't drink more than a bit. Sarah was quite naughty in her way, but that's okay, she was an art student. And she began to sell her work and everything else. And then she married someone that she... well, it... that wasn't a great marriage. She had three children, they're very beautiful and we love them dearly, and they're very like her.
And she was very frail and she did take a lot of prescription drugs because she had terrible migraines. And she did very good work and she had terrible migraines. And in... she... her husband and she... she and her husband parted and she took up with somebody else. And he was a perfectly nice architect guy, but he was more concerned with architecture than with her health. And she got ill and nobody seemed to notice. And it wasn't our business and we didn't really realise. And she got pneumonia and she went into hospital and they said she was okay, and then they said she was dead. And that was in January of 2001. And, to tell you the truth, I don't know what's happened since then.
If I look it up, I mean, I can only say that once again, Beetle really saved... saved the situation. I mean, I don't have to say how we felt. I can't even say how we felt. And I was in a state of whatever I was in. And so was Beetle, but Beetle is different from me. That's one of the reasons why we're together, I suppose, and like, as well. And Beetle said, 'We were together before Sarah was born and we're going to be together again'. And we are. The boys were terrific. Sarah died and Will Boyd, a friend of mine, the young novelist, whose father was a doctor, said to me... us, very... he came to see us the day after we got the news, while we were sitting in this room. And he said, 'You must not be sorry for Sarah. There's nothing to be sorry for, for her. You're only sorry for yourself. I understand. But just don't think it's your duty to be sad. It isn't'. Which was good advice.
I... as you can well see, I still can't really talk about Sarah in public very easily. I've never understood these people who can go on television and appear on programmes and talk blithely about people who've been murdered or died in accidents as if they were sort of nothing to do with them. Sarah was everything to do with us. And because she was an artist and because she and I had a sort of extraordinary rapport, I have been bereft of the only friend of my work, apart from Beetle, that I could talk to and who could talk to me in the same way. And I've discovered that actually, the unity of the arts, which people somehow didn't sometimes deny, is much closer than we imagine. Painting and writing are very similar. I like to write in longhand in my notebook, in which I've written millions and millions of words, because the fingers do the work. Sarah could paint and be on the telephone at the same time. And she would occasionally look to see what her fingers were doing. And they were doing very careful work by the way, sometimes with a brush with one hair.
And Sarah died and our responsibility, of course, was to her children. Our son, Stephen, who was then in his mid-30s or early 30s, said that he would live with the children with Sarah's other ex-partner, the... Renato Benedetti, who is an architect. And he went and lived in the house with the children for 10 years. He wanted to be a screenwriter and luckily at that time, I was earning enough money to pay him enough to keep him going and to do screenplays and stuff. He's still doing them, with some success now. It's now 14 years, if it's... that's 13 years, isn't it, since Sarah's death. So sort of getting over it and not getting over it, it doesn't really come into it.

I've gone on working because the brain insists on doing this stuff. And I've done some pretty good work since she [Sarah] died. I haven't done as much fiction as I would've liked, but I've done other things.
When she died, I found I couldn't write in English for a while, so I only wrote in French in my notebook. And my French is not good enough to be published but it's good enough to be written down and to convey what I wanted to say. And I still do a bit of that when I'm distressed, in particular about Sarah. But I published a lot of my notebooks in the last 13 years, with Sarah's... always with Sarah's pictures on the front of my cover. And I think of those books as being sort of for her. And inadvertently, I think, that the notebooks which I've been keeping since... since Cambridge contain more truth about what I think about the world. I decided very early on to try not to talk about how I felt in my notebooks. I do a bit of it, about being miserable or angry with this or that person or having resented this review or the other. But in principle, which I stick to pretty keenly about 90% of the time, I only describe things. I describe people, I describe conversations, I talk about books, I talk about ideas, I talk about – God help us – the Jews.
The Jews. I remember quite early on in my life when I was slightly involved and I suppose even at the synagogue I think, during the time when I was doing a play there, somebody said to me rather challengingly, are you proud of being a Jew or proud of being Jewish? And to tell the honest truth... well, my answer was not very honest. I said, 'Are you proud of being left-handed?' I regarded being Jewish as being one of those things, a kind of given. You couldn't get out of it because that's what had happened, like being left-handed, right-handed or blind in one eye. But to be proud of it implied being concerned with what Jews had done. And there I'm in a sense, in Nabokov's party. Nabokov, whom I met incidentally in 1970 when I was going to do a book of his for a screenplay. Nabokov said once somebody said to him, 'What do you think about the future of the novel, Mr Nabokov?' To which he replied, 'I am not concerned about the future of the novel. I am concerned about the future of my novel'.
I am not immensely concerned about the future of the planet. I am not immensely bothered about the plight of anybody very much, copiously as I may weep to see any specific person ill-used in any context. I can't do anything about the world. And since Sarah died, I've sort of more or less given up programmes for the improvement of mankind. I don't think mankind is going to improve. I don't think he can improve. You can improve and I can improve. And then I come back to Casals and the cello. When he was in his 90s he said to somebody, 'I can't see you in the morning because I have to practice'. They said, 'Maestro, at your age, why do you want to practice?' And he said, 'Because I might get better'.

The Jewish thing has haunted me all my life and I come back to that, so to speak, as a... as an envoi. I don't know what I think about it. I wrote not long ago, in fact two or three years ago, a book about a man called Titus Flavius Josephus, a Jewish historian who was known, when he was young, as Joseph Ben Mattathias – a well placed Jew in Jerusalem during the time of Nero. And he wrote the only history that we have in any extended form of the war which led to the fall of Jerusalem in 70, the destruction of the second temple, and supposedly, the dispersal of the Jews from having a homeland to no longer having one. Not entirely true because actually there were plenty of Jews in Judea afterwards because they had another revolt later which was also crushed, that time by Hadrian.
Josephus survived because he elected not to die in the siege in which all the other people being besieged proposed and did kill themselves. And Josephus, by a ruse which as they say need not concern us here, escaped and was taken by Vespasian who wanted to talk to him. So he was the only survivor of the siege of Jotapata, a small hill town outside Jerusalem, long before the fall of Jerusalem. And Josephus was the first – what I... what I have called 'existential Jew'. He had been a member of the hierarchy. Not... he was a priest, the highest rank of priest, but priest was not a vocation in ancient Jerusalem – it was a social register level. The Jews was a... was a hierarchical state. There were no democracies. Jerusalem was run by the high priest and his men, and like that. They... the public had certain loud noises they could make, but there was no voting or anything of that kind as far as I know and I don't think there was.
Anyway, Josephus in effect deserted the Jewish cause. But, of course, he was in great danger because Romans usually killed the commanders of cities or towns who resisted sieges for any long time. And Josephus was eventually brought in front of Vespasian at his own request. He'd obviously failed to do something that Vespasian wanted to do so Vespasian put him aside and left him in this tent or a cell or whatever it was to cool his heels, as they say. And after a while Josephus called to the jailer and said, tell your commanding officer that I have an important message for him. Presumably they thought, aha! You know, he knows who to get in touch with in Jerusalem to get the place surrendered or whatever it was. So he was taken to Vespasian and Titus and two other officers were in the... in the tent with them. And before Vespasian could say anything, Josephus said, you think I am here as a captive to plead for my life. You're wrong. I am here because I have a message for you from the God of the Hebrews. You, Vespasian, are destined to be the emperor of Rome. Some sources say that he said, 'but not the next emperor' – much it matters.
Now, Vespasian was Nero's general and Nero dealt very harshly with generals who were in any way insubordinate, even if they were very successful. He'd recently executed one called Corbulo. Now what he should've said at that moment was: take this man out and kill him – that is sedition. But he didn't. And every second that passed secured Joseph Ben Mattathias as a privileged person. Because now it was quite certain that [Vespasian] could not send Joseph to Nero as a prisoner because he would say to Nero what he had said to Vespasian, which is, Vespasian is going to be the emperor after you, at which point, of course, he would not be because Nero would send someone to kill him. So by a Jewy trick, a smart piece of thinking, a bit of middle management, Josephus became a privileged person. Now, of course, he could've killed him – Vespasian – anyway. But the Romans were both deeply realistic – nobody more realistic than Vespasian, a tough old bird if ever there was one – but they were also very superstitious, as most people were in the ancient world. A guy who brings a message from a god should probably not be killed because he was, in some sense, a sacred herald. So Vespasian survived... so Josephus survived. My book has a great deal about this.
Now eventually Jerusalem falls in spite of all Josephus' efforts to get the bloody people to give up and make a deal. They wouldn't do it for various reasons which are too complicated. They're not uninteresting to talk about. And eventually Joseph was rechristened Titus Flavius Josephus. Vespasian and Titus were... family name was Flavius. And he went back to Rome and he wrote the history of the fall of Jerusalem. He wrote a very, very long book attacking a man called Apian who was an Alexandrian anti-Semite Greek. Not an anti-Semite in the programmatic modern sense, but just somebody who wrote against Jews of whom there were a large number in Alexandria, none of whom had rebelled against the Romans, and who became quite assimilated. And he also wrote a long history of the Jews which actually, I think, came after the writing of the... of the war, but looked as though it preceded it in temporal terms. And he wrote a first autobiography which we've got – the first piece of writing that's come back to us from the ancient world written in the first person apart from Archilochus who wrote poems with his first person, but generally the first person was not favoured in the ancient world.

And I suppose, in some sense, since I wrote a fairly sympathetic book about Josephus, my position is a bit like his. I think a lot about the Jews and Israel and Palestine and Harold Pinter and I don't know what not all else. But I don't have any strong desire to live with Jews. I've got a lot of Jewish friends, and I hope I've got a few – what my father would call – Christian friends. But I truly don't discriminate, except on the cheapest possible level of the jokes that one tells or whatever. But I am ridden by the Jewish thing, just as Josephus was, even though he did not dare to go back to Judea because they would kill him if he did. He didn't renounce Judaism any more than Nahmanides did in Spain in the 13th century or than Rosenzweig, 20th century Jew in Germany, who was about to be converted – as many Jews were in Germany – to, I think, Lutheranism, and then, at the last moment, he stayed on his side of the line. Hitler made sure the Jews had their choice, but to stay on their side of the line, and the ones that tried to cross the line he pushed back across it and then, if he could, he murdered them.
An English general in Palestine, as it then was, asked Golda Meir to tell her quite frankly what she thought it was that the Jews had done wrong because surely the Germans had not murdered them for no reason. This didn't go particularly well with Golda Meir. And it doesn't go particularly well with me. But I know what the reason is. It is, of course, the validation of Christianity. There's been a great attempt with anti-Semitism to divide it into religious anti-Semitism, which was discriminatory, sometimes cruel, but not murderous. Although you could've fooled the pilgrims... you could've fooled the Jews who lived in the Rhineland who were murdered by the people in the First Crusade on their way to Jerusalem to kill the rest of the Jews that they could find. You could forgive them for not thinking that in view of the number of Jews that were killed in Spain by the Moors as well as by the Christians. You could be forgiven for all sorts of things, and you would still find it very hard to find any Jews, until of course the present wicked generation of Israelis, who ever killed anybody. In fact, as we all know, the Jews were cowards. And when the Cossacks came, they ran away. There were a few Jews who became heavyweight boxers and various other things. There was a guy called Jew Mendoza who was a friend of Byron's. And Byron himself was a... philo-Semite, actually.
I don't really care all that much about whether people like Jews or not. And if you have a problem with them, by all means don't tell me about it. The fact of the matter is, all I ask is that you should not murder my children and my grandchildren. And preferably not the murder of children and grandchildren and various other people with whatever weird race... racial kink you think we have because, actually, there isn't one, you know. Just like there wasn't any racial distinction between the Tutu and the Hutsi... or the Tutsis and the Hutu or whatever they were bloody well called in Rwanda, who murdered each other with the acquiescence, to some degree, of the European powers not all that long ago. People do a lot of killing. They used to kill a lot of Jews. And then the Jews actually, slow on the uptake as they can be, evolved a strand of resistance to being murdered, which started in the Eastern... in Eastern Europe and in the Pale of Settlement, in particular in terms of resisting the Cossacks who liked murdering Jews. The Ukrainians murdered lots of Jews and they wouldn't mind doing it again if there were enough there to murder. But of course we all support Ukrainian independence because what else can we do?
And when the Jews tried to get out of Europe in the 1930s, the great powers including United States and Britain did their very best to deter them from entering their shores. And if they did, on the whole, they pushed them away again. People say that they didn't, but they did. And why was it so noble to take the children in the Kindertransport and leave their parents behind? Well, you know, there was a problem about room. Was there really? But would you have done that with French people? Would you have taken the French children and not allowed the parents to come if they were going to be murdered? No. The truth of the matter is there were too many Jews. There weren't many, but there were too many. Voltaire wrote against the Jews – the great symbol of liberty and intellectual honesty in France. He wrote a violent tract against the Jews because, of course, there were so many of them weren't there in France? Yes, there were. There were 0.5% of the population of Alsace and Lorraine and various other parts.
So, oh, be careful, he's ranting. He's ranting. Presently, as they say in Ben Johnson, he will 'rail desperately.' Well, I'm not going to rail desperately, but I'm fairly unmoved by the deep regret which nice people have about the way the Israelis seem to be impervious to the possibility of shaking hands with their enemies. Their enemies have shown no disposition whatever to shake hands with them, except under heavy financial pressure, usually from the US. But nevertheless, of course it's disgraceful that they haven't given back the occupied territories which they weren't occupying until Nasser and his friends decided that they would destroy the status quo as it was in 1967. And I wish that [the Israelis]had kept their word which they gave to me personally – imagine them breaking that – that they would give the lands back. Yes, I do wish all that. And I don't want to live in Israel. And yes, I have been there. And yes, two weeks was quite enough. I don't want to be involved in communities. When I hear the word 'community', I reach for my passport. I don't like communities. I don't want to sit with other people, deciding what's best and all the rest of it. I want to do my work. That's all I want to do. It's convenient. Oh yes, it's convenient. But that's what I do and it's what I do best.

So the Jews. What are we going to do about them? What makes you think you've got to do something about them? And, who the fuck are you? Would be the question that would occur to me, of course without the expletives. A lot of people that I know and like and respect share the view that the Israelis should be cold-shouldered until they give back the occupied territories. Well, I honestly don't know what the Israelis should or shouldn't do but I'll tell you something for absolutely certain. They are not going to do what the Ukrainians did and give up their nuclear weapons and give up their capacity to defend themselves and then rely upon signed documents by all kinds of noble people in the so-called international community. Because depend upon it, of all the people in the world that the international community will allow to be destroyed, the Israelis and Israel is the number one choice. In fact, I can imagine – and of course I must never say so because it's a sign of paranoia and we know what that unfortunate movement leads to – nevertheless I can well imagine Barack Obama, who sat for 20 years in a church listening to an anti-Semitic black preacher and apparently found nothing to disagree with him, what he said, I can imagine him for the sake of a quiet life – and oh my goodness don't we all want a quiet life – I can imagine the powers saying if, in order no longer to have mad people on airliners and no longer have people stabbed in the streets and various other things which Muslims with their good-heartedness and desire for peace do their... a lot of, mainly because of course the Israelis have upset them so much... I mean there was actually an Arab invasion of Egypt in the sixth century in which they burnt all the books in the library in Alexandria except, of course, the book which they regard as holy which probably wasn't in that library. The Moors have a great reputation for brave cavalry charges of one kind and another.
But only the Jews apparently are to be systematically barred because they have dared, can you imagine – after 2000 years of being little crawlers – they've actually decided to grow muscles and defend themselves. And this is a deeply disturbing phenomenon, not only politically but also metaphysically. Why did the Vatican not recognise the State of Israel for a great many years? Because the resuscitation of Jerusalem as a single capital of a Jewish state confounded centuries of Christian propaganda which proved that Jesus was the Son of God and that the Jews had killed him culpably and were deicides. And it said so in the Missal until Vatican II. If they got Jerusalem back, perhaps God wasn't as angry with them as they thought. And a Jesuit priest in Rome in 1943 wrote a piece saying, perhaps, perhaps the survival of the Jews is evidence that... I'm not quite sure what of, but I better go and have a pray.
 The human race has done astonishing things. It keeps doing them very unevenly. There are shitty Jews, of course. I was sold a car which was in two pieces and put together by a Jewish friend of mine. Actually, the car worked fine, but he knew it was a fake and I didn't. All kinds of things have happened. And believe me, I've been sold a few pups by people who didn't happen to be of Semitic nature. I don't know what the answer is, and the answer, of course is, there isn't one. Because, as Wittgenstein said, you know, when there is no question, there's no answer. And when there's no answer, there's no question because there has to be an answer. So maybe Wittgenstein didn't say that, but you find out where he didn't say it. I think he said it. He certainly said something close to it. What is to be done? Not a lot. What are you going to do? Write.

Writing to me is something which one goes over and over and is careful about and all the rest of it. And if you say, what's the point when the planet is going 'phut', you don't believe in the afterlife and frankly no-one reads your books now, why would they do it later? And the answer is: that's what I have to do. And David Garnett, whom I knew... once I went and saw him in... he had a house down in the Lot in France, and famous member of the Bloomsbury group. And he said about writing... somebody had said to him, why do you want to go on writing when you know that life is, you know, a short and useless activity and no-one is going to care afterwards? And he said, that's why. Because writing is what makes being a snuffed out, or about to be snuffed out, little creature somebody.
I hate all this average man and everything being equal and all the rest of it. Not because I think I'm better than other people or worse, but because the idea of creating a society in which everybody has £8.10 a week or £8.10 a minute or anything else and nobody has more and everybody watches the same television programmes because we don't believe in highbrow stuff. The answer is: you do that. I'm not going to do that. I'm going to go and read Montaigne. And one of the things I despise most about the cultural climate at the moment is that a man called DJ Taylor, who's quite a sort of toffy reviewer, once reviewed a book of mine in which he sneered because I had refused... I had referred in a letter – which was published – to a friend of mine to, I think it was, Karl Kraus and Montaigne. And he thought that was very affected. But he didn't really think that; he thought that people who read what he was reading would think it.
And I remember coming back to London in the... 80s? I don't know – time begins to lose its linear qualities... 'timeline' – oh, fuck off! Came back, and we had dinner with a man called... with George and Sarah Walden, who are friends of ours, and a man called Howard Davis, who was the head of the LSE at that time; a man who had been a city journalist. He's now Lord or Sir or whatever it is. He had to resign from the LSE because he took money from Gaddafi. What's wrong with that? Something, actually, if you want to know. Anyway, we were having dinner with him and his wife and they started talking about a couple of people called Richard and Judy. And they talked about these people for a while. And eventually I said, 'I'm... I'm terribly sorry but actually who... who are Richard and Judy?' And this man's wife turned to me and said, 'That's the most pretentious thing I've ever heard'. Pretentious, moi? It's pretentious not to know who two people of absolutely no account are?
Well, I didn't take a Cambridge scholarship and I didn't read Classics and I didn't do a number of the things I did for no good reason except, in very many cases, because I was told I ought to. But I didn't do those things in order, in the end, to read crap books by crap people or to know who people of no account are. I don't know anybody who is of much account. That is to say, I do not solicit company of famous people. I tend to walk away from them. My books do contain... my notebooks do contain references to people who've become famous because, God help me, I'm 82 years old and I've known a few people – whether it's Harold Pinter or David Garnett or anybody else – but I have never solicited their company. I don't chase after professors. I don't chase after anybody much. I walk away. More fool me, because I've missed meeting a lot of rather interesting people. Including, for instance, Nabokov with whom I got on very well during a day of conversation.

I walked into the hotel – wonder what it's called? I think it's the Montreux Palace where he lived, because I was going to ask to do a film about Ada... of Ada, his [novel] Ada. And I had reviewed it in the Sunday Times. And I arrived before the producer and I sat reading a book about Nabokov on the... on the front at Montreux. I remember Montreux because it was so quiet that the headline in the local paper was, 'Fire Alarm Rehearsal'. It was the nearest they could get to a major fire, was rehearsing one. I sat on the bench in my usual examinee's way. My whole life is actually like an exam and so is this, in a sense. But I do my best, of course, to pass. I sat there reading and one of the articles I read was about how Nabokov was particularly keen about anagrams. And one of them which he had confected was on the page and it was a Russian-looking name ending in –sky. But, of course, the actual author concerned was Kingsley Amis for whom Nabokov did not have a great deal of respect. And nor do I.
So I went in and there was... well, down they came in the lift, Nabokov and Véra, his beaky-nosed Jewish wife. He was a great anti-anti-Semite, Nabokov, and so was his father. So we sat down to lunch, the two of them and me, and at some point in lunch he said to me, 'You like anagrams, don't you?' So I said, 'No, not really'. So he said, 'Well, here's one for you'. So he passed it across, a piece of paper on which was written the name of this pseudo-Russian figure ending in 'sky'. So he said, 'Which contemporary writer do you think that is?' And I took the piece of paper and I said, 'It's Kingsley Amis', and handed it back to him. So he turned to Véra and he said, 'This is a very impressive young man'. And I said, 'No, not really – just well-prepared'. But we did get on very well.
And a few years later, we were – happened, as they say – to be in Montreux, Beetle and I. And I said, I wonder whether I might not go and, you know, knock on the door and have a word with Nabokov. They never made the film, but it wasn't my fault and I'm damn sure he doesn't blame me and all the rest of it. And then I said, well, I... you know, you don't really want to be dragged in to see Nabokov and I don't... I... we'll let it go. Few years later we were... I was playing tennis on our tennis court in France – if you've got it, you flaunt it, don't you? And in those days there weren't any portable phones. So we're talking about, what – early 90s? I don't know when Nabokov died, I can't remember actually. Anyway, phone rang and I... phone! I ran up from the tennis court up to the house. 'Hello?' 'Hi, Mr Raphael? This is CBC calling from Toronto'. 'Yes, hello'. 'I don't know whether you know but Vladimir Nabokov died'. So I said, 'Have you phoned me from Toronto to tell me that Nabokov died? I mean, that's very nice of you. Why would you... why would you call me?' 'Well,' he said, 'here's the thing. His wife – you know his wife, Véra? – she told us that... that you have a very kind of close bond with him. She felt that you and he were really, kind of... had something together'. I said, 'But I only met him once'. And he said, 'Well, that's what she said. Would you care to say anything for... you know, we could print?' So I said, 'How... how about: he's the greatest writer of the 20th century not to get the Nobel Prize?' 'Oh, that'll do. Thank you very much. Okay, goodbye'. Whose service is it? That ought to have made me realise that, really, you shouldn't deprecate yourself too much, but after all, you do what you do. Whether I would've been greeted by Nabokov if I had rung the bell, I don't know. On the whole, people living abroad in exile on their own are quite willing to see other people – I've discovered that. So there we are.

Everyone has the idea that Stanley... all Stanley Kubrick's films were enormously inventive and original and... and all the rest of it. Actually they weren't. They were nearly all dependent on original... some other material. Which is not to say anything against them or against Stanley. But Lolita, for instance, I think did defeat him, just as Ada defeated me before I even got to the battlefield. For various reasons, of course. The girl in the film of Lolita had to be much older than Lolita was in the book because she was actually a 12-year-old girl. And Kingsley Amis, not entirely foolishly when he reviewed Lolita, said más o menos, what the hell did the guy think he was doing? And it is, as they say, not a bad question. Because actually Lolita is about a paedophile. Yes, it's sort of admitted. But it also has the paedophile defence built into it which is she was the really hot little number and, you know, she couldn't wait for me to do what I did and then I discovered that she'd done it before with somebody else, anyway. So let's have all the fun of the fair, but then not be to blame for it.
On the other hand, there are wonderful passages in Lolita. I happen to prefer Pale Fire, by the way, to Lolita. I don't much like Pnin either but I do like Pale Fire, I do like The Defence, I do like King, Queen, Knave and I do love... Laughter in the Dark, I think it's called – Camera Obscura I was going to call it which I think is what its original title was. I read a lot of Nabokov and I liked it. I was influenced by it in certain ways with a particular book of mine called California Time, which does have Julie Christie in it in a very masked form. I thought Lolita was actually – when I read it – it was, sort of, wow. And I re-read it again not long ago because I found a copy in some shelf or other – I don't know – and I thought it was fairly crappy, really. And I also thought it was a dirty book. I've no idea what Nabokov did or didn't do in... with small girls and I don't much care either, actually.
But Stanley didn't really make a great movie of it because he had too much respect for the original text. So, unusually with Kubrick's films, Lolita is very verbose in spite of the fact that I think James Mason gives the most marvellous performance as Humbert Humbert. I wasn't all that bothered about Peter Sellers, who was wonderful in Doctor Strangelove. I thought it was a mess, actually – Lolita, the movie. There was... as I say, Mason was terrific but it was crap. Also because of the moral code then in existence in movies, he didn't actually – how shall I put it? – mount  Lolita on his greasy pole or anything of that kind. It was all a bit what Joe Janni would've called 'nyah, nyah'. The bed collapsed before they could get into it. It was all turned into a sort of silly joke. I don't know why he bothered. And the reason is, it was a famous name and you could get the movie made. Poor Stanley Kubrick, the great genius who could do whatever he wanted. Oh really? I don't think so.

I really liked Stanley. I mean, it was a great, great moment when I was asked to write the movie for Stanley Kubrick. And I mean it. But I was 60-something. So I wasn't actually knocked over like I had been when I was working with Schlesinger and Janni. I wanted to please him and I think I did, actually. I didn't know he was a dying man, which he certainly was. And, of course, I wrote a book about it which all kinds of people said was a disgrace and a scandal. Actually, it was a very eulogistic book and bang right and truthful in pretty well every regard, except the worst bits, because he was a tiresome fellow in many respects. But we got on very well and he treated me very nicely. He loved the classics, which he hadn't done, but he'd pressed his nose against the window of classes at Colombia when he was a, sort of, mendicant – quite well paid in the end – stills photographer. I think he actually rather liked me and we used to talk a lot on the telephone.
I had a funny experience with Stanley Kubrick and one of the ones that is in the book which is, again, quite truthful. He had the idea that there ought to be some backstory about the orgies which took place in Eyes Wide Shut. So I wrote a document – a sort of CIA report – about certain people who were admirers of Jack Kennedy and who formed a sort of Kennedy club which kind of relived the sexual exploits of Kennedy and all the rest of it. And this was a sort of FBI report on these people and their doings and what they got up to and all the rest of it. And I... I must have faxed it because in those days you had to fax everything. I faxed it through to Stanley. And the phone rang quite quickly and he said, 'Freddie?' I said, 'Yes?' 'Can you talk?' He always said, 'Can you talk?' as if I was having an affair with him, you know, and was my wife in the room. 'Yes, I can talk'. 'Okay, so listen, where... where'd you get this stuff?' So I said, 'What?' 'Oh no, no – I'm serious here. Where'd you get this FBI report from?' So I said, 'Well, you... you asked me to write something about the background and... and, you know, that's it'. 'Yes, but where'd you get it?' So I said, 'Stanley, I... how do you think I managed to do it within the hour? I wrote it, didn't I?' 'No, because I really have to know. I mean... I mean, if you've got access to some kind of secret material, I have to know. I mean, you have to level with me'. 'The secret material is between my ears. There isn't any secret material'. 'You wrote that in one hour?' 'Well, I just typed it out'. 'Okay'. There's an old American expression about people not knowing shit from Shinola. And the truth is, directors have no idea, though they have great fears about the capacity of writers to generate stuff.
On another occasion with Kubrick – and we had lots of talks and I really enjoyed them and I was proud to be doing the movie, make no mistake – but, you know, he... I said something about, I wanted to get back to writing a book or something, I can't remember. I said, don't worry, I can write a book while you're preparing, whatever it is, or doing so and so. He said, 'Oh, yes', he said, 'you don't think I'm an artist, do you?' So I said, 'Oh, Stanley, I don't really care whether you're an artist or not. I don't even know what an artist is necessarily. I mean, all I know is that when you want to do what you call art, you have to have a script and a cameraman and $50 million and stars and a unit and lights and location catering and I don't know what not all before you can actually do it. And all I need is just a piece of paper and a pencil'. And he said, 'You sure know how to hurt a guy, don't you?' And I said, 'Yes'. It is one of my failings, that I do know how to hurt people. But it's usually by telling them things which they know to be true that they don't want anyone else to be aware of. You shouldn't hurt people, should you? No, you shouldn't hurt people. Don't start hurting me or I will hurt you if I can, I'm sorry about that. It may take me a day or two but I'll get to it by-and-by. No, it's not a nice thing to have said. Mais, un peu vrai.

Well, I mean, Stanley Kubrick was always a, sort of, mysterious figure. And I... it never occurred to me at all that I would work with him. I very much admired The Killing, I very much admired Paths of Glory, I very much admired Strangelove, etc. I didn't all that much admire Full Metal Jacket though it's very memorable, the first half. I didn't like Lolita. I loved Barry Lyndon. Which he was very, very much abused for in America because they said that he's made a European film and, you know, he's supposed to be an American director. He was quite vilified over Barry Lyndon. He chose wonderful music. Because like many people in the movies, they are actually... well, they're pretty good at picking up here and there little bits of stuff which will dress their salad and it all gets tossed together and it ends up by being their salad. But it wasn't their vinegar and actually it was somebody else's oil and so on.

Well, my experience with Kubrick started actually a long time before my experience with Kubrick. Because I think it was in 1958 – a very sort of drear period really – I went to a movie once on my own in the afternoon. I don’t know why, perhaps Beetle was looking after Paul who was a baby. I can’t remember. Anyway, the two films on the screen were The Killing followed by Paths of Glory. I hadn’t ever heard of the director before. And I was considerably knocked out by both of them and sort of really thought of him as a master. And I thought of him as a master all through his subsequent career when his mastery became generally recognised.
I met him with Stanley Donen in Stanley Donen’s house once, in Montpelier Square. We all had dinner. And Stanley seemed okay and his wife was rather a brisk little smartass lady. And we all played a game after dinner, not a game, a sort of game – rather desperation game for supposed grown-ups in which we each had to say something we’d never done. And if we had done what the other people had never done, then we had to throw a matchstick into the pool. I mean, it was a completely silly kind of thing. We were there... I was there with Stanley Donen and his then lady and with the Kubricks and with a man called Lord Goodman who was a very large, in those days very famous, lawyer-advisor to Harold Wilson. And the game was to say that. So I don’t... I don’t remember what I said. I think I said, ‘I’ve never slept with a movie star’. At which point Stanley threw several matchsticks into the pool and I don’t know whether... I don’t know whether – I mean Stanley Donen – whether Stanley Kubrick did, I don’t know. And Lord Goodman didn’t. I... he threw one in because he hadn’t done it, and Stanley Donen said, ‘I’ve never been in the Underground’. So we all threw in... so we all had to throw matchsticks. Yes, I think even Stanley Kubrick had been in the Underground. And I don’t know whether Lord Goodman had. Possibly not, possibly not. Anyway. Then Stanley Kubrick said, ‘I’ve never had a suit of clothes made to measure’. Which was interesting and we all, again, threw matchsticks in. And then Lord Goodman capped it all by saying, ‘I’ve never taken legal advice’. Never taken dietetic advice either, but let it pass.

Many years later, this is about 19... 1993-4, I suppose, I was asked to go up to Paris from our house in France to meet an Hungarian-Canadian producer – a fairly dangerous combo – about doing a television series about the Count of Monte Cristo. In other words, doing the Count of Monte Cristo on TV. And I wasn’t very keen, but I didn’t have a job and every now and again, you need money to do various things in houses. So I... I went up. And this guy, Lantos, was two hours late for the meeting because he overslept because of his flight. Well, I didn’t really mind. But on the other hand, I wouldn’t have overslept and I don’t think you should oversleep and I didn’t want to do the Count of Monte Cristo.
And on the way back, walking back to our hotel which was the Raphael in... just west I suppose of the Champs-Élysées – the ex-Gestapo headquarters which I always rather favoured staying at – I was accompanied by one of Lantos’s sidekicks who said that he wanted to begin ‘the bonding process’. And the further we walked, the less bonded I feel with this particular man, in whom there was no harm, it’s just that I don’t want to do ‘bonding’. I didn’t become a writer to bond.
We got to the hotel and there was a message saying, would I phone my agent, which I did, with a kind of sinking heart because I thought he wanted to know how it had gone. And it had gone, unfortunately, fine. But no, my agent said that somebody wanted to call me. And I said, Well, who? And he said, I don’t know but I’ve got a number that you should call. So I call the number and eventually it emerged, as they say, that Stanley Kubrick was the person that I had been asked to return the call to. So he said... eventually I got him and he said, ‘Yes. Are you doing anything?’ And I said, well, I hope not. And he said, ‘Well, would you read something?’ So I said, yes, what is it? ‘I... I can’t tell you what it is. I’ll just... I... I’ll send it to you, okay?’ So I said, yes. Is it for a movie? ‘Yeah, I mean, that’s... I... I’m a movie director’. Oh, fine.
So we got back down to our house and the courier or whatever it was – I can’t remember – arrived with this bundle of pages. And the title had been cut off and so had the name of the author. They were... they were duplicated pages, as we used to say. And I read it. It was all set in Vienna in the 1880s, 90s, or something like that. And I... I thought I knew who it was. Anyway, eventually Stanley called me that night. No, not that night. He said he would call me that night but he didn’t. He called me the night after which was okay. ‘So, Freddie, did you... did you have a chance to take a look at that?’ So I said, yes. I said, who’s that by? Is it... is it... is it Zweig or is it Schnitzler? ‘Yeah. Anyway, what do you think?’ So I said, well, it’s really, really interesting. It’s quite a good story. It’s slightly old fashioned. Are you thinking of setting it in Vienna in the...in the...you know, under Franz Joseph? ‘No, what do you mean? No, no, no. Going to transpose it to New York, okay? Today, New York’. So I said, oh! Well, if you think that’ll work. He said, ‘You don’t think so?’ I said, well, I mean, anything will work. But are you sure? I mean, you know, things...well, people aren’t the same now. You know, relations between men and women, I mean they’re not the same now as they were in Vienna in the 1880s. And Stanley said, ‘You think so? I don’t think so’. So I thought, well, maybe you’re right. Anyway. So, you see, I said, really, it’s a sort of work of translation, isn’t it? You want to translate literally from Vienna to New York and change all appropriately. ‘Yes, yes, exactly. So what do you think?’ So I said, well, you know, first of all let me say that, you know, I’m really pleased that you called. ‘Yeah, okay, but what do you think?’ I said, well, fine. I mean, I’d like to do that. ‘Okay, so do I talk... talk... do I talk to your agent?’ So I said, well, if you... if you want to, yes. Well if you want to do it, that’s... that’s what I have to do. So I said yes.
So that took about... no time at all and he made... he made the going deal with my US agent who is an Armenian who is no... you know, no fool at all. But anyway, there it all was. And that was good. And then he called again and said, ‘Well, you know, you... when you coming back to England?’ So I said, I’ll come back to England if you want me to... want to meet. He said, ‘Well, you know, I think we should’. So we came back to England and we used to do that a lot. We used to go back and forth a great deal. Fares were not very high and, God help me, I was well enough paid for that all to be included. The chancellor paid for that, quite rightly. Business is business, isn’t it?

So we came back and Stanley said, ‘I’ll... I’ll send a car for you, okay?’ So I said, well, I can drive out. ‘No, no, no, no, no, I... I’ll send a car’. So he sent this taxi from St  Albans, a sort of rather proper cab with a... with a rather inscrutable driver. He said... he said, ‘What time you want to do this?’ So I said, well, early in the morning, you know, as early in the morning as you like. He said, ‘Okay, about 12 o’clock?’ Fine...fine, okay. So the car arrived and we drove out to St Albans and then we drove down various lanes and through gates and more gates and then ba-bap-bap-bap-bap to get into the last thing. It was like a sort of... his house was like a luxurious concentration camp, surrounded with wire and all kinds of devices. And there were lots of cars there and everything. And he opened the door wearing jeans and... you know, he’s just an American guy. With a beard.
So we went in and talked. And he’d read some of my work. He was by no means foolish. And we talked about the Schnitzler which was now out in the open. It was what’s known as the... as the Dream Novel, the Traumnovelle. I don’t speak German so I don’t know, but something of that order. Anyway. We talked about that, and a bit of this and a bit of that. And eventually, about half-past one, he said, ‘You want... you want some lunch?’ So I went, well, yes, that wouldn’t be a bad idea if we had some lunch. ‘Okay, so I... I don’t know whether... where... where there is any but we’ll take a look’. So we wandered through this enormous house which was sort of full of packing cases and all kinds of stuff everywhere. It was... we never passed through a formally furnished room at all. And eventually we walked through into a room with a... with a big table in the middle and there was a buffet laid out like he was expecting a party. So he said, ‘This looks like lunch. What...what do you think?’ I said it’s fine. ‘Okay. So you want some wine?’ I said I don’t mind a glass of wine. ‘Okay’. He said, ‘What... what do you think of this?’ And I said it’s... it’s fine. He said, ‘It’s New Zealand wine. It’s £3.25 a bottle’. So I said, well, I would’ve said £3.75. ‘Okay, so what do you think?’
On we went. He was fine. He was not deferential, but he was... he was... he was polite. And... and you know, he was correctly polite. And I went off and... ‘When can you start?’ And I said, I’ll start so and so. I’m going back to France, then we come back to London again for Christmas. He said, ‘Well, will you send me 50 pages? Will you have done 50 pages?’ So I said, I don’t like to send pages. He said, ‘I know, I understand. Will you send me 50 pages?’ So I said, well, as it’s you, I will. ‘All right, all right’. I don’t usually do that because you know what happens – they all don’t like the first 50 pages, you never get beyond page 50. He said, ‘Okay. But you’ll send it?’ So I said yes. So I started work. And you can always tell... pretty well always tell whether the muse has alighted or not. It may be a tarnished muse, it may be a cheap muse, but it’s a muse. And you need her. Anyway, the muse delivered and I worked very hard. And I enjoyed it, it was fun. I had lots of ideas. He said, ‘Put everything in it... put everything in that you think of, and you put it in’. Okay. So I did. And there they were all, alive on the page, I thought, and pretty good too.
About a couple... starts with a couple who are, you know, long-married by Schnitzlerian standards i.e. about eight years, and go to a party and both of them has a kind of flirtation with one of the opposite sex in the party. Each of them is aware of the other’s excitement of another and when they then get back in the taxi and drive home, they have better sex than they have had for a long time. Not exactly the most unusual experience of anybody’s life, but a true one. So I handled that, I thought, pretty well. And eventually I got to 50 pages and it was getting towards Christmas. So I sent them to Stanley. In those days, of course you posted... I think I posted them, I may have faxed them, but I think I posted them. Anyway. We were back in our house in... in those days we had a house in the country in the... near Colchester. And the phone rang sometime or other on that pre-Christmas period and Beetle answered and she said, oh, it’s... it’s Kubrick. So, Stanley. ‘Freddie?’ Yes. ‘Listen, I’ve read the pages, okay, and I’m absolutely thrilled’. Sorry? ‘I’m absolutely thrilled’. Okay, good. ‘So, will you go on?’ So I said, well, yes, I think I... I think I’ll go on, yes, fine. He said, ‘Okay. Don’t... I mean, don’t... don’t... you know, put everything in you think of, okay? Just like you... like you did, okay?’ Yes.
Well, I know one should be above all these things but I would like to meet the person who is. The fact is if Stanley Kubrick says that your script is... thrills him, you feel good. I was not a young person. I was younger than I am now, but I was not a young person. So although I was also thrilled, not least because I had cleared the hurdles – in fact almost entirely because I had cleared the hurdles. In other words, it was one more scholarship exam and I had passed yet again. That’s what I do. That is my weakness, that is my strength. I take exams. Including my own. Anyway. And Beetle’s.

On we went and I wrote a lot more script. And he was never as thrilled as he had been because, of course, I had cracked it and you only crack it once. After that, you see if you can do something different and all the rest of it. So it was a very long process, conducted at a distance. Because Stanley was living in his castle surrounded with barbed wire and all the rest of it, and I was most of the time in France where I like to do my work because I don't like to be conscious of all of those other people. I don't wish them any ill. I don't wish them anything. I just don't want to be near people. That's why I became a writer. So I don't do clubs and I don't do committees and I don't do getting on in the world and I don't do careers. In fact I can hardly believe that anyone says that writers have careers, but they do. I thought writers stuck it to people. I thought that was what you did. And that's what I have intermittently, with blunt or sharp instruments, tried to do and continue to try to do. So anyway.
Eventually, draft after draft... When I finished the first draft, I made the mistake – if mistake it was – of sending it to my agent, the same one who had negotiated with Stanley. Because experience shows me that you have to register with your agent the fact that the end of the first draft has been done and, vulgar as it is, the payment is now due. The agent was not in the office and the assistant put a William Morris folder on Stanley's script for sending it on to Stanley. This excited great rage on his part because he was, of course, paranoid. He once said, and he meant it, 'Paranoia means knowing what's going on'. And his idea of what was going on was that people were trying to crib his ideas, to tell what he was going to do next, etc, etc. And that probably is quite true. I was... I had no intention that he should know that anyone else had seen it. But, of course, I did have a reason i.e. next stage please. So he called up in a great rage. Well, a sort of... sort of rage. He said, 'You know, it's... what you've done is unforgivable. I mean, you're... I'm very tempted to, you know... you know... kill the whole thing there and then'. And I said – because I was not a child and I wasn't particularly intimidated though I was certainly delighted by working with him – I said, Stanley, we all have our foibles. You don't want your script to be seen. I don't want anyone to say that I haven't finished the first draft in time when I have. 'Yeah okay, but I mean, you... you know, you sent it to people'. I said, Stanley, that's it. That's really how it is. I quite understand your being upset and I'm really sorry that you discovered that I did what I did. But I will not pretend to you that I'm sorry that I did it because that's what I always do. So he digested this and his letters, which had previously ended, 'Regards,' resumed being, 'Best regards.' That was a symbol of our reconciliation. And on I went into the second draft.  And on and on and on.

It was a very protracted process and he did have a habit of saying... his assistant would say, Stanley's going to call you tomorrow. And then he would not call tomorrow. Then he would call the next day and not... not ever be sorry that he'd wasted your entire day. And the answer was: get over it. Which I did. And eventually – I guess it was a year or two later by the time I had finished the draft after that one and do a few little bits and pieces and all the rest of it – I said... he said, 'Well, what're... what're you going to do this summer?' So I said, well, I don't know, I... I'm going to probably write a novel and then I'll... I'll probably go... we'll go to Greece, I expect. And he said, 'Okay'. I said what are you going to do? 'I don't know. I guess I better try and get this picture made'. So I said, well, what do you do? 'Well', he said, 'I'm going to, you know, take a look at the script and then I... I call the people in LA – you know, Samuel and the other guy – and I say, “Better get over here, okay?”' Yes. And they... these are the head of the studio, the head of Warner Brothers, this was. And do... and do they come? 'What do you mean?' So, will... will... because you want them to come, will they...? 'Oh yeah... oh yeah'. What happens, I said. 'Well, what I do is I... you know, I fly them over the... you know, get them to come to London. And then I put them up in the hotel – you know, the Savoy or wherever it is – and then I just leave them for 24... 24 hours and don't... don't call them'. I said, well, why do you do that? 'What do you mean?' Why don't you call them? 'Well, you know, I want them to feel, kind of, you know, uncomfortable. So then I call them and I make a date for them to come out to see... see the... see me and then... you know, I sit them down and give them the script to read. I mean, what are they going to do? I mean, how are they not going to do it? I mean, they've flown all the way from LA. You know, they wasted their time in London. I mean, you know, they got to do the script, okay?' Oh, fine. So that is more of less what happened and all the rest of it.
Now, he then... I can't remember the exact order but I know the order in terms of A, B and then C. Eventually, at some point, he called me up when I was again back in England and said, 'Alright, now I've done this kind of, you know, shooting script, kind of... kind of thing, you know. Would... would you come out and read it?' So I said, yes, of course. 'Alright, I'll send a car, yeah. When do...when do you want to come?' So, well, yes, early in the morning. 'Okay, I'll send a car at noon'. So I went out and Stanley said, 'Well, I've... you know, I've done some work, you know. I mean, I've done some work on the script, okay?' So I said, fine. It's your... it's your script, Stanley. You're... you're the filmmaker. It's fine. 'Okay. So would you take a look at it?' So I said, yes, of course. So he said, 'Okay, alright. Listen, you sit in here...'
I remember there were newspapers all over the floor – German newspapers. So I said, oh, what are you doing? You... you got a new floor? 'What... what do you mean? Well, I mean, all the, you know, newspapers – that just been retiled or something? So he said, 'No. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Those... those are German newspapers. Excuse me. If you look closely, you'll see they've got ads for my... my last movie in it, you know? And I've been measuring the ads'. Measuring the ads? Why are you... why are you measuring the ads? 'Because, you know, in the contract it says what size they have to be, you know. Some of them are, like, two, three millimetres short, you know. So, I mean, I get them to do it again'. Right.  'So listen, you read the script and, you know, when you've... when you've taken a look at it, you know, you... you just go bap-bap-bap on that, you know, and... and I'll... and I'll be in wherever I am, okay, and I... I'll come to you'.
So I sat down and... I'm a very guileless person. I want to... if it's a script, I read the script, ba-ba-ba-ba. And then I think, no. I said to myself, almost consciously – I mean, like reading myself the... the rules – I said: don't hurry and don't call him when you've finished. So I read the script and I made a lot of marks on it. It was actually, in many ways, a disappointment. Not particularly because he'd changed things. He'd changed some things, he'd left others. But because, in particular at the beginning of the film which... the pages he had liked so much, but a long time ago, I had had the two – the married couple – excited into revelations and... and sex by what had happened at the party. He seemed to find it necessary in 19 whatever it was... '95, '6... to have them smoke pot and kind of use artificial stimuli before beginning to... whether to reproach each other, excite each other, whatever. And I thought that was a big mistake and I still do, because he did actually do that. The real excitement that comes out of a sexual situation should not be generated by artificial aids, I think.
Anyway, that's what he did. And a lot of the chat was not all that good and he'd changed things unnecessarily. And I wrote... made a lot of marks on the page. And then I sat and read a book for 20 minutes. And eventually I rang the thing and, you know, Kubrick arrived and in a sense we now had a kind of role reversal because he wanted to know what you think. So I said, well, this is okay and this isn't and I don't really think much of that and are you sure that's a good idea? And he said, 'Well, you know, I'm not... I'm not a writer, you know'. It's quite common for Hollywood directors and, for all I know, every director – a very strange breed of sick person becomes a director – to rewrite, even to the point of retyping in the old days, people's scripts in order, as Sydney Pollack once said to Bill Goldman, 'You know, I have to feel I own it'. Okay. You poor sap. But never mind.

The end of that thing, I remember – the end of that day – he was really kind of ready to start preparing the movie. And he took me out to the cab, where the cab was waiting, and he was not a demonstrative man, as they say, but in a sort of very awkward way he put his arm behind my shoulder and said, ‘Well, thanks’. That was a kind of... actually, the last time I ever saw him. Because he was going to ask me to come out to see the rough cut or whatever it was. And I read... saw on the French television, Stanley Kubrick est mort.  
After that, the movie was edited by... indeed by Sydney Pollack, who was in the piece. Not, I think, to its best advantage but I wouldn’t wish to be the... you know, the man who does the mortician’s job on somebody else’s script. I didn’t like the movie hugely. The public... the critics didn’t like it hugely because, of course, the worst thing that could happen with your movie is you should die. Curiously enough, it’s become a sort of posthumous, famous film. Particularly in France and Italy. Probably because, as with the French and the Italians with Byron, they didn’t fully understand what it had to say but what they read into it, they liked. Fine. I get, you know, 20p quite regularly in terms of DVD royalties which even the furious Kubrick family couldn’t deprive me from happening... having. Why were they furious? Because I wrote a book which was absolutely truthful and honest about my association with him, but it was not an act of piety. I don’t do piety. I do accuracy, if I can. And irony is part of accuracy because that’s the way I look at the world. Not at my wife. Not at my children. The world.
Frankly, Eyes Wide Shut... reminded of the thing that Mastroianni said to me, Cinema non é gran cosa – cinema is not a very big deal. It wouldn’t really matter to me now whether I had done Eyes Wide Shut or not. And if you don’t like it and think you’re going to hurt me by telling me you don’t like it, you’re not. And if you did like it, I’m really glad to hear that. I had other things to do and I did them. I was sorry that Stanley died. And he actually treated me, in his strange, domineering way, with a certain kind of domineering deference. Did I like him? I... yes, kind of. Because I like Americans. I find Americans more fun, even to be annoyed with than I do English people. I don’t mean I don’t like English people. I don’t mean I... anything. It’s just that’s how it is with me. The thing about Americans with me is that I don’t have to be the guy who went to Charterhouse, the guy who went to Cambridge, the Jew who does or doesn’t assimilate or... no. You’re just, You’re the guy that’s working with the movie. And that, actually, is a very enjoyable arrangement and I like it. I also like American dialogue because it’s, as they used to say, peppy. And I like the snappy comeback. I like the American style of joke. I can do Oscar Wilde to a degree, although Oscar Wilde wouldn’t say so. But I can also do Ben Hecht, although Ben Hecht wouldn’t say so.
The movie was a kind of holiday and happened to be, in my fortunate experience for 40 years or so, a very well-paid holiday. And you can’t beat that with a stick, as they say on the coast. The Kubrick family took great exception to the book. As I say, mainly because it stopped short of veneration. It’s rather like Jesus’ family might object to a book which told you about what nice times He’d had at the wedding at Cana in Galilee, but omitted to say that He was the Son of God. It’s one of those things.

I don't... I think, unlike television – not nowadays, necessarily, but in the days when I was fortunate enough to do three series at the BBC as well as one or two films and various bits and pieces as well as early plays – there you had a strong sense that you were the author because, actually, they didn't have time to ruin it. That was one of the advantages of any boom situation in the arts. Nobody has the time to form a committee and decide that on the whole the Sistine Chapel might look better if it was in blue not in green or anything of that kind. 'The Sistine Chapel's painted. What do you think?' 'Terrific. Thank you, Michelangelo. What are you going to do for us now?' That is a much better arrangement than, 'We just might be wanting to paint the Sistine Chapel. Have you got any propositions to make about what it should look like? How about if God is on the roof and he's touching Adam with his...' 'No, I don't think so. I don't think that'll work'. That's what they're all like: they're all people that I don't want to talk to. That doesn't mean nobody ever has a good idea. That's the hell, in particular, of the movies. People who shouldn't actually have any right to have a comment can occasionally say something, and you think, oh, good idea. And you're a fool if you don't adopt it.
My sense of proprietorship is limited in the movies to... Two for the Road I do feel is kind of mine because Stanley Donen gave it to me, you might say, and because it contains elements not necessarily of truth but of lived life in various forms – idealised, amused forms, I hope. Darling I feel the same about because it is my script for 93... 8% and also because I spent a lot of time doing it with great devotion at a time when I thought that the cinema could a) change the world – ha! why would you want to do that? – and b) that it could be an art form that I really wanted to spend a lot of time with. By the time I'd finished with Darling, I didn't have that feeling anymore and I've never had it since. I like to do things very quickly. I like to write screenplays which are performable, in which the actors are going to say, 'Oh, boy'. And, on the whole, that's what they have said. I've had a very good run with that. I don't really know, on reflection, what I thought I was going to do with my work. I just thought I was going to do work. Talking about changing the world is, I think, very unwise, to put it mildly. If you can very, very slightly inflect the lives of one or two people who read your books and perhaps give yourself a kind of articulate decency or even indecency, that's pretty good going.
The Jews, yes; the working class... all kinds of stuff, yes; these are important, interesting topics. But again, essentially Oscar Wilde turns out to be right. Books are either well written or badly written, and I like to think that I can do well written books. I don't mean I always do, but I certainly always try. I even try to write well written reviews. I even try to say things clearly and sharply in almost any circumstance I can because you only get one ride on this particular... roundabout? Carousel? Whatever it damn well is. And you may as well do the best you can. I'm not disposed to take myself unduly seriously, but I would quite like you to. I think one of the great mistakes that I have made, career-wise, is that I have too generously admitted my misgivings, doubts, failings and so on. People with a very serious sense of themselves never do that. If you want to be Mr Eliot or Mr Pinter or who all else, you should preserve a grave and serious attitude to your own work. You are the pedestal on which you stand. I'm... well, my daughter Sarah once made a cartoon which I... which I proposed to her. I don't do a lot of that, but I have this vision of a... of a large pedestal and on it were two large feet and ankles. And one of the bystanders is saying to the other, 'The rest of him was clay'. I'm not disposed to ignore the element of clay in myself or others which, to some degree, allows others the opportunity to say, 'Well, you're the one who admitted yourself that that bit of you is clay'.
The luck of it is to get away with it. That's what Peter Sellers used to say to me. I used to meet him occasionally at the tailors. It was a guy called Dougie Hayward who made smart clothes in the 1960s. And I'd known Peter when he was on The Goons and on the radio. And a radio producer said to me quite seriously, 'Isn't it wonderful that the radio exists because otherwise somebody as ugly as Peter Sellers, you know, couldn't make a living as an actor'. And Peter, having met Sophia Loren, decided he was going to become handsome which he kind of did. But when I met him at Dougie Hayward's in Mount Street, he used to say, 'Still getting away with it, Fred'. Which is sort of Jewish and sort of nice. And lots of nasty things written about Sellers – how badly he treated his women, his children, himself and everything else. And maybe he did. But there you do think to yourself: but tell you what, who gives a shit how he treated anybody – look at the work. And somewhere along the line, even though I'm incapable of behaving like a shit for any prolonged amount of time... for instance, my bourgeois nature means that I am not unfaithful to my wife, which is a great inhibition in the building of one's reputation in the United Kingdom. I'd sooner do great work than earn your friendship. And if there's a choice, I'll do the work.

There's a thing that André Malraux once said – he said a lot of things actually and many of them were slightly dotty and certainly self-advancing to the nth degree, but he was a smart fellow. And one of the things he said... I think it was in that book of his about the imaginary museum which he talked about where each of us has an imaginary museum in which are hung the pieces of work that we admire and somehow have changed our lives, and one could extend that into a library and I will in a minute, perhaps. But... André Malraux said: one doesn't become an artist by looking at life, one becomes an artist by looking at art. And that is both true and a bit untrue in my view because, of course, Malraux was to some extent an ideologically driven person. First of all, by Marxism and the... and the communist party, and then, eventually, by this Gaullist French nationalism, you might say, which also articulated his style.
Because of my Anglo-American provenance, I don't feel any specific allegiance to... certainly to national allegiances of any kind. But American writers have influenced me a lot more than, I suspect, English writers have... English writers have been influenced by English writers. However, the main influence, as I've said often enough to be boring, was Somerset Maugham whose Of Human Bondage I picked up when I was 15 and who seemed, as they say, to speak to my case – that's what certain kinds of writers manage to do, whatever your case is. I don't think that Willie Maugham was a great writer, a great writer of English, I mean. In fact, to open one of his books is often to be slightly shocked by the number of clichés and all the rest of it. I think there are reasons for that which is that he was French, his first language was French, and he tended all through his life to think that clichés were in English rather what they are in French, but they're not quite the same. The French use standard phrases to describe standard things because their language is like that. The English, because of the wealth of words and terms available, tend to deprecate the repetition of tired phrases.
But Maugham first of all taught me that you... well, a very clever thing he said once about how, if you have to choose between having dinner with a diplomat and a vet, you should have dinner with the vet. The diplomat will tell you the things which you... he thinks you want to hear or what he would like you to believe are typical of him, but the vet will tell you, if you're lucky, one or two very interesting stories because he won't have the wit or the guile to conceal himself. And on the whole, this is a good... good advice. The thing about Willie Maugham is that he is generally deprecated by all the smart, critical folk, and they have good reasons and I've just explained what some of them are. But the odd thing about him is that rare among English writers of his time – that is to say, of the turn of the century and of the 20th century – he doesn't actually have any violent prejudices against anybody. His prejudices are, to some extent, evenly distributed in the tone of his prose, that is to say that he is ironical about many people, including Jews and, of course, the English. He wrote, I think, in the 1890s, when he was a young man: the English abroad imagine that they are... they are admired for their sterling moral qualities. Just wait until they lose their money – that's when they'll find out what people really think of them. And that is, of course, exactly what the English today have absolutely refused to admit about themselves in the world. As Cavafy said to EM Forster, 'Above all, my dear Forster, don't lose your capital'. Well, the English have not lost all their capital but they've lost a lot. And certainly, they lost their capital ships. Nevertheless, they posture about the place as if their opinions matter to people like Master Putin, who actually doesn't give a shit about the English.
Willie Maugham taught me to work hard, and also, I suppose, to be a professional. Not only in the vulgar sense that Virginia Woolf attached to him of doing things for money. Because that's what you have to do if you don't have any. Funny that, particularly if you have a family, but also in terms of a certain detachment. And my work, I think, doesn't belong to any particularly national shelf in any particular library, which may be one of the reasons that it makes people rather uneasy. I thought I was just going to be a routine English writer. But when I think of the work, I realise that it doesn't subscribe to any of the usual patterns of English writers. I don't say that out of any pride. It's just what the Frogs call a constatation – that's how it is.

I haven't missed the company. I like the admiration of my peers – who doesn't? I like the admiration of my betters – who doesn't? I don't particularly like being abused, even by people who don't know what they're talking about – who does? But the fun of being a writer is independence. Not exactly solitude, because I've been lucky enough to live with a woman who... who's happy to live with me and we see a lot of each other. We have all along and we do now. And we also see a lot of our children because, thanks to her – and to some extent thanks to me – our children have become our friends and always have been.
I could wish that my books were widely celebrated. But when I read, as I just have been reading, even such a sort of outsider figure as Philip Roth, whom I used to know a bit and quite... not I'd say liked him, but we got on fine – and Philip, in a recent interview a) says how glad he is to have stopped writing, quite as if he'd been riding a sort of bicycle with a very sharp saddle which no longer does whatever sharp saddles do to what lies between your legs – he's got off that particular thing and he feels much better now. I confess that I dread the day when I don't actually have any writing to do. I don't regard it as a great – what – pain? But partly because, of course, unlike Philip Roth, I don't actually seek to please publishers. I don't mean I'm not pleased if they're pleased, but Roth, by selling many copies and becoming very famous and getting big advances, eventually became a figure, a feature of the publishing industry. That's all he ever did was write novels. He didn't seem to be very interested in anything else which is also a bit sad, because part of the great fun that I've had – and there's no fun like it, as the Americans say, with your clothes on – has been working with actors. Because although you would not tell from my modest demeanour and all the rest of it, I am, as they say, a bit of an actor, or, as Beetle sometimes says, a bit of an over-actor. That'll do actually in showing actors what you think you'd like them to do and I love doing that and I have great respect for actors – not because of their intelligence, though some of them certainly have some – but basically because of their extraordinary facility for assimilating information and ideas and re-presenting it to you in the form of credible behaviour of the character that you've created. It's quite amazing. That's been huge fun and that's the kind of company I like to keep when I have the fortune to keep it. I do not wish to go to conferences. I do not really care very much whether I am welcome, you know, in certain places or not. I wouldn't want to live the life that most very successful writers live because, in a sense, success stalls you. You then begin to either reproduce the work which is successful or to be unable to reproduce it. In either case you have, as they say, got a problem. There's a lovely quotation which I may have mentioned before but I just came across it recently, which is, 'Old age is a funny thing to happen to a little boy'. And the little boyishness, which the only son of a Jewish mother – as Stanley Donen correctly accused me of being – has, is that one remains – and I think Auden talked about this, whether or not he was an only child – you have the feeling you're the youngest person in the room. So in a way, one's always trying to make it and that's a pretty good arrangement; I've had enough success to think I haven't failed but not so much that I feel I must have done it by now.
There's a story about Casals, which I again, I may have said before because it won't be the first time I tell it which I really like – when he was in his 90s and somebody said, oh, can we have coffee in the morning or something banal like that, and he said, 'Oh, I always practice in the morning'. And this person said, 'But, maestro, you're 90 years old. You're the greatest cellist in the world. Why do you... why would you want to practice?' To which he said, 'I might get better'.

So I look at the work, even the letter that I've just written to my friend Joe Epstein which we're... we write to each other weekly – with a view to publication, I admit, but not only with a view to publication, also to entertain each other – and I read the thing and I change a word and then I change something else and then I put something in it. Actually, I could just as well have sent the letter to him, but I want him to be delighted.  The great line that... when Cocteau said to Diaghilev, what kind of sets do you want me to design for whatever opera or ballet he was going to do, Diaghilev said, 'Étonne moi'. And I would like to be able to go on astonishing people. I've just written a little novella which I think is quite shocking and I wouldn't be surprised if it wasn't published. And the thing I like about it is that all of the eroticism which the reader will read into it – perverse, disgraceful, I don't know what the hell they'll read into it – all that, or most of it, is contained in the spaces between the chapters. So by the time you think you've read a really, really naughty book which should be burned by the public hangman and have to go back and point out which bits shock you, you will find that it's the spaces between the chapters. It's what's implied in the dialogue but never said. In other words, the naughty one is you, not me. Or... however.
The genesis of books is very strange. That particular book came about because a long time ago – I don't think it's very scandalous to tell this story; if it is, then it is – a long time ago, when I published my first book actually, or my first book was published... I always thought it was funny talking about writers publishing books whereas there's the publisher doing the publishing. Later one gets grand enough to say, 'I publish.' Anyway, 1956, before Suez, a kind of strange period of refurbished British ruling the waviness, and Ken Tynan brought Jane Howard to a party we gave. And it was an interesting conjunction in terms of sexual activity, though I didn't know it at the time. There was Ken, a famous young person who'd agreed to come to my party... our party, and there was Jane Howard, a very good-looking young woman in her early 30s who came with him. And that was that. They came, they went. I knew Ken vaguely for a while and all of that. And then, a long time later, I got to know Michael Ayrton, the sculptor and painter and draughtsman and writer. He did too many things for the British quite to feel he was British. And did them in a particularly kind of arrogant way, which also offended people. He... I mean, I think he was a very bright man. A dangerous man in some respects, particularly to other people's wives, but by the time we met him, he was not very well so I did not feel this danger very acutely though I did notice that he was interested in Beetle.
Anyway. He talked a bit about the many women that he'd had. Not with any great lack of discretion, but he did. And one of them was Elizabeth Jane Howard. And he told me that he had been rather shocked by her sexual tastes, which is quite comic because Michael was not actually immensely given to prudery in that way. And the fact was that Jane Howard, for whatever reasons – and they're nothing to do with us and nothing to do with anything that we need to get excited about – liked people to do certain... liked men to do certain things to her. In other words, she liked to be whipped or beaten or whatever it was that she liked. And that's what you were for. And Michael, being quite an egotist, was somewhat offended to be appointed to an activity which anybody could have as well exercised. And it sort of disturbed him quite a bit. Not very much, but a bit. Anyway, that all broke up eventually... and we met Jane again because she was married to Kingsley Amis and they came to visit us on... well, they came to visit a Greek Island on Ios, where we had a house and... called Ios, where we had a house. And we had dinner and Jane pissed in our field in a rather kind of grown up way on our way to dinner. She wrote books. She was okay. I didn't really care about Jane one way or the other. Later she became a friend of our daughter, Sarah's, who came not to like her at all. I used to see her occasionally at the Ivy or wherever it was.
And I wrote a book, a short story, back in the 80s which was sort of based on that thing about the woman who... to be perfectly simple, the woman who is loved by somebody, who can't do to her what she wants done. And therefore, although they have the perfect love, it's imperfect. It was quite a short story. And then, just... I had a month before Christmas when I was free and I thought, I'd... I'd like, really, to do what Nabokov did when he wrote Lolita, which was to take a small story which he'd written many years earlier and have another run at it, as they say. So that's what I did. And I did and this is the story I'm talking to you about. Which is pretty funny actually. And I mean, because it's got some good dialogue and it's set in the 1970s and I finished it on, I think, New Year's day and the day after that, I saw in the paper that Jane Howard had died. What do you make of that? I don't make anything of it at all, actually. But it is curious.

And one of the things I've always felt about life in general – not a particularly astute observation – is that to keep talking about what causes things and why we do things and all the rest of it is generally a vain activity. I don't know why we do things. I don't even entirely know why I'm doing this. Vanity is certainly a reason. Fear of death. Desire to leave something behind. Garrulity. You asked me. Au choix.
On the other hand, it is extraordinary how things lie in relation to other things. The notion that it's always a causal relation is, first of all, unprovable, and secondly, perhaps not interesting. But one does notice how odd life is and that's the fun of being a writer. The further one goes through with things, the more I find that narrative has these gaps that I talk about. It used to be that you tried to fill them in. Now I'm more disposed to leave the gap, rather as Pinter discovered the pause. Unfortunately, the pauses are more interesting than the dialogue in many cases. This is not to my mind necessarily an improvement. I have no objection to Pinter's work. I just don't have any interest in it. Because Pinter's work, to my mind... well, it reminds me of a story that Dirk Bogarde told me. I think it was in a book of his but I... he did tell it to me because I remember talking to him about it. And he said that Pinter became suddenly, sort of, West Endy. And Dirk said to me, I asked Pinter why, in The Servant script, why did all the sort of posh people always have lobster thermidor for dinner? And Dirk, who was extremely méchant and ill-advised in his méchanceté, said that I kind of realised, after I had asked the question, that Pinter thought that all rich people always had lobster thermidor for dinner.
And this is... I think we all make these kinds of mistakes, if we do, in misreading toffs in particular. We tend, of course, to assume that, for instance, the upper classes are much wittier than they are. Oscar Wilde did it and who am I to dissent from that? They aren't necessarily all that witty. I tend to enjoy writing what I think of as gentile books, which I've done quite a few of, i.e. books with no Jews in them. I don't mean they're for gentiles, I just mean they haven't got any Jews in them. I don't really give a shit whether they have Jews in them or not, to tell you the truth. And a book which has got lots of Jews in it, called Lindmann, that doesn't have the word 'Jew' in it at all. A sort of Perec-type conceit. It's also a way of holding something back which makes the reader wish that he could see the word Jew on the page whereas normally he would dread seeing it. Sex scenes are best done in this way also, as I hope I've shown in Private Views.
I don't mean... one credits other people with more wit than they have and perhaps wrongly. Clive James once said to Tom Conti when he didn't... when he had... he said to Tom Conti, well, I mean the thing that's wrong with The Glittering Prizes is that nobody talks like that. And Conti said, oh you haven't met Freddie, have you? He has now, Clive. And actually we've become rather friends, mainly because of our daughter Sarah, to whom he was very kind in giving her space to paint and so on when she was a young painter. He also, of course, made the routine passes but she resisted these with some ease. And they were very good friends and they had lots of laughs together. And she painted an absolutely pitiless portrait or two of him with enormous forearms and all the rest of it. And Sarah, more than me, possibly from me, partly perhaps just adjacent to me, had an absolutely pitiless eye. And the fact that she liked you would not in the least prevent her from depicting you exactly as you look. And she did that with me. The... she didn't paint me but she did do a drawing of me. And I thought I looked very old and sad. And I suppose rather like... like Whistler, you know. You will, Oscar, you will. And when she died, I looked like her picture. So that's the way it all goes.

I think love is always a surprise. That's to say, it's not in the recipe. It only actually is discovered in the eating, so to speak. I don't think you can put love into a book and I... I remember that Pinter said that he could write any sort of scene except a scene of happy lovers. I think that told us more than perhaps one would like to know about... about poor Harold. I think when you're young, you tell girls... or in the 50s, you told girls you loved them and hoped that that would get their girdles and various other elaborate things off. I married very young and Beetle wasn't at all inhibited about saying that she loved me. And it was... it was an extraordinarily moving moment because I was an only child and my father had once said, when I was behaving I'm sure like a teenager, not without reason I suspect: we love you but we don't like you. I didn't really believe the love part and I was somewhat unnerved by the not liking part, but not very, because I knew that I was cleverer than my father, who was not a stupid man. And I sort of knew that I didn't want to live their life at all. I didn't want to live in the block of flats with a lot of gentiles or a lot of anything. And I did not want to be subject to love as a sort of limit to my life. And therefore I wrote a book called The Limits of Love in which I tried to suggest – very successfully this time – I tried to suggest, among other things that love was not a sufficient guide to how people should behave. God help me, I think I thought socialism might be, but never mind about that.
I was dubious of love because it had been oversold with wonderful comic propriety. The manager of the block of flats that we lived in in Putney was called Mr Love. He was also called Bernard. And he was a miserable, droopy man. I've written about it so I don't want to go on about him. Anyway. I thought that fucking beat love and I was keener on that than on the affection. But love will...you know, life will not meet your prescriptions. And Beetle was so extraordinary and found it so easy to be loving, or so it seemed to me, that she actually, so to speak, taught me to do it. Nabokov, who after all wrote some pretty difficult, strange, even macabre and perverse books, is one of the few writers who was able to do happiness. Happiness and love sort of go together. You can't arrange to be involved in either of them. They occur epiphenomenally, as the philosophers used to say.
There's a lovely story of Nabokov, a short story in which a couple are having a quarrel, I think in the Luxembourg Gardens in Paris. And the man looks up and he sees a child at the end of the alley looking at them. And he says to the woman, we can't behave like this. He is going to remember what he's seeing. Let's not be ugly to each other. Something of that order. That isn't happiness exactly but it's something to do with how you should look to the world. And how you look to the world is something to do with how you look to yourself and to each other. It's not a kind of different thing altogether. I like being happy with Beetle. I've enjoyed, you know, for a very long time, feeling that it's her and me. Not against the world but in the world. And that nobody else much matters. And my friend, Joe Epstein, with whom I correspond, and I were talking about friendship in our letters the other day. And I was saying, although it's not a particularly nice thing to say, There is virtually nobody in the world on whom I could not turn my back and walk away without ever thinking again, 'I wish I hadn't done that,' apart, of course, from my children and Beetle. And he said, well, I think that's what happy marriage does to you. If you are with a woman that you not only like to sleep with but also like a lot, then other people do become superfluous. And that has been my blessing. And if it's a curse – well then, that's the curse.

I've known a lot of bright people and I've walked away from a lot of them for one reason and another. George Steiner was perhaps the most famous. I was kind of proud to know George Steiner when I first met him, actually at Michael Ayrton's house. And George was perfectly friendly and he wrote me very effusive, rather continental letters in which told me of all the famous people who had solicited his lectures and attendance at theirs and so on. And he used to end up with rather effusive statements like, 'I am aching to see you'. I can't say I ever ached to see George, but I did go through the motions of aching, I suppose, or something like that. Beetle did not like him on sight. And when Beetle doesn't like somebody on sight, she doesn't often take a second look. So I used to see George in a slightly furtive way – go over to Cambridge to his house and so on. And then one day, I dedicated a book to him and it had an illustrations by Sarah in it. I wasn't going to tell this story, but I damn well am. And I... it was dedicated to him in print and I sent him the book. When he wrote back he said not: I really enjoyed your book, or how clever of you to have done all these different versions of Greek myths in various styles from cinema to acrostics and all the rest of it. He said: what a shame that Sarah did those dire – D I R E – paintings. Wouldn't it have been wonderful if Michael was still alive? Now, what would drive anybody to be as honest as that?
When I say that I'm not afraid of saying whatever I want to say, I can also add that courtesy is part of the irony which I enjoy. And since, if somebody dedicates a book to you, the correct thing to do is to thank them for it, you can choose the terms in which you do the thanking with some care and somebody outside the loop might spot the fact that saying: this is one of the most interesting books I've ever read, means it isn't the most interesting, meaning you didn't like it all that much, or whatever. But you do not, when a book is dedicated to you, have the right to write anything except : this is one of the greatest treasures that I shall ever have in my library and I cannot tell you how much it means to me that you have done that. That's the number that you're supposed to do. You can play it however you like in waltz time or rumba, but you have to do it. And he didn't. And I wrote back to George and said, I know exactly how you will defend what you have said. You will allude to the etymology of the word 'dire' in dirus the Latin, as I know you know, for something which is dangerous, dark, has something to do with the underworld, a sort of godly quality, but you don't mean it. What you mean is: I dare you now to say that you will never speak to me again rather than defend your daughter. And the answer is, 'Goodbye, George.' I've never spoken to him since.
They did write when Sarah died and they did send their love, and, God help me, in the state that we were then in – and we answered all the letters, which people often don't, by the way, very odd that – I replied, 'love.' But I wrote 'love' in the Oxford style, which is more or less the same as 'yours faithfully' or unfaithfully. I've never spoken to George since and I have not missed him. He does a lot of that. He is, in many ways, what Charlie Broad, one of my Cambridge philosopher professors would call, 'a silly clever'. There's always something he does which mucks it up. For instance, in his book about the Antigones, Sophocles' Antigone and the versions which then followed it, he says that the Greek choruses were composed in iambics. Well, they're not. It doesn't really matter. Who, as they say, is counting? But the answer is I am. And if you're going to be a smartass, you'd better be a very smartass. I mean, John Carey, who has been the lead reviewer or the chief reviewer of the Sunday Times for as long as I can remember – and I don't read his stuff with any great zeal – wrote in a book of his, deploring the intellectuals and their pretensions in the world, happened in the same book to refer to Ida as a Greek god. Well, Ida is a mountain in Crete. Does it matter? Who's counting? I'm counting. If you're going to tell me that I'm a smartass, but you're an even smarter-ass, you better be one. That's the game we play, isn't it?
Chess, you know, is one of the games that intellectuals play. And it's a very, very murderous, by proxy, kind of a game. I think chess players, in their sort of interior monologues are extremely militant and aggressive. Much it matters.

I don't know what does matter. Does love matter? Oh, yes. But, of course, it renders you vulnerable. And people would like to find a way of not being vulnerable. I'm quite tearful about my children and about my wife. I'm not very tearful about anything else. The Marseillaise can get me on a good day. It's odd what makes you cry. Poor films make you cry. Noël Coward said, 'Strange how... Strange, the potency of cheap music'. And that is, of course, perfectly true. Why are we nervous about love? I think it's because it demands... it demands, as they always say, commitment, and commitment scares us. Because what if you commit to the wrong thing? Well, I haven't committed to the wrong thing. I'm not going to pretend – and I don't pretend – that I haven't imagined sleeping with more women than I have and lots of other things. In fact, somebody reviewing a book of short stories of mine immediately assumed that I must have lived a pretty rackety life in the London of 1960s and 1970s. I didn't, but I do have a head and I do have eyes and I do notice, and all the rest of it. And also, back to William Maugham, you don't have to eat the whole sheep to know what it is like to have a piece of... to eat roast mutton, but it's a good idea to have a lamb chop. I do have lamb chops.
I met a underwater diver in Belize. A Jewish guy, actually. I think his name was Writer, I can't remember. And he said, 'All the guys are going to the cat house around the corner. But, he said, you know, why do I want a cheap hamburger when I got the best steak at home?' It's not a particularly elegant image, but it sticks in the mind.
He was a tough Jew. I rather wish I was a tough Jew. There are some in America. Quite a lot, actually. In fact, Jerry Weintraub, was a producer that I worked for, at the time when I'd just finished Eyes Wide Shut – they were shooting it. Have I told you this story? Jerry called me up. He said, will you... will you come and do a movie with me? So I said, yes. I went down to Chelsea. That was the way it was in those days. So he said, what do you think? I'd like to do this and this and this. I said, okay. So he said, fine, let's do it. So how's it... what's it like working with Stanley Donen? So I said, oh... Stanley Kubrick. I said, Oh, fine, you know, he's shooting. Yeah, I know. As a matter of fact, he said, we've been shooting on the stage next to his... where he's shooting. And one day I came down to the set and my cameraman was like, you know, pretty well in tears, you know? I said, 'What's the matter with you?' So he said, 'Well, you know, I had a call from Stanley Kubrick. He says my lights are interfering with his lights on the next stage', which is impossible. I mean, it...you know, it can't. But that's what he was saying. And he said, you know, that I was, you know, incompetent and didn't know what I was doing and... So Weintraub said, okay. Jerry Weintraub said to me, you know, I came up... you know, one of the things I did was I organised concerts, you know, big venues like, you know, the big Astrodome in... down in Dallas, or wherever it was, you know.
Well, anyone who does venues in big concert halls in big cities in America has to be in with the mob, you know. I'm not saying he was good or bad, but he was in with the mob. He was a tough Jew, of the kind that only – I think Sidney Bernstein had that kind of quality and the... and the, kind of, broken non-Jewy nose to go with it. Anyway, so Weintraub went and called Kubrick's office and he said, 'I want to talk to Stanley Kubrick'. So the guy said, 'Well, I'm terribly sorry but he's not... he can't come to the phone'. 'So when can he come to the phone?' Said, 'Well, he can't. He's on... he's busy shooting his... his new film'. 'Yeah', he said, 'I hear... so I hear. So listen, you got a pencil? Take this down. Dear Mr Kubrick, if you speak to my cameraman or anybody else on my set or in my unit from now until we've finished shooting, I will come round and do you bodily harm. My name's Jerry Weintraub. You put that at the bottom and you give that to Mr Kubrick, okay?' So the guy's, 'Well...'. 'Yeah. You better do it. You better do it. What's your name?' Quarter of an hour later, 'Is this... is this Jerry Weintraub?' 'Yeah'. 'Stanley Kubrick. Listen, there was some kind of a misunderstanding, you know'. 'I don't think so'. 'Yeah. Well, believe me, I... there has been some kind of misunderstanding and...' 'I don't think so'. 'I just want to tell you that, you know, of course I... I wouldn't dream of upsetting your cameraman or anybody else on your unit. I mean, I... you know, I have absolutely no need to talk to... to anybody in... in your movie, okay?' 'Okay'.
 
Well, who's the big man here? I don't know. It's the rich comedy of alpha beats alpha minus or alpha plus beats alpha minus. I don't know. I have to say that... Stanley Kubrick's movie was probably better than the one that Jean Weintraub did, but that's another story. Jerry Weintraub, I think his name was. Jerry, yes.
 
I wrote a very interesting movie for him, actually, about the guy who killed Versace. He was a gay guy in... I think he came from San Diego, who went on a kind of killing spree – his name was Cunanan – killed a number of people, wound up eventually on Miami South beach and killed Versace who was also, of course, gay. Why he killed him, nobody quite knows. Perhaps in the usual... the same reason perhaps that Herostratus burned down the temple of Diana at Ephesus – because if you can't build the temple you can at least burn it down. I thought it was a nice movie because I started with Versace in Reggio  di Calabria – the toe of Italy as it were – his journey to meet his own doom in Miami. Not very elaborately but that was the scheme of the thing. But it was quite an unpleasant story and in the end they didn't make it. Actually, Weintraub made that movie which they've just done about Liberace, with a wonderful performance by Michael Douglas as Liberace and not bad by Matt Damon. So he had a curious hang-up about homosexual themes. Don't ask me why; I don't know why. He was a rough, tough guy but there we are, who knows. A lot of movies don't get made. And I've written quite a few of them. And luckily, you get well-paid if they don't get made. Today you don't get well-paid if they do get made. So that's the way it goes. So I kind of timed it right.
 

I do my best work here in France and I've done some pretty good work in Greece as well and I love it there, not least because Greece in particular, the little house we have on an island in Greece, which we've had for over 50 years, it's kind of, they can't take that away from me. I mean, of course they can a) by death and b) by legislation. But in principal, a small cottage on a Greek island with a minimum of comforts, though with some – that'll do me if it has to. And I think it's quite important, even if you do quite well in life – and I'm not going to say I haven't done quite well by vulgar standards – somehow you should always be able to think, 'I don't mind. Take it away. Just leave me my pencil.'
I said to Stanley Kubrick – one of the things I didn't tell you in this particular tape... one time I was talking to him and... I don't know what about – this or that or the other. I was... the fact that I wanted to go back and write the novel or whatever it was. I had a novel coming out. And he said, 'You don't really think I'm an artist, do you?' So I said, I don't know Stanley. I mean, I think you're a very extraordinary movie director but, I said, the thing about being a movie director is that you need to have the cameramen, the stars, the locations, the designer, the musicians, the da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da. And all I need to do what I do is a pencil and a piece of paper. And he said, 'You sure know how to hurt a guy, don't you?' And I said, yes, I do. And, God help me, I do. And some people need to be a bit hurt, not in order to hurt them but in order that the public should not get an undue idea of how right or important they are. That's why I mentioned the thing about John Carey, an Oxford professor already, who thinks that Ida is a god and it's not a mountain. Now, why mention it? The answer is, because he is unduly conceited. And when balloons get too big, they have to be popped. And I'm not ashamed to do that. And I'm not afraid to do it. And most people are. It isn't a great achievement, by the way, to have a little bit of moral courage. In fact, I don't think there is such a thing as moral courage which deserves any great medals. The only things that deserve medals, in my view, are physical courage... is physical courage. I admire the guy who is any kind of a moral coward, and I've known one or two, but if they have the DSO and the DSC, you throw the first stone – I think I won't. Those of us who've been lucky to be on the stepping stones through the... most of the 20th century without actually putting our foot in the cockatrice's den or other unsavoury places, let alone being dragged into things we won't even talk about, should be careful about not thinking much of people who have had... who've saved our bacon, if that's not an inelegant phrase, and who have saved the sum of things – whether for money or anything else. So good fortune should make one modest about one's conceits, but I do notice that I actually have the nerve to say, for instance – and I say it now not from any vindictive reason – for instance, that the novel by Ian McEwan called On Chesil Beach, which received all kinds of plaudits and stuff from various people of the greatest metropolitan significance, is a piece of shit. How can you tell? I sniff.
Now, Carey doesn't think that there's an objective standard which can tell you whether one book is good... better than another. This is another instance of pseudo-intellectualism. What he actually is saying is there is no absolute standard by which you can measure one book against another. First of all, why would you? But to say that there is no way of knowing whether one book is better than another, is pure populist humbug. What he's actually saying is, I may be an Oxford professor but, you know what? I'm just like one of you. I like going through the turnstiles and standing on the terraces, even if people don't stand on terraces anymore. And I like to wave the old rattle and cheer my team on, just like you. I'm not a toff. I went to a really crappy school. I'm not a toff. I am a professor at Oxford and I think perhaps you should pay attention to that. But not all the time. Now the truth of the matter is it's, of course, true to say there's no absolute standard in the arts. But are you telling me that in... you really can't tell whether a book is any good, even if it contains clichés, inelegancies, falsenesses? Of course you can. Are you telling me that only in books is there no distinction between one and another, whereas between one musician and another there are perfectly objective standards? One fiddler fiddles better. Casals plays the cello better than you do. You think you can't tell the difference. Oh, I think I'll manage it. So what about the soufflé? Even one soufflé is manifestly better than another, whether it is an absolutely perfect soufflé don't matter a shit. But that it's better, yes. Only in books which happen to be Professor Carey's speciality, apparently, is it impossible to tell whether one is better than another. Bollocks.

Well, I have a lot of feelings about the Holocaust and I have written more about the Jews and all of that than frankly I ever wished to do when I set out. I actually meant to be if not an English novelist, certainly an English-writing novelist. That is to say, whether I was English or American, I wished my books to be published in England and America; if they were translated, so much the better. I didn't wish to advance a cause or stand for a particular tranche of humanity. I think my attitude to the Holocaust is one of indignation about how it has been treated, in many respects, than about the thing itself, which doesn't' mean that the thing itself doesn't rank as something much more terrible than you could conceivably begin to imagine, no matter how anybody regarded it later. Nevertheless, I can't change that. I can't affect what the Germans did and the Ukrainians by the way and various other chums, a large number of whom were welcomed into England when Jews were not welcomed into England after 1945. A Waffen-SS regiment mostly, consisting of Baltic recruits to the SS, were admitted quietly by the back door into the north of England in order to get them down to the mines. Whereas Jews, who were dirty and smelly people, were not admitted into England in any large numbers at all, despite the pretence that they were.
I have a reaction to the whole Holocaust thing which is naïve because it's postulated on the notion that there are people in the world capable of behaving well. There are people in the world capable of behaving better than other people, God knows, but on the whole, behaving very, very well is very, very rare. So my sense of outrage at the conduct of the British and the Americans and the French, for instance, in the lead up to the war of 1939-45 is a luxury. I dare not look at the actual horror. I look off at something different. But what I look at different is something which is still worth talking about because those are the kinds of things that can be dealt with by civilised people, i.e. you can actually be conscious of what you're doing and why you're doing it while pretending that that isn't the reason. The British didn't want the Jews to be able to escape from Europe. That is the truth of it, because they didn't want the balance of power upset in Palestine. The balance of power being, we'll look after the Arabs and then we can take their oil. I didn't know until very recently that the British and the Americans, oh, and the French – the British and the French in 1918, the time of the Sykes-Picot pact which was the objective correlative of this sentiment – referred to the Middle  East in a very brief phrase: they called it the 'loot'. But by the 20s and 30s, the British had retreated or advanced to their favourite position, that of moralists. They were the people, apparently, uniquely designed by heaven to determine who should and should not live in Palestine.
Now, I don't deny, I don't need to deny and I won't deny that the Jews were mostly, though not absolutely, entirely arriviste as far as Palestine was concerned and that Palestine was indeed inhabited mostly by Arabs. But I would like to know which part of the world has not been invaded by... received large numbers of unwelcome immigrants, etc... invaded by other people. The fact is, it happens all the bloody time. Peoples move all the time. Only the Jews perpetually on the motion – in motion – are mysteriously supposed, by some ordinance which is of course largely religio-metaphysical, never to come to a stop. They must keep walking, keep moving. Don't let the sun go down on you in this town, as they used to say in the old Westerns, and the Jews supposedly, for some reason, are condemned to be perpetually mendicant. Well, I don't buy into that. And, of course, what you don't buy into if you don't buy into that is actually the entire Christian myth because the Christian myth insists that the Jews are responsible for their own misfortunes because of the way they treated Jesus and they're only responsible for their misfortunes because God wishes it so because that was His Son. I just... I can't even discuss any of this.

But I now cut to Luther. I cut to any number of European intellectuals, and you notice the 'warrant for genocide' – the phrase is Norman Cohn's said very calmly – is being prepared throughout the history of Christendom. And when the Jews were abandoned not only by, God knows, the Germans, the Ukrainians, the Hungarians, the Bulgarians... no, the Bulgarians was not so bad actually – very curious, that – nobody wished to save them, including the British and the Americans.
So that... should that make me feel very uneasy? No, because actually I'm the... I have the vanity of somebody who isn't threatened by eviction and the rage of somebody who notices how people who think well of themselves are actually capable of behaving. I notice for instance, with more irony than anything else, that Christopher Ricks – supposedly our greatest living critic of English and a master of nuances – actually said that the Holocaust was an improper term to apply to the murder of 6 million or so Jews. Of course, nice that they... people now argue about whether it was 500 and... 6 million five hundred or 6 million two or 5 million nine or whatever it is. I don't really think we need to do that. Anyway, Christopher Ricks said, number one, the Holocaust should not have a capital H. I don't know why not. But more important, he said it wasn't a holocaust because the Jews were not entirely consumed by fire. Well now again you come to one of those professorial excuse-me-but-may-I-just-say-something' moments. A holocaust of, for instance, an ox in a Greek ceremony – 'olo' means 'the whole,' 'kaust' means 'burnt' – the holocaust of an ox is a perfectly legitimate expression. It doesn't mean that all the oxen in the world have to be burnt before it's a genuine holocaust. It means the one that's being sacrificed has to be wholly burnt. And if you don't think that a large number of Jews were sacrificed on the altar of German vanity, rationalism, the Enlightenment, Christianity and what else have you got, then you don't know anything about anything. There's nothing wrong with calling people who throw babies into ovens – and that has happened literally, I'm not talking about gas ovens, and other people – there's nothing very wicked about accusing them of committing a holocaust because that's what they've done. So what is this fancy chat which always surrounds the Jewish issue? Anti-Semitism becomes a very elaborate, diagnostic matter. So although you may say 'bloody Jew' or, in the very recent case, make a gesture which is associated with anti-Semitism, that doesn't mean you're really anti-Semitic. So really anti-Semitic now becomes a metaphysical condition – meta and physical – because it's supposed to be that you can somehow discover whether people are really anti-Semitic or just saying something silly. And the answer is, I wouldn't bother because I don't believe it's ever a particularly serious belief, except with nutcases. On the whole, it's a form of trendiness, it's a form of declaring who you are by declaring who you're not – quite an important aspect of nationalisms of various orders and endlessly repeated.
Does it matter? Oh, I don't think it matters a lot if what you mean is you don't want me in your club. It matters a bit if you're going to kill my children. Or deny them an education as St Paul's and Winchester and Eton both tried to do with Jews immediately after the... after the Holocaust. Because of course, although they didn't mean it, old man, they sort of saw their opportunity to finish the work that Hitler began. I'm sorry, but I do think that. And that's why I also think that although I perfectly understand the deep scruples which lead people to examine Israeli behaviour with quite incredible care, I cannot quite let go of the fact that if Israel had not been founded on other people's land by people who did really, really bad things like hanging people who'd been hanging them, etc, etc, all of which I deplored... I was absolutely on the side of our people. How could the bloody Irgun Zvai Leumi and the Stern Gang do those things? Yes, okay. If Israel had not been founded partly because Balfour – as many people including friends of mine have said through a basic misunderstanding of what Jewish power in 1917 was – he didn't really grant a homeland to the Jews in Palestine out of the goodness of the British heart, he did it because he feared that Jewish international finance – always a very overrated enterprise – might be favourable to a German victory. So they said, tell you what, don't... don't side with them. We'll give you a bit of Palestine. What do you say? In whatever toffy accent Balfour used.

So if Israel had not been founded [after] 1945 over the objections very deep of the British Foreign Office which have continued surreptitiously all the time, what would the role of the Jews have been in Europe in 1945? Well, they would presumably have – those who managed to survive – have gone home to where they came from. Oh yes, I seem to remember that quite a lot of Poles did that. I... that's to say, Polish Jews did that. And when they got home, their neighbours – their Christian neighbours – murdered them. But of course it was actually because of something else, wasn't it? I can't remember what it was but I'm sure that all of you know very well that it can't have been... if a Christian did something wrong, the Jews did something wrong. The British governor of... whatever he was in... military governor in Palestine said to Golda Meir at one point, close to the period when Israel was established, what did the Jews actually do in... in Europe that led the Germans, you know, to... to want to kill them? I mean, they must have done something? Vous croyez? as my neighbour would say. Yes, plenty of people believe it. Because, by a very careful distribution of vices, the Jews are lumbered with the vices which of course other people have but wish they didn't. A very common aspect of all kinds of scapegoatism. Hence my admiration for a somewhat marginalised French intellectual called René Girard who has written very well and very clearly about what he calls the scapegoat mechanism. People feel better if they gang up on people. And the Jews are the ganger-uppers-on of choice.
I thought when I was very pettily persecuted at Charterhouse that it must have been because of my rare qualities. I flattered myself. It was because of the insecurity of the Indian, the Welshman, the fat guy and various other folks who suddenly became supermen because Freddie was a Yid. And they still do it and luckily they don't touch me a lot. They do touch other people. The Jews are still the only people in this country, as far as I know, whom it is not in any way a very serious offence to write things about. Not, of course, in the newspapers, but on bus stops, for instance, in Birmingham where 'kill Jews' is a, sort of, licensed form of hobby... declaration of Islamic hobbies. Oh, are you anti-Islamic? You don't like Muslims? I don't give a shit about Muslims actually, one way or the other. I have met very nice Muslims and I don't really think that I notice whether people are Muslims or not unless they declare themselves, but I am a little bit hostile to schools where killing Jews is taught as a duty to students who are either funded by the British taxpayer or something very close to that.
Ah, but you have to remember those terrible things that they've done to people in Palestine. You like to call it Israel, don't you? I don't really care what I call it, as a matter of fact. Call it whatever you like, but let's talk about those things a bit as you really want to do that. I don't doubt that the Israelis have behaved abominably in many specific and general ways. Would you remind me how many Syrians have endured the anathemas which you are eager to wish upon the Israelis? Do you have any views about that? All of you people who think the Jews are the worst thing that happened? In fact, Shirley Williams, with whom I used to be friendly, honestly sent me a Christmas card in which she was good enough to enclose a statement that the only thing which was really destroying the possibility of, I think, what she thought of as universal peace was the Israeli occupation of Palestinian land. The only thing? Well, I'm afraid that I never spoke to Shirley again, either. Because I don't doubt that there was some justice in her great wish that everyone should be really, really happy in Palestine, but nobody's really, really happy in the Middle East. They've never been really, really happy in the Middle East. Certainly not since Alexander the Great tried to turn the whole place into a Greek enclave. And he succeeded, almost. It's a complete – as my American grandfather would say – schweimerei. I think he might say that. I'm not sure actually, because my German doesn't really exist. It's all a mess.
But you seem to think, you bien pensants, the Guardian people, that only the Jews, they should have known how to behave after what happened in the Holocaust. Ah, that's interesting? So you actually think that if you kill a large number of people, then the people who are left over who might be in the same category will, and should, behave better than they did before. Is this a frequent experience of yours? How many people in history, having had half their population murdered, then learn their lesson? Well, they may learn the lesson of keeping quiet. They may learn the lesson of deviousness. They may learn all kinds of lessons. But the idea that somehow or other they should now set the moral example that you, Christendom, was completely unable to follow – that's a bit comic, isn't it? Oh yes, it is comic, but it's not the kind of comedy that draws laughs. If I were you, Freddy, I would actually, as my old tennis coach used to say, delete that one from your repertoire. But I can't.

When I was young and didn't expect to die, or at least I, sort of, knew in principle one would but I had a feeling I'd get out of it somehow. I was always comforted by a thing that Wittgenstein said in the Tractatus which is, 'Death is not an experience of life. It is not lived through'. That sounds kind of, hey, one to run with, isn't it, that? It does... when you think Wittgenstein is some kind of saviour. Which he was in a way, actually, in certain respects in terms of the capacity to think otherwise. What's fun about Wittgenstein is that you have a very egotistical person in many respects – very concerned about people stealing his ideas. He had a friend called Fredrich Weissman or Friedrich Weissman who admired him so much that he... you know, they clashed oars by taking the same course, so to speak, and Wittgenstein then never spoke to him again. So you have a sort of very strange thing of the man with the open neck shirt, didn't like being a professor, etc, etc, but actually was a person of great egotism. But... but at the same time he had an extraordinary capacity for suggesting that you should understand how somebody else might mean this; he could perceive various strands of thought. He likened thought to a hawser in which the ideas are... the concepts are all the little bits which, when bound together, turn into the hawser but which can be detached. If you detach one little piece and say, what does that thread mean? – the answer is: nothing. So he had the great phrase of, 'Don't ask for the meaning; ask for the use'. Which seems to me very important. Not least incidentally with regard to anti-Semitism, about which he said little except that he did greatly admire a man called Otto Weininger, a crackpot Viennese who committed suicide when he was 23. And Weininger argued...  a Jew – argued that the Jews were female, weak and so on and Aryans were strong and male and blah-blah-blah-blah-blah. And Wittgenstein, surprisingly, thought that Weininger's book was very interesting. And somebody said, más o menos, it's crap though, isn't it? To which Wittgenstein, más o menos again, said, oh, but interesting crap. There is plenty of interesting crap about. And Wittgenstein, although in many ways regarded as a man who believed in logic, also understood very well the limits of logic. He talked about the limits of my world means the limits of my language, but he also knew that the unspoken, whereof one must not speak, is part of speech. Back to Harold Pinter and his pauses. Good luck.
Death, you know, is not something you can philosophise about and you can't do much about it, either. You can try and keep out of the way. And Beetle and I led an extraordinarily fortunate life – both of us – through all of the horrors through which we lived, but luckily in a different place, until... until the beginning of this century if you call that 2001 when Sarah, who had not been – God knows – strong but who was a painter of extraordinary quality... I mean, if genius still meant something then I would say she was a genius. I would sooner say extraordinary quality now since, if Tracey Emin is a genius, we can all afford to back off that term. And when Sarah died, in a sense we died with her. But it's also in a sense because Beetle whom you... well, you've met, but is not unfortunately here with me today – she's in the next room, I mean – Beetle said, we were together before Sarah died and we're going to be together afterwards. And we are. But I have to say that Sarah's death reminded both of us of the fact that... sooner or later... Not because we then became sorry for ourselves or anything else but because time then became much more Proustian than it had been before. By which I mean, it sort of ceased to mean much. And I think of things as happening before Sarah died and I know what happened after she died, but what happened after she died is much more difficult to put in order in terms of years, times, etc. Was it three years, was it five years? I don't know. Because, suddenly... there isn't any time. And that, of course, is our condition, if you like. On the other hand, famous Cambridge philosopher called Bradley, a Hegelian who was renowned for saying or being said to have said, 'Today I think I have effectively proved to you that space doesn't exist. In my lecture next week, I will do the same thing for time'. Time exists. It's later now than it was when we started talking and it'll be later still this evening and tomorrow. Of course time exists and we'd be stupid, even if John Carey thought otherwise, to maintain that it didn't.

I once met David Garnett when he was quite an old man, living in a cottage in the... in the Lot, down in South Western France. A man who was sort of an artist, a Bloomsbury man. Screwed a lot of people and had quite a good time. Wrote one or two books which are not very good, which are very famous. I don't know why. One of the first novels I... no, the first novel I ever reviewed for The Cambridge Review actually was a thing called...God, what was it called? Of Love... I keep thinking of the André Maurois book, Climats, which it isn't. Aspects of Love is what the Garnett was called. I thought very little of it and I was right. It was made into a dreadful show by Lloyd Webber who has a kind of unerring eye for the marshmallows of all time. I went to see David Garnett and he was a very unassuming man. He had his garden, he had his cottage with no... with an earth floor. He was quite a bad man in certain respects which we needn't get into; his treatment of his second wife was bad. Anyway. Talking about death, I said to him, don't you find that the prospect of death sort of renders writing books sort of rather useless? I mean, after all. And he said, no, that's really the reason why it's worth doing. Now, it's a bit glib but it's not stupid. Here we are. I don't know who put us here. I'm pretty sure nobody put us here and nobody's going to take us out. We're just going to die, aren't we? We're not going to... as Noël Coward once said, we're not going to pass over, we're not going to pass on, we're not going to go to sleep; we're going to die. I'm saying that now because I'm in very good health. Don't come and tell me that when I'm on my deathbed. Well, I remember you saying... no, no, it'll be okay if you just say, 'Hello Freddie, I hope you're going to feel better soon, and when you do, I've got a very interesting project I want you to do'. That is what people should say at deathbeds.

Beetle and I, were going to go to Chicago – my birth city – because somebody invited me to go and be on a panel in Chicago, talking about film, and they were going to pay the passage and all the rest of it. We then discovered it was going to cost, like, £2000 pounds to insure ourselves for six days to go to Chicago, in case we had a heart attack and all the rest of it. So we... we're not... we're not going. It's a bit wet but it's also fairly prudent. Anyway, my general experience of life now is, don't make dates so far ahead that you think the day will never come because it just may be that it will. And when it does, you'll find you've agreed to go to Newcastle. So, on the whole, I now try to say no to people if I can, unless they will come to my house in which case I'm a soft... fairly soft touch as long as it's not in the morning because in the morning Casals and I do our stuff.
Do I dread death? I would like to say I dread my death more... less than I dread, certainly Beetle's death. I don't know what either of us will do without the other. I suspect that she will survive without me and I'm sure that I would, God forbid, survive without her. But it wouldn't be much of a life. Perhaps we'll both be killed in the same plane, car, stuffy room or anything else, I don't know. But depend upon it, it's very unlikely that what would be nice will happen. Something... as Cavafy said, you should not lie awake at night worrying about the terrible things that are going to happen. Almost certainly they will not happen. Something worse will happen.

There isn't anything worse than death, as long as it comes quite quickly. I mean, I was knocked down in the street the other day, well, a month ago or so, crossing Gloucester Road to go to the post office, with the lights, no traffic, bold and brave as ever. Off I stepped from the hither shore to reach the thither, but I never got there because I was knocked down by a lady riding a bicycle, coming round the corner from the Cromwell Road. How she hit me, it required skill. I'm crossing the road. There's nobody else crossing the road. There isn't any traffic. And whack! She comes into me and bonk, I'm down on the ground. Now if I'd been dead and down on the ground, that would've been quite comic, wouldn't it? Crossing the road, knocked down by a bike? No, actually, I wasn't dead. I wasn't even very badly injured. But I sort of think if death comes like that, that won't be very terrible. For me.
And William Boyd, whose father was a doctor when Sarah died, he and his wife – a debt of gratitude we shall always owe – came round that day and spent all day with us in this room. And Will Boyd said, 'I understand how you feel and that you feel. Not that I understand what you feel. But just allow me to say that what you're sorry for is not Sarah. It's very understandable, what you're sorry for is you'. It's not entirely true, though it was certainly something to bring one to order. Because I have to say that as far as Sarah's concerned, the work she didn't do... she did a huge amount of work, an unbelievable amount of work. Painters are extraordinary. She did wonderful work and practically none of it is not of the first order, mainly because she destroyed things. But it's terrific. But I do think of the work she could now be doing. And that – well, perhaps it's not quite true but it's a bit true – that brings the lump to my throat more than being sorry that I don't actually see her. Her children are remarkably talented at drawing. Again, I don't know why, but they are. And they reflect aspects of her, but they are not Sarah.
I had a feeling with Sarah that I understood what art was in a general kind of generic sense. I... the sense we both had of the work was very similar. I mean, maybe she learnt some of it from me – it would be odd if she hadn't learnt anything, but it was her own thing. And that rapport – because I don't know many people in the arts – is something I miss, God help me, quite as much as I miss, so to speak, having dinner with her. We understood each other. She would come into my room in France and say, 'Got time for a chit-chat'? And you know, I always did. I don't have time for a lot of chit-chat in the mornings. But with Sarah – she was only there for a while – I always did. She just had a sort of dignity about the work which was implacable. And one of my favourite stories is, she went to a show done by a friend of hers, a painter, and he said to her, what do you...what do you think of the work, Sarah? And he...and she said, oh, it's really nice. I really like it, really like it. And he said, no, no, really. What... I really would be glad if you would tell me what you think. And she said, Oh no, really, I... it's... really, really nice show. I'm glad it's going so well. And he said, Sarah, I want you to tell me what you really think. And she said, why isn't it finished?
Now there's an old glib saying about no work of art is ever finished, it's only abandoned. But the glib answer to that is, 'And yours looks like it was abandoned'. And our job, as writers, as painters, as musicians or whatever, is it should not look as though we just stopped. It should look as though we finished. And John Carey can paddle about with his silly little canoe up and down the same stupid creek that he's been in for 50 years and I don't give a shit what he's got to say and I don't give a shit what Waldemar Januszczak or whatever it is has got to say. He sent Sarah's daughter and me to see a show at the Serpentine Museum by two people called Chapman, brothers. They are now called, in my private vocabulary, the Chap chaps. And Annie and I went up there. She'd just got a First in Art at the City and Guild. We schlepped up there because this fucking little Polack tells us that we've got to go and see this show. His article, I need hardly tell you, contained more cliché's even than a secret agent's memoirs. We go up there and it's all what my mother again, using the Yiddish which she would never have been caught speaking in unmixed... or in mixed company, would call shtuss. Yiddish has a particular selection of extremely opprobrious terms. And you know what shtuss is and I know what shtuss is and that's...when it's shit, it's shit, isn't it? I mean, shtuss. It's better than shit. It's, kind of, shtuss.
This show was hopeless. Hopeless. I mean you wouldn't have... If somebody had said to you, I'm so glad to see you here, Mr Raphael. After all, you are my favourite writer if not the greatest writer who's ever lived. Why don't you take something home with you? The answer would be, I'll take what you've just said but that'll do. There was nothing you wanted. Crappy little pieces of made-up shtuss. So I wrote to this man, Waldemar Januszczak or whatever his name is – I never trust people with more than... you know, four vowels in a row seems too many in a name to me. Anyway. I'm... who knows who he is; doubtless a very good little man. I wrote him a letter, quite polite actually, pointing out that he uses a great many clichés, and itemising what they were – but he would want me to do that in order to improve his English – and also saying that the Chap chaps was a load of shtuss and why on earth did my daughter... my granddaughter and I schlep all that way, because he told us it was really the leading example of modern English art. I did not use any offensive terms. I was a bit British, I admit, in the way in which I spoke to this gentleman. But he didn't answer my letter. I don't think that you cannot answer a civil letter. I think if somebody writes and says, You slimy little Polack, why don't you go back to wherever it is – that you don't have to answer, I grant all that. Kubrick didn't use to answer letters. Oh, there's a wonderful story about Kubrick.

I don't write angry letters to people and then feel good about it. I don't actually even want to hurt them very much. I don't much like having my time wasted by people who tell lies. And this critic, for whatever reason, was lying. You cannot seriously believe that the Chapman brothers are the apex of modern British art and that's what he said. You are saying that because you wish to reassure the crap readers of a newspaper that's gone a long way downhill that they're not missing anything by not knowing anything about art and not caring about it. Because what you're telling them is, anything that gets stuck in a museum – it's just as good as anything else. You don't have to worry. You don't have to worry. Go and buy an ice cream and have a good time. It's just not honest. Honesty does matter. It does matter. Lying matters. I don't mean you have to keep going around calling people liars, particularly if they've only said something you don't agree with. No, that's not lying. But some people lie. They lie about their motives and they lie about... about what they've seen. And that, I think, is always worth pointing out. Unless you say to me, it isn't real – just go away and write your stuff. No, there's an edge to what I write. And the edge has to impinge on something rather than just air. It impinges on cant. And cant always needs to be attacked. It doesn't mean you have to hurt people's feelings. I mean, if you do, you do. But it has to be attacked. Some things just aren't as good as certain people say and you are allowed to say: why are you saying that that is good when it...you know it's not? You have to say lots of things.
There's a guy called Dominic Lawson who writes the whole of the bloody Sunday Times that isn't written by John Carey and Bryan Appleyard. And a few weeks ago he published a piece saying that anti-Semitism had been imported into Germany from Austria. Well, have I done this? I don't usually write to these people who put their addresses at the bottom of their columns because they're so self-important, they think you're going to send them roses all the time. But I did on this occasion write to him. And I do know Dominic Lawson, like, hello, and say, 'Have you ever heard of Luther? Have you ever heard of the whole history of the Wilhelmine dynasty and its advisors, Baron Stockmar, whatever his name was, and the... I mean, do you know anything about Germany?' Well, he did have the grace to say that he had written the piece in a bit of a hurry or whatever it was. But the answer – I mean, he's peddling bollocks. You're not allowed to peddle bollocks. Doesn't mean nobody does it, but you do have to point it out. I don't know what drives one to be like this and it may be that there are motives. But I don't think it matters much what motive one has in getting things right. Anal? If you say so. Revenge? Okay. Self-importance? Could be. But all the same, that comma should be a semicolon.

[Q] It occurs to me that an art critic, whom you might have quite a bit in common with, also on Web of Stories, is Brian Sewell.
Yes, I don't know Brian Sewell. I know Bill Packer who's a very different animal. I have problems with Sewell because I think that his defence of Blunt was deeply disingenuous and I suspect that we might get to that at some point, a little bit too soon. I mean, he suggested that Blunt should be left alone on the grounds that he was an old gentleman who needed to be left in peace. Is Max Clifford an old gentleman who deserves to be left in peace? Was Jimmy Savile and old gentleman? I mean, I don't know at what point you deserve to be left in peace. Because what you have actually done, consciously and deliberately, was a few years ago now and also, you'd sooner not be reminded of it. People don't seem to need to be left in peace about the centuries they scored on their first test match against Australia. It's odd, isn't it, that we're supposed to leave certain people are dispensed from being criticised because of whatever suits Mr Sewell to say, but other people not. I think he's quite a smart fellow, Sewell. But he's not... he's not the kind of lemon I want to squeeze on my salmon, I don't think.
[Q] He'd certainly share your views on the Chapman brothers and the nonsense that...
Well, yes, I mean... but that's because, I mean, any man who halfway loves what he's been involved with all his life is going to notice these things. I mean, I noticed there's a woman called – are we still running? – a woman called Alice Munro who won the Nobel Prize. Oh, the Nobel Prize. Oh, what a great writer. Don't you wish you were as good as she was? So I thought, yes, I'll have a little look at this. So I...my wife, I think, was reading her short stories. So I picked up this woman's short stories – have I said this before? – and I noticed, first of all, that it said, 'He was going to go to England' – semicolon – 'but he died instead. Now, shall we have a little look at the use of instead there? Because, of course, he didn't intend to go to England and die instead. He intended to go to England; but he died, is the correct assertion. 'Instead' adds nothing except the idea that it was a substitute. But it was not a substitute. It's what prevented him doing what he intended to do. That is not the same thing. Later on I read, she was driving somewhere or other, not in a desert or anything and 'her mouth felt like a tundra'. A tundra? I had to go and look up the dictionary in case a tundra was also some kind of affliction of the lower lip, which I wasn't aware of. No, a tundra is one of those tumbly, thorny things that are on deserts. Now, I would like to ask the members of the panel to imitate what it would feel like or look like to have a mouth like a tundra. What? What? The answer is, she didn't have a mouth that felt like a tundra. And if she did have a mouth which was swollen, uncomfortable or anything else, through her head did it go the thought: oh, it feels a bit like a tundra actually? No. It's just bollocks. It didn't feel like a tundra. What she decided to do, Miss Munro, in very, very dull prose, is suddenly to say: I know what I'll do. A salt shaker!  Put the salt on it! Look at that! Like a tundra. Fabulous. Am I a writer? Should I have the Nobel Prize? Why not? And the answer is, you have it sweetheart. That's fine. After all, Canadians, it's their turn to have a Nobel Prize. You got it. If you think I'm going to read your deeply dull short stories because you got the Nobel Prize, I'm not. I'm not. Because it's no good.
There are perfectly good ways in which one can test whether one wants to be bothered with things any more. People who love music do it all the time. And doubtless people who love all sorts of other things do it all the time. In writing, we know very well when it's being properly done. And one's job as a writer, by the way, is not never to write, 'He was going to go to England; but he died instead', it is never to let somebody else read that you've written that. In other words, one of the beauties of age as far as a writer is concerned is – back to Casals – we may not write with the same pristine verve, we may not any longer imagine that we're going to write the great English blah-blah-blah, or the great American thingamabob, or the world-beating bump. But we do know what won't do. And my image always is of carpentry, which is quite close to writing prose. You run your fingers over the surface of the thing you've just sanded or polished and there's a little snag. Now, the first time you do that you may think, oh, no, it's nothing. It's just a bit of fluff on the... on the surface. You do it again and you feel the thing at the same particular point – there's something wrong. If you now say, 'Agh!' then you're not an artist. If you say... well, you're getting there. It doesn't make you an artist, but it doesn't actually mean that you don't even know what it is to sit correctly, do your work. That's what you have to do.

I think... I think art, actually, and love have something in common which is that if I tell you that I'm doing art now, you are permitted to smile to yourself and think: fancy pants. If I say, I'm writing a book or I'm writing an article or I'm doing this and I hope it's going to be interesting, or whatever, that's okay, and you can read my thing and then you can say, 'You know what? This is a work of art'. It is a judgement, not an activity in my view. My job is to do what I do as well as I can. When does carpentry become an art? When it's done by Mr Chippendale? When Mr Chippendale sells his work at a very high price? When a critic says it's art? Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn. The great thing is to do the best work you possibly can. And love, it seems to me again – you may notice that I love my wife, but I would be wise not to put advertisements in the paper about it. There's a lovely line, I don't know why it comes to mind... a film that's directed by Chabrol, about Bluebeard – the same story that Chaplin did in Monsieur Verdoux. And in Chabrol's film, Monsieur Verdoux is eventually, as he was indeed, condemned to death to be guillotined. And on the way to the guillotine in the... in Chabrol's movie, the official in... who's escorting him says to him, 'Now, you know, given that you only have a few minutes left, tell me, did you... did you really kill all those women?' And the line which is written by Françoise Sagan which sticks in my mind is, 'Ça? C'est mon petit bagage'. And how do you do it or what makes Beetle... why do you think Beetle's loved you for 60 years and why have you loved her? 'Ça c'est mon petit bagage'.  Actually, there's nothing in the bagage because I don't know what it says, but if I did, I wouldn't tell you. And I'd be right. And if I exposed it, it would perish. So love is like luck. Never assume it's yours, never assume it'll last, just hope it will.

I'm not sure I knew much about Goya. I mean, I think I'd seen the Penguin thing in particular – the execution of the... the insurrection in whenever it was, 1802 I think it was, something like that. But when I went to the Prado, I went very quickly to see the Goyas and I was... I love the pessimism and the bleakness of it. It's an odd thing to say but that's how it was. I sort of thought this was the... what the Frogs call the vif du sujet. And talking of the Frogs, I later... I met a... this guy, Herb Oppenheim and he always had the Guide Michelin with him. And I was sort of introduced to the Guide Michelin by him and later on I bought the Guide. And one of the things which sticks in my mind – the Green Michelin which is the one which is the sort of tourist guidebook of the Prado and it has a note on Goya. And Goya lived, I think... 80 years anyway, I think. Whether it was... I hope it's more. Anyway. The first line of the French description of Goya was, 'Goya n'était pas précoce' – Goya was not precocious. And when I think back of my... on my juvenilia, which weren't unnecessarily much more juvenile, although they were fairly juvenile – I sort of think: thank goodness you don't have to be precocious to be – God save us – a genius.
Goya's early paintings – his early court paintings – were actually pretty, what my Italian film producer Joe Janni would call, nyah, nyah – people on swings and all the usual kind of Boucher stuff. And then the invasion of Spain by the French and the war that then took place – the repression of... by the French of the Spanish guerrillas, sponsored, of course, by the naughty British, provoked this kind of intense sense of tragedy. So, indeed, did the Royal... the Spanish Royal family provoke his sense of the absurd because they were a pretty odd looking lot and he depicted them, with incredible agility, as being... looking pretty crazed, actually. But they seemed not to notice that. That's quite a skill. The great thing about Goya was that he saw the horror and found a way of translating it into art. And when we went to live in Spain, which was not that long afterwards, in the... in the late 1950s, friends of ours from Andalucía went up to Madrid and they came back and Harry said, 'We're buying one of the last prints... set of prints of Goya's Caprichos, in his case, because they're not going to make any more. The plates are now getting so used that they're not going to print any more. But they have done one last printing and there are two or three sets of The Disasters of War which are left. And I thought you ought to know and perhaps you'd like to buy one'. Well, we were very poor when we lived in Spain. And I said, well, how much are they? And he said, Well, they're... they are actually, what, the equivalent of £110. In 1959, when you're broke, £110 is quite a lot. I dare say it's quite a lot now if you're broke, let's not joke about that. But nevertheless,  I said, well, how many are there of the... of The Disasters? He said, well, there are 84 prints, £110. So I had a kind of... I thought, we... I'll... we'll do it. I mean, Beetle and I thought, we'll do it. So we bought The Disasters of War for £110. And we still have them. I will not say where. And I looked at them a lot. I framed quite a few of them but they were so disturbing that it's very hard to live in the room with The Disasters of War. Like, a man, you know, with a prong through him, on a sharpened tree, and various other nice things. And, as Goya said with the incredible economy, Eso no es lo peor – this is not the worst.
Goya eventually wound up living in Bordeaux which is not far from where we live in the south west of France. I don't know whether he was a nice man or a nasty man. I don't care really. The work is fantastic. And he did prove that, actually, I mean, you can go on producing important work... important, I mean, excellent work until a very old age. And that begins to be a comfort as well as an inspiration. There was also a, sort of, very great irony in him. Great irony. And also a kind of indifference to whether people liked him, which grew with age. It's much easier with age to not worry about whether people like you. Because, quite candidly, you know, nobody can do much to me anymore. I mean, they can hurt my feelings, they can abuse my work, they can be unpleasant, do all sorts. Basically, what are you going to do? And that's what you feel about Goya as he goes through his life. He gets bolder and bolder. So did Philip Roth up until a certain point, and then some limitation kicked in, in my opinion, which made him sour rather than rare. The... a lot of the later books I liked a lot but I didn't like all of them. There's something crude there which... I don't like crude. I like... I like... I suppose – it's the Sephardic in me – I like to slide the sword in so cleanly that the beast doesn't even notice until he drops. That's what I like to do. It's not very nice. But it's elegant.

The bullfight is fine until the guy kills the bull, whether he does it well or whether he does it badly. At that point, you know, there's a dead bull in the... in the arena. At which point you think, oh. But then, I mean, after all, a lot of people are supposed to feel sad after sex. I've never had that experience, but apparently that's what you're supposed to do. Omne animal and all that. Well, you know, human beings are not omne animal, actually. Even great desire that people have now to say we're nothing but animals. But look at us in our shoes and trousers with our language and the stuff we do. And that and that. Yes, yes, yes and no, no, no. I mean, did that guy, Morris – I can't remember his first – Desmond Morris wrote a book in the 60s called The Naked Ape which was very influential at the time because it, sort of, said, get your clothes off and be an ape. You'll be much happier that way. And the answer is, Are you sure that that's actually all we are? It's what we used to call in Cambridge reductionism. And when... for instance, again, back to Carey – against whom I have nothing personal – but Carey wrote a book in which he suggested that the only valuable way of... only way in which you can measure a book is how much pleasure it gives you, which of course is a completely vacuous assertion because as soon as you start unpacking, as we used to say in philosophy, pleasure, you have good pleasures and bad pleasures, refined pleasures and vulgar pleasures. And actually, all you're saying is, if you call pleasure the only measure, you've then got to measure it off the pleasure elements.
It's like human... the idea that... the Benthamite idea that you can somehow discover what would be... lead to the happiness of the greatest number and that's what your policy should be. I'm not at all sure about all that. A lot of people were made very happy seeing Jews, Muslims, God help us, Christians torn to pieces in a public place two or three times a day. Are we sure that if they're all happy – the people doing that – it's alright? No, we don't mean a word of it. Actually, again, it's back to Wittgenstein – start getting somebody to tell you more about a silly idea. Just keep talking, buddy, and sooner or later, the absolute silliness of what you're saying may even occur to you. If it doesn't occur to you, it will certainly occur to the people around. It's not true that pleasure is the only measure in a relationship, in a book, in a... even in a meal. The look of the plate is something... is part of the pleasure. In other words, pleasure comes in several instalments and in various different ways so why don't we, as Wittgenstein again would say, divide through by pleasure and keep taste – and various other things – and then we're actually back to where we started. The most disgusting trick of treason of the clerks, as Julien Benda called it, is reassuring people that their stupidity is really a lot more intelligent than they think and, actually, it's the intelligent people who are stupid. And it's you, the nudniks, who really, really are the salt of the earth and I should stick with your stupidity, it's very intelligent.
[Q] The treason of the clerks is the betrayal of...
The treason of the clerks in Julien Benda's sense is simply the fact – what I'm talking about – it is the intelligentsia telling ideologically motivated lies or half-truths in order to, as it were, join the club. It is our job, such as it is – decent people – not to tell lies, in order to make our way in the world.
