george.daniels

George Daniels, CBE, DSc, FBHI, FSA (19 August 1926 - 21 October 2011) was an English watchmaker most famous for creating the co-axial escapement. Daniels was one of the few modern watchmakers who could create a complete watch by hand, including the case and dial. He was a former Master of the Clockmakers' Company of London and had been awarded their Gold Medal, a rare honour, as well as the Gold Medal of the British Horological Institute, the Gold Medal of the City of London and the Kullberg Medal of the Stockholm Watchmakers’ Guild.

Yes well, when my mother was 92, she died at 93, she wrote me a letter and I hadn't heard from her for 20 years or so, and she wrote and apologised for my miserable childhood. I must say I was astonished to get this letter because I didn't know I'd had a miserable childhood, it seemed to me to be quite the opposite. Of course we were very poor and lacked often even the basic requirements, or as we consider to be requirements nowadays.  And the diet was very frugal.  I mean, for example, it would be bread and dripping for breakfast and a cup of tea and bread and jam for tea and another cup of tea and whatever might be going cheaply available from the local shops for lunch. So it wasn't a very varied diet. And we ate all meals standing round the kitchen table, there were no chairs.  The only chairs available were occupied by my father, who made quite certain that he didn't suffer any discomfort. Even his diet was different to ours; he had to be specially catered for.
And I would be sent off in the morning to buy a loaf of bread.  One would get a large loaf of bread, stale, for a penny, and I would have to negotiate very heavily trafficked roads to get to this baker's shop. No traffic lights in those days, just motor vehicles, not stopping at junctions. When I got back, the loaf apparently was so stale that my mother in a rage threw it at me and knocked me over. So I was a bit like a ninepin that morning. But during the day I would leave the house and find things to amuse myself with.  There was lots going on and lots a workman could do, and I would quite often make money helping the local retailers who had stalls... set their stall up in the high street and I would help, either by carting boxes or helping with the vegetables or generally getting in the way and trying to be useful and make a few pennies like that.  For transport, we sat on the rear bumpers of the local busses, and this was a very precarious hold we had on life on that thing. Why we didn't get rolled off and run over, we will never know, but there it was. We travelled up and down on the backs of these busses on the bumpers.

When I reached the age of five, I was due to go to school, which I did at the local school, of which I have very fond memories.  And there I met Miss Crawford, who was the headmistress and we got on very well together and it was discovered that I had a talent for drawing and painting. And this gave me a very easy passage through my primary school, because pictures are wanted desperately in primary schools. I think most of their work is done with pictures and I could paint these pictures. And I had been an assiduous reader.  My sister was two years older than me and she had learnt to read, and so I learnt to read from her, simply by looking at the picture and she would say what it represented and I just had to remember what it was. And so I had that advantage also that I could not only draw and paint, but I could read. So I was a star pupil and got on very well at school.
Unfortunately, we moved from that location and so, of course, I had to go to another school where even so there again I shone with drawings and paintings and so forth, and it was a tremendous asset to me because I wasn't any good at anything else. I mean geography and history and mathematics meant nothing to me. I couldn't understand and didn't want to know about them. But I could write, I could write an essay, with atrocious spelling, but however, the essays and the writing... sorry, the essays and the drawings and the paintings got me through my early schooldays.
And after that, I changed schools several times. They were all very undistinguished schools and I didn't do anything to make them distinguished. Again, I could draw and paint, which was beneficial, and I had to do quite advanced stuff, and I learnt the art of perspective drawing and that was very useful and it earned much praise so that I wasn't too often chastised about the things I couldn't do.

Well, my interest in watches was first aroused by the discovery in the house of a watch.  I don't know who it belonged to, but it was fair game to open it up with the bread knife, and examine its contents.  I found them quite fascinating. The watch wasn't going but it had all the potential qualities of the complexity of a watch, which is very intriguing. Later on, I turned to the household alarm clock, which offered better opportunity of dismantling, being larger and more easily accessible, and having learnt all I could from that, my early exploratory horology ceased. I was then six years of age and couldn't find any watches to take to pieces and I had to abandon it all. I had nothing to do with watches then for some five years, when again my interest was quickened by the ability to make some pocket money selling firewood, which enabled me to go and buy the clocks I wanted from jumble sales, and one could obtain a very good clock for - as it was in those days - sixpence or a shilling. And so I found plenty of material to exercise my horological interest with.
Later on, by the age of about 12, I had advanced sufficiently to start actually charging people for repairing their watches.  I couldn't charge many people because I didn't mend many watches.  I think I wrecked more than I repaired, but at least I learnt how a watch works and made some money out of it. And the interesting thing about it was that I knew that I was the only pupil in that school of a couple of thousand pupils who knew anything about watches, who knew anything about how they worked and what they looked like inside, and so it was my private information.  I didn't discuss it with anybody because nobody knew enough to discuss it and it was a very comforting thing as I was rather a bad scholar in other realms.  It was a great comfort to me to know that I knew something that no one else knew.

In my school days at the age of about 12, I was very keen on horology and the difficulty was to find clocks and watches to work on and learn from, and jumble sales were a good source of clocks.  I mean for a few pence literally you could get a clock that nobody wanted because they couldn't afford to have it repaired or even find anyone to repair it, so that was very useful.  And then again, I discovered that there were an enormous number of empty houses in London.  You never see an empty house now, but in those days you could reckon that certainly one in every 10 houses was empty and nobody bothered to lock them up. These people just moved out and left them.  They were renting these houses you see, they didn't care about it, they just upped sticks and left. And so I would go into these houses and search around and I would find clocks and watches, gramophones... mechanical gramophones.
And so I gathered all these and took them back home and could work on them, and one day I found this American clock hanging on the wall. It was about two feet tall, hanging against the wall with a cart leaf winding spring at the bottom.  And, I believe, they are now regarded as quite valuable American antiques, but to me in those days it was just another American clock and it looked pretty cheap compared with European things. Quality is the thing, you know, you soon learn if you associate with watches and small mechanics.  Well, I was very pleased with the clock and it took it home and repaired it. The spring was broken and so I managed to heat up the end and bend it round and join it in again.  And whenever I had anything interesting and useful, my father would take it away from me and keep it for himself.  And he took my clock and he banged a nail in the wall and hung the clock up so that I couldn't reach it. And we were all having tea one day, standing round our table having tea, and the clock exploded. A spring broke, blew the clock all over the room. So there you are you see, that's what you get for stealing another man's clock.

The other thing one found in empty houses was gramophone motors. This was an age when the electric gramophone was coming in and you'd get electric pick-ups and amplifiers and that sort of thing, and it was a great age for do-it-yourself radio mechanics, electricians, radio frame builders. And I decided one day that I would pluck up enough courage to take the spring out of the barrel of the gramophone motor so that I could examine it more closely. And I don't know why I thought I could examine it more closely. I suspect it was just traces of destructive interference that all boys have you see. I just wanted to find out what was in it.  And I got this spring out and it was enormous. It was about six feet long and two inches wide and very powerful and I didn't know how I was going to get it back, but I thought, it's got to go back. And so I hooked in the outer edge, which seemed the sensible thing to do, and then I began to wind in these coils, and after I'd got half a dozen coils in the barrel, I realised that I was running out of strength and I wasn't going to be able to hold this spring any longer, and if it took command of the situation, it could probably wreck the drawing room you see. So I had to pluck up all my courage and strength and grab this spring and switch my mind off to everything but getting that spring back in that barrel. And eventually to my enormous relief I got it in, but I would never take one out again after that.

Then when I got to the age of 14, it was time to leave school and go out to work and, of course, I would have liked to have gone to the watchmaker in Kingsbury, but that wasn't possible because he could only pay seven shillings a week, which is about 30 pence today, and the bedding factory offered 10 shillings a week.  And so I spent my days clipping bedsprings together to form the foundation for the company's 'Sleep Easy' mattresses and it was very dull work, dreadfully dull work. And the people who worked there were the crudest sort of labourers and rough and the work was rough and the building was uncongenial, dirty, it really was a sort of slave labour factory, of which a great many existed in London.  I'm speaking now of the 1930s.
And so I, not enjoying this work, decided I must get out of it, but the trick was to prevent my mother knowing I was getting out of it because she could see her seven shillings a week going down the drain if I didn't keep this job going. But I had started - when I was about 10 years of age - a firewood business and I would go around the shops and get old wooden cartons and chop them up and hawk them round the houses and get paid like that, and so I knew a lot of people and they were very kindly, generous people and I enjoyed their company and we got on very well.  Often they'd have me in for meals and look after me, so all that was very enjoyable. And one of them... I told one of them one day that I was very unhappy about this work business and she very kindly found me a job as an errand boy. Well this was a wonderful opportunity because I was out all day. I had a bicycle that I could take home and use again in the evenings and I got paid for it and there was also a bonus in that job because after I'd been in it for about nine months, the clock stopped and I was paid ten shillings to repair it. So it was a very beneficial occupation for me.

I stayed there for a couple of years and it wasn't very constructive, I didn't learn anything there, I just enjoyed myself, but I wanted to do more and I knew where there was a works that interested itself in motorcars and accessories, ancillaries, tyres, batteries, all the things that needed attention on a motorcar. And I was able to persuade the proprietor, a tall rangy American, that I was the chap he wanted in this building and he took me on.  Again at 10 shillings a week, so that was a very happy arrangement for me.  And there I learnt how to retread tyres.
The war was on and tyres were in short supply and we would retread them, fairly badly I think, but at least they had treads and would run and we were always advising the purchasers not to corner wildly and never to exceed 30 miles an hour because there might be difficulty with the tyres. And they were very happy to do that, very pleased to move about... no other way they could get their cars maintained on the road.  And we did the same with the batteries...  repaired the batteries. In those days, of course, everything came up for repair.  Nowadays, if the battery goes flat, a man goes out and buys another battery, but in those days you had the battery repaired and you'd save. If a battery were a pound, then you would repair it for five shillings and save 15 shillings.  And it's extraordinary how many things carried an extra sixpence.  Everything was so many shillings and sixpence, and the sixpences you see were not very significant to the purchaser, but they added up at the end of the day.  Sometimes one would spend two hours repairing a motorcar tyre and I mean it would be grossly uneconomical today, but in those days if you spent two hours on that and you charged the man five bob, he is very happy, he's got his car back on the road for five bob and we're very happy we've got the five bob.  And otherwise it would have just been thrown away. But they were very lean days. Nothing was thrown away without it being repaired to the point of exhaustion.  You couldn't do any more with it and then it could be discarded.
I stayed in that job for a couple of years and during that time we took an interest in the entertainment business.  My boss had taken an interest in cinematographs and he had a cinematograph machine and some films and he decided that he would go into making these things for sale to the public. There was a war on and the cinemas were closed, theatres were closed.  Only those with a radio or some home entertainment could get any pleasure out of the arts and the sciences - they just weren't available in those days.  And so we started to make these machines and we became very adept at it and there were several different sized films in those days.  It was all very confusing because there was a great deal of competition between different manufacturers... Kodak and Pathé and Western Electric all had their own systems and so we were forever finding ways of turning this machine into what was that machine and vice versa. And so it was very constructive and interesting and I learnt a lot there, and in particular, I learnt about electricity, how to use it on these things and the amplifiers for the sound.
And then I felt that I ought to advance this knowledge of electricity and so I left that job and I went to another firm in North London, Franco-British Electric, and I took a job there and to my astonishment, they paid me £2 a week.  It was quite extraordinary that I should jump from this small amount, 10 bob up to £2.  And I found I was getting the money for nothing because I wasn't doing anything and I wasn't trusted to do anything. I wasn't considered to be able to know anything and the trade unions wouldn't let me do anything because that would be taking work away from a mature member of the trade union. So it was all terribly restrictive and mealy-mouthed and mingy, and I didn't really learn anything there. Soon I was 18 and then, of course, I was directed into the army.

I joined the army in 1944 and was posted off A1 fit, to Scotland, which is about as far as you could get away from where I lived.  And I must say I enjoyed it. I had a much better life in the army than I ever had at home. I had more comfort, more convenience and regular food and exercise and interesting things to do and to me it was a wonderful life, I really enjoyed it.  No responsibility and you get all your food and your clothes and everything you want free of charge and all you had to do in return is march up and down the square until you're proficient at it and then you get sent off somewhere to do something constructive. Well I did my training and I passed out all right on that, and I played the mouth organ a lot in those days. I'd started up playing the mouth organ in about my ninth or tenth year and it was very irritating to my mother because I apparently sat banging my foot on the floor all the time to keep time. And the curious thing is she also apologised about that in later years. So it just shows you the things that go on in parent's minds that children don't understand. And I did very well playing the mouth organ and actually made money playing it for charity things and I'd get paid a few shillings. When you're a soldier in the army pre-war, you were very, very happy indeed to make a shilling. I mean a shilling would buy a packet of fags or sausage and chips in the NAFI, you know that kind of thing. So, it was a very valuable sum of money to fall over and if you didn't play the mouth organ you wouldn't get it anyway. So that was the matter of the mouth organ and I turned up for a talent competition with it and I not only won the competition without actually entering because when I arrived, the cinematograph didn't work and I knew about cinematographs so I was able to prod this thing into life and they considered I'd won the competition for doing that. And then subsequently I did play the mouth organ and they thought I was the best there so I won.  I've still got the prize somewhere, I see it every 10 or 20 years.  I look at this thing and think of those harmless, very happy days.

Soon after basic training, I went to Wales, where I was taught to blow up tanks with a mortar and the mortar is quite a heavy instrument.  It's three components, there's the barrel, the tripod and the base plate and each one weighs 50 pounds, and so wherever you went you had this 50 pound weight on your back and it gets very tiring. You never get used to it, but you become stoic and you just think here we go another ten miles, 50 pounds on your back, but you do it. And they say in the end it's good for you, but I've never really discovered whether or not it was.
So we enjoyed ourselves on this. There we were driving these Bren Carriers, tracked vehicles, which were terrific fun to us, and a great adventure. And I remember on one occasion we were learning how to cross a ford. It's very important to know how to cross water in tracked vehicles, and someone made a bit of a rush at it and hammered on to a rock and jammed all the gear changing mechanism up into the engine so that was hors de combat. Another tracked vehicle was brought in to tow it out and our platoon sergeant was standing with one foot on each vehicle and someone gave the word to go and of course he fell down the middle between these two, into the water, soaked to the skin, you know. And it was then we heard the poetic majesty of the expletive of an instructor who's been humiliated and left in great discomfort by all these people.  And everybody around us was terribly amused, so everybody got blamed for it.  But that is the sort of thing that happens.

After that, I was sent up to Yorkshire while we waited for an overseas posting.  We were due to go to Germany, but at that moment the war was declared over, we didn't have to go to Germany, so we wait in Yorkshire at a farm and there's this dour old Yorkshireman who is going to get our labour free of charge. He knows he's not going to have to pay anything for it. So we turn up, 30 of us, and we made hayricks and cleaned out his sheds and did a lot of work. Never got any money, we were very bored off with that, and so next morning we saw our platoon sergeant and we explained we didn't care much for this job, you know.  Well, he said, I'll go and have a word with the old boy, so he went and had a word with him and pointed out the advantages of paying everybody a shilling at the end of the day, and he'd get his haystack for 10 bob or whatever it was. And so that was all right, he took a bit more kindly to us then.
And he said to me one day, I want you to get the hay wain out and go up to yon field and we're going to load it up with the bales and bring it back.  So my only experience of horses had been looking nervously at the milkman's horse as he was delivering the milk in the suburban streets and I'd never been nearer to a horse than that.  And I went into this stable and there were these two horses and, sort of, 15 feet high and they had feet like dinner plates, you know, enormous heavy horses, and they looked disdainfully at me. They realised I was a total mug, you know, they're going to have a bit of fun out of it, and they did.  And we got them in the traces and led them outside and then one of them laid down in the traces and stirred it all up and got his feet tied together... couldn't get him free, and I was asked by the farmer to hold his hind legs down while... there was no way I was going to go anywhere near his hind legs! So we got him untangled in the end and we got out and we got the hay and we brought it back, and that horse remembered me because we got him in his stables and I was up the front putting some hay in his manger and it turned round and looked at me out of the corner of his eye and then it leaned over on me. He must have weighed two tons and it leaned over. So I ducked down below its hip and scooted out of the stable and with my pitchfork, I jabbed it in the rump. Of course the horse screamed when it felt this pain, but it kept him off me, and there was this fearful row about it because the old farmer reckoned I had tried to kill his horse and I had to explain to my colonel, you know sir, well you see sir, I've just been very expensively trained to go to Germany and the horse is trying to kill me.  So that was that and I never went farming again.

And shortly after, we were drafted off to Egypt. We got there, not without some difficulty because first of all we flew from... and it was a wonderful experience. I'd never flown before and the planes flew close to the ground. I mean they were only two or three thousand feet up you see, and so you could see the ground quite clearly and really quite a fascinating experience.  And when we got on the way to Egypt, over Toulouse, we lost one of our engines. So we have to come down and fix the engine and the plane was a Liberator Bomber.  We all sat in the bomb bay, there's so little room, our knees were intertwined like fish's herringbones in this plane. And all the usual jokes were made about hope the pilot doesn't pull the wrong lever, you know, and we all come plummeting down.

There we were. We landed at Toulouse and fixed the engine. And having done that, we trundled out for take off again and found we'd got a broken undercarriage.  So we all trundled out again to get the undercarriage repaired and took another two days, and these planes were all worn out. They'd been on service for four years during the war. And so fine, we got airborne and got to Egypt near Cairo. And these planes were unbelievably noisy. I mean there is a huge roaring like an express train, continuously throughout the journey, and when we got out in Egypt, the silence was impenetrable. It was like a huge, black velvet cover had gone over everything, not a sound to be heard. Absolutely silent. We were all half deaf, you see. And then there was the heat and an amazing number of things going on.  Labour was plentiful. Egyptian... the Egyptian fellaheen they call the Egyptian labourers, and they get treated very badly and they do all the work and you don't have to lift a finger, everything is done for you.
And I spent a year or so in Egypt. It wasn't very interesting. On one occasion I had decided not to go on a physical training exercise, which was quite illegal, because I wanted to repair this watch, because I was doing a bit of watch repairing.  And half an hour after the platoon went off to do their exercises, in came the sergeant major and I thought well I'm for the high jump now, he's got me well and truly. And he said to me that the company commander wanted to see me, and I thought well this can be big stuff, I'm really going to get rained on here. And so I went to the commander officer, and 'Now Daniels', he said, 'I understand you can type'. 'Oh yes sir', I said.  I'd never been nearer to a typewriter than my headmaster's old machine at school, but it wouldn't do to say you couldn't type, after all, typing is a terribly easy thing to do, all you've got to do is push the buttons down. So I said yes, I could type. Well he said, then report here tomorrow morning at 9 o'clock and take over the duties of company clerk.
It was a wonderful plum job.  You know, I mean, I was excused from everything. No more parades, no more guard duties, no more drill, just company commander's clerk. And as a company commander's clerk, you practically run the company, you know, with the routine and you just organise it all each day. So that was very beneficial to me and the second time in my life I'd got out of an awkward situation... an un-likeable situation, first from my mattress days and now here in the army. So I was very happy with my position as it stood at that moment.
Then we went to Israel and Palestine, and we crossed the Sinai Desert, which is a major experience in one's life to do that, on wheels across the desert. The desert looks lifeless, but it teems with life.  You know, you just scrape the sand aside and there is something alive there, and especially lizards, small lizards who lose their tails, if you grab them by their tail they shake off their tail and go.  And we ran into some difficulties in Palestine because of the Stern Gang, and so we had to be very alert and it could be quite dangerous, but if you, you know, took normal precautions it was all right. And we moved on up to Haifa with a beautiful climate and we camped on the edge of the sea and spent all day swimming.  It was wonderful, and all paid for by the taxpayers, and terribly extravagant. When we wanted to go to a football match, there might be six or seven of us wanting to go to a football match, then we'd all pile into one of these giant transporters that could hold two tanks and 50 people and it's doing one and a half miles to the gallon and we go off for a 15 mile run just to watch a football game. So it was all frightfully extravagant, but well that's the way the army works.

I was no great solider and not interested in soldiering, didn't want to remain in the army. I enjoyed it very much but I knew that I wanted to be a watchmaker... well, a watch repairer, so I wasn't interested in staying in the army and I had, in fact, during the last two years in the army, been very active repairing watches. I had my own workbench in my living quarters. As the company clerk, I could pretty well do as I liked, and so I organised my life around that and I did typewriters for the whole of the brigade and cameras and watches, and I made a lot of money and didn't draw any salary for two years, didn't need to. And, of course, that was all very useful money. I was saving that money specially to start on watches when I got back to England. On my leave, I went back to England and I bought books and equipment that I wanted and so that gave me more flexibility when I got back to Israel.
We lost one or two people through carelessness really. They were shot, by carelessness really and if one took adequate precautions, it could be avoided.

I was demobbed in November '47, and I'd been three years in a hot climate and I came back to England and it was the worst winter we'd had for 15 years and the whole of England was icebound and the only clothes I had were my demob clothes, my Burton 50 shilling suits and a waterproof coat.
And what to do now?  I wanted to be a watch repairer and I knew I didn't have really enough experience, but in Edgware in North London, I had while I'd been on leave and looking for tools and information met a man who was himself just demobbed from the army and he ran the watch repair side of the jewellers in Edgware. And I had spoken to him and he'd seen my watch and he asked me who made the glass for it. It was very complex glass, which I'd made from Perspex. I mean when you're in the desert, you know, you can spend months just shaping a bit of plastic. You've got nothing else to do, and so I did all that and made various bits for the watch and he was very impressed, and I spoke... having read De Carle, and I spoke with great authority about how certain things were done. And he suggested I came back to see him when I came out. And so I did and he gave me a job and I've never been so lucky in my life to get that job. And it was £3 a week and my digs, my accommodation were £2.50 a week, so there was 50p left over to live on, after I had paid my digs. And so I was forever scrabbling round trying to make enough money to live on, get a watch and repair it and sell it, and of course watches were in very short supply.  You weren't allowed to import them. They were hard to obtain and there didn't seem to be very many good watchmakers about to repair them, so one way or another, it was all very helpful to me. So I became a trade watch repairer.
It never occurred to me that that was not what I should be aiming for. I was very lucky to be in work and working at what I liked and I really enjoyed that and I knew I was working at what I liked so I was prepared to go to quite a lot of trouble. But the money was totally inadequate and so I had joined up with the Northampton Polytechnic,  evening classes and there met a man who said his employer was looking for a watchmaker.  So instantly in my mind I became a very advanced, superior watchmaker and I would go along to be interviewed and I'd bought a lot of tools. In fact, when this man interviewed me, I discovered I'd got more tools than he had. I mean I'd got lathes and everything, and so he was very impressed by that and he very foolishly let me know how impressed he was because I had all this equipment. So when it came to negotiating the salary, I pointed out that, you know, the £8 a week I was earning at the moment was really somewhat inadequate and I really ought to do something about it and that's the reason I'm prepared to change my situation. And he said to me, 'Well all right then, £9 a week'.  I was so ecstatic that I couldn't think of an answer and he's thinking that I was delaying and he said, 'Well all right then, and another 10 shillings travelling expenses'.
So, of course, I had to agree, and so suddenly I went into the millionaire bracket and I could buy clothes.  I mean I had holes in my shoes and I could buy clothes and a motorbike so that I could move about more freely.  And I'd go up to Northampton Polytechnic every day on the motorbike and then motorcycle on to Edgware where I was in digs, and that is 25 miles between Croydon, where I worked, and Edgware where I lived. And I'd have to do that every day, starting at 5:30 in the morning, from Edgware to Croydon to get there at seven. And then in the evening, up to evening classes and not home then till 11.

So I set myself the task of learning more when I came home on leave.  I bought books, studied the books, tools, equipment and did very well and came out of the army with a sufficient sum of money to be able to take a job as rather a poor professional watchmaker, but knowing enough to get by. And I was taken on, fortunately. The pay was only £3 a week, but indeed, it was so inadequate that after a while I was obliged to sell my own wristwatch to make up the rent for my digs. But I went to evening classes and studied hard on the theory of horology, which most practising horologists don't have very much time for, but it is very important if one is to get an overall picture of the whole science of the thing, very important to do that. And so I studied, not very enthusiastically, but I knew it had to be done and I wanted to get through the exams.  And in a practical way, from a practical point of view, the evening classes weren't very beneficial.  I didn't learn anything about horology, excepting the theory of horology, and even at one stage, when I was actually doing professionally more highly-skilled work than we were doing at evening classes, I was accused of having got someone else to make my exercise pieces.  I'm very flattered they were so good that they thought I hadn't made them, but it wasn't a very enjoyable experience, and fortunately I was able to show that I had done it. So, it was a two-edged sword. On the one hand, I was pleased that I could work to that standard, on the other hand I was disappointed and disillusioned with evening classes because that was the beginning of my experience of the closed shop mentality of the average horologist, who if you were good, wouldn't say so, and if you weren't very good he was very pleased to point out your shortcomings.

The evening classes were a very interesting experience because I suddenly realised I did want to learn mathematics and physics and so forth and so I paid attention, and I had to get through my exams anyway so I had to pay attention to do that. And it all became very interesting and I would travel back on the tube at night with my friend, who's boss had given me a job.  He eventually finished up as a hairdresser. He obviously wasn't very keen on horology.  We would stand outside the railway station and talk till 1 o'clock in the morning about the things that we'd learnt that day, you know, and we'd take an equation and we'd pick it to pieces and turn it upside down and really understand how it all worked. And then by 2 o'clock into bed and up at five in the morning to go up to Croydon. So, you know, they were pretty gruelling days, but very exciting.  I enjoyed them all very much.

So I discovered that... this sort of petty mindedness in horology. The people who had secrets and wouldn't let you know them, and it was all very disappointing, and fortunately I couldn't see anything very secret in what they knew. It was all pretty common-sense stuff to me, so I didn't worry too much about it, but it was disappointing. And I do remember, having got myself established as a watch repairer,  I suddenly realised that I'd been in the horological profession for 10 years, and I was making my own way, and indeed I was quite successful - I had got my first two Bentleys, I was very fond of Bentleys and I had the first two Bentleys - and I suddenly realised that I had not got a single social companion in horology.  It was probably my fault, but there it was, I didn't have any friends in horology.  No enemies, but nobody I would warm to and whose company I would seek. And so I gave more attention to my Bentleys and the result of that was that after a short while, I had more friends than I could cope with through the Bentleys and the motoring clubs and the cars have remained with me ever since.  Even up to now, after all those years, I never give up the cars, I still race them, rally them, and generally amuse myself with them and enjoy the company of all those, who like me, have nothing better to do with their time and money than spend it on old motorcars.

I went into partnership with somebody after that, and then he drank all the profits and I was out on my ear again, and no work. And so I had to start again and I did. I got work from material shops. They only have the worst sort of work given to them by jewellers who don't want to be bothered with all that rubbish. But I wasn't personally known to anyone and so the man I'd been working with, who'd drunk all the profits, he was known. He was twice my age and had been at it that much longer, so I had to really start again from the bottom, which was very annoying, but anyway, I soon got through that.

I'd been working as a watch repairer for 10 years and I suddenly realised one day that I hadn't got any social contacts in horology. There was no one I wanted to see or talk to about it.  It seemed to be full of the dumbest sort of people who's only interest was administration and profit and so it was then I bought my first Bentley, and you know, within a year I had a hundred friends with that Bentley. And so it was a tremendous social asset to me, and life really took off once I'd got that Bentley and I travelled everywhere in the car. I mean it's extraordinary to think that one could just use a 1924 car as if it were everyday transport, but it was very reliable and I wasn't in the least doubt about my ability to repair it.  Whatever went wrong it didn't worry me, I could just go and fix it. And so that started me on my motoring career.
I mentioned to you earlier about meeting Clutton and so forth, and that took me through into the upper echelons of horology, but in the meantime, I had now become obsessed with my Bentley and I wasn't so interested in horology - at that moment. The Bentleys were more fun.  I paid £100 for my first Bentley. I didn't actually want it but a local car dealer had been trying to sell me a car. He sold Audis, all those years ago, and he tried to sell me one and I wasn't interested in such a car and I kept... and I hadn't got a car at all at that time.  I got fed up and I got back to bicycling and I had a special bike built, a hand-built racing bike, and I rode that. Then this man collared me again in the high street and he goes through his rigmarole about buying this car and I said no I didn't... and in order to put him off I said if I buy a car, I'm going to buy a vintage Bentley, knowing that that was the last car he was ever likely to have in an Audi shop. 'Come with me'' he said. We went into the shop and there was a vintage Bentley and it was the biggest vintage Bentley I'd ever seen.  I mean it had eight windows in it to start with. We labelled it 'the greenhouse'... and it was a three litre, long chassis, weighed two tons and the bonnet had flown off at some time and been run over by a following car and that was crumpled up. And I thought I've got get out with it somehow, and he said to me, 'It's £200'.  'Oh,' I said with some relief, 'what a pity, I've only got £100, I can't afford it'. 'It's yours', he said.
So there I got it and I was very intrigued by this car because it exuded quality. Everything about it was high grade, all the door cabins had beautiful polished wood, the handles were all ivory inlaid, silver flower vase on the dashboard at the front, and the back opened as a landaulet so that you could put your crowned heads of Europe in the back floating along the promenade, which is what it was designed for. And so I ran it for a couple of years.  Went everywhere in it. My budgerigar, who was my sole companion at the time, hung from the roof inside of the car, and he loved it and he learnt to make noises like tappets rattling and spanners falling on the ground. He was quite a talented bird and a great companion to me.  He went everywhere in the car of course.  We would go down to Glyndebourne, to the opera, with our buckets of ice in the back and our picnic and Henry hanging from the roof and we were very keen on the opera at the time. All my friends were keen on the opera. We would sing opera in the car, all the way down to Glyndebourne at the tops of our voices. We were once stopped by a police car for causing a nuisance.
And eventually I rebuilt that car and it was wonderful when it was rebuilt.  It was so beautiful. And I sold it.  I had to sell it because it could only deteriorate from there and I was using it a lot and so I sold it. And I sold it to Jack Bond, very famous vintage car dealer. And to my astonishment, he paid me £800 for it. I've never got over that figure of £800 because the best sort of Bentley in those days was only fetching for 400 or 500 and yet I got 800 for this, which was a wonderful step up for me because I could immediately go and buy another car, which I did. More of a sporting car, and that's when I took up racing.

So there I was in about 1960, and I was quite enjoying life and I had plenty of money, and the hours I worked were phenomenal.  I mean often I would work all day Monday, all night Monday and all day Tuesday and then go to bed and deliver the work on Wednesday, and the reason for that was it left me with four days spare in the week to work on the motorcars. So I worked hard at the watches and made money to spend on the motorcars, which also meant hard work. So it was a very gruelling period in my life, but it was what I wanted to do and the only way to get it was to do it myself.
Well through the motorcars, I then met a friend, who became a very great friend, Sam Clutton. Cecil Clutton always called Sam Clutton, he was a crown agent, and a CBE and an expert in vintage cars, clocks, watches, keyboard instruments, motorcycles, aeroplanes, architecture. He'd written about all these subjects. So he was a very dynamic chap and a very, very difficult man and I set myself the task of becoming his friend.  It wasn't going to be easy because he was rather snobbish and he'd had a very good education and he rather liked people who came from the right side of the sheets, you see.  But, however, I set myself the task of ingratiating myself into his company, which I succeed in doing and we got on very well and wrote books together and drove motorcars together. And, of course, through him, I met all his high-flown friends who were collectors of horology and historians, and so life took on an entirely new aspect for me.  It was a very... suddenly it became very exciting, very interesting and a lot to learn, and fortunately I had an ability to assess the worth of an object immediately and how it worked and all about it, so that was very fortunate I could do that.
And so I decided to take on some restoration work, which in a way was like an apprentice. I'd never had an apprentice you see... apprenticeship... I'd never had an apprenticeship, and to work on these things was a bit like being an apprentice because whatever one does to an antique machine, one has got to forget one's own personality and put oneself into the mind of the maker so you must not be able to tell it's been restored.  This causes a good deal of concern in the antiquarian world because I've always insisted that you must not be able to detect the change in the work or the style or anything and it doesn't suit those who like it to be known that they know enough to make these alterations, and it doesn't suit those who feel that for instance you should make every restoration recognisable as your work.  So there's these different views on that subject.  My view was that you must not detect a change in the works, and the way to do that is to become... enter the mind of the maker and do it his way.

The Clockmakers' Company is a livery company and I think livery companies are exclusive to the British Isles. Some countries, notably France and Germany, did have guilds which were much the same thing. And the Clockmakers' Livery Company had a huge collection of very important antique clocks, watches and so forth, and especially some of the best pieces of the greatest makers, who on the whole were English. All the great makers were English, and the scientific makers were English. So I was very happy to be able to get my hands on these pieces and learnt a tremendous amount from them and lived a very tranquil existence.  I was surprised lately to be shown a bill for some work I did in 1960. A man had just bought a chronometer from a friend and he said, 'Just a moment I've got an important document that goes with this machine, I'm going to get it for you'. And so he disappeared into his strong room and came out with this sheet of paper, which said, 'To restoring marine chronometer at £2 an hour, George Daniels'.
So I wasn't charging very much money, but of course it was early days and money was worth a lot more then. But there it is, that invoice is known as an historic document now. It gives away what I was up to at the time.

During the time I was restoring the pieces for the Clockmakers' Company, I was also meeting more and more collectors all over the world and I began to travel a lot, especially to America and France. And it was in France that I met George Brown, the head of the Breguet company.  He has an English name because the Breguet company was given to his grandfather by Antoine-Louis Breguet when there was no more money in horology. They turned to aeroplanes and they gave the business to George Brown's father, Edward Brown.
But I was fascinated by Breguet because I had seen one or two pieces and I realised they had a kind of exquisite comprehension of the art that no one else was able to display.  And so I learnt about Breguet and he obviously was the most extraordinary man who was totally without any inhibition at all and not only knew exactly what he wanted and how to get it done, he had a hundred men throughout Europe working for him, and obviously a genius at what he was doing and the greatest possible variety of things. He didn't just make watches or clocks, he made everything horological. And so there was a great deal to learn there and I succeeded very well. George Brown didn't want to talk to me at first, but then of course I was a foreigner, I couldn't know anything about horology, but we did get to know each other and eventually I became [an] agent for Breguet Paris in London.  And I still have the name Breguet registered in my office and I still have the pentograph which was used for putting on the secret signatures, which Breguet managed to persuade his customers were essential to knowing that you've got a genuine Breguet watch.  Of course, I mean if it was secret you wouldn't know to look for it, so it didn't really help the client very much, but it was good for Breguet's public relations.
And during that time I did a certain amount of work for Breguet, always choosing those pieces that needed extra attention, and eventually I made a couple of clocks, which Brown came across to London to see and he was so taken with these clocks, he said we cannot have these clocks scumming about the surface of the earth without them being tied in with Breguet, because they looked like Breguets.  And so he there and then issued a number and had the clocks entered in the books and signed, and of course being George Brown, he had to make a quid pro quo, and so he charged me for the number and the signature saying that that is the profit he would have made had he handled the clock through his shop. So fair enough really, I got what I wanted and I still have my clock with the number engraved on it and the certificate showing that it's a genuine clock, although the books do say: 'Wholly made by George Daniels from London'.

The thing about Breguet is that he was recognised very early as having a curious talent, not for watch or clock making, because he wasn't a very good workman, but for his designs and his comprehension of what to do. And then there was later his ability to find the right men to do what he wanted to do, which again was a very difficult thing. And then he was brilliant at public relations and I mean, for example, he was very popular in all the grand houses in Paris and one day he strode into the house at a party, a meeting, a soirée, and he drew a watch from his pocket and he said the time is 9 o'clock and he threw the watch across the floor and then went and picked it up and showed it was still going, which was the object of the exercise because he'd made this shockproof watch you see.  And he had several little... what do you call them, well, several ideas along those lines for demonstrating his work. He was very interested in automatic winding watches.  He didn't invent them and never claimed it, but he did make them very successful and all the crown heads of Europe and Russia carried these watches.  Marie Antoinette was one of the first recipients of a Breguet perpetual watch.  They were very, very expensive, enormous sum of money, but again, Breguet managed to organize a series of workshops right though Europe so that no matter which country you were in, if your Breguet watch went wrong you could get it repaired.
The variety of things he made, well, they covered every aspect of horology, the watches and clocks and timers, and thermometers.  Of course, one could name 20 different kinds of clocks he would make, all different in some way or other, many of them with striking mechanisms, of Breguet's own devising, which was superior to the earlier mechanisms.  They would strike the hours and the quarters and even the minutes. And there were astronomical devices for checking the transit of stars, all mechanical. And there were pace watches for the army to use, measuring out the number of paces per minute. Any watches... he made the slimmest watch, it was just a few millimetres thick, or bulky watches for those... no matter what kind of watch you wanted, you could have it, he would make absolutely anything. And he became internationally known, so famous that I mean the great writers of the day all found excuses for getting Breguet into their books. He's in Around The World in 80 Days. Balzac's writing features him two or three times.

So Breguet altogether was one of that little and rare group of masters who could exploit every aspect of horology. No matter what was wanted, Breguet could produce it. He had his workmen all the way across Europe.  He sent his son to Soho in Birmingham as an apprentice, but the son found that the English were too coarse and drunken, and so he elected to go back to Paris.
[Q] Did Breguet work with some of the English watchmakers?  And Arnold, did he have a lot of contact with Arnold?
He knew Arnold, he had a great admiration for Arnold, which is unusual in any profession really, but he did have a great admiration for Arnold and he did convert one of his own watches... sorry, he converted one of Arnold's watches into a vehicle for carrying Breguet's tourbillon, which was a great compliment to Arnold. It was a very expensive present to make too, and that watch is in the British Museum now.  So of the few people in the history of horology, to make a positive contribution, Breguet counts very highly among those few people. There is only a handful, a half a dozen at the outside, who really influenced the profession.

And then I met Clutton and got involved in the antiquarian side and he realised that I needed a proper workshop.  I was working in the drawing room of the flat that I was renting and he said he had some spare money floating about, which he could lend me. So I sold my sports Bentley for £1000 and borrowed £1000 and I had a few hundred in the bank and I bought this house. You never saw my house in South London? It was a beautiful double fronted Victorian villa with three-quarters of an acre of garden in a beautiful wide road lined with blossoming trees and not a vehicle to be seen anywhere.  Nobody parked cars in the street and it really was a wonderful house. It had been grossly neglected by the people who were in it. They'd been renting it and let it go down and there was something like 150 empty gin bottles in the shed at the side, so he was obviously a great party-giver. And in the middle of the garden was a great heap of discarded motor tyres and brambles occupied every square inch that wasn't occupied by rubbish and jumble. However, I do remember with great pleasure sitting on my back step in the sunshine eating my first breakfast cooked in my own house. So that was very satisfying.

Now, it happened that my bank manager would agree to lend me the £1000 but only if he was sure it was a good investment.  And already he was a bit suspicious of me because he hadn't been best pleased when I bought the sports Bentley with money I'd borrowed from his as well. And... I must have this report... well, Sam Clutton was senior partner in Cluttons Crown Agents and therefore there could be no better-qualified surveyor.  And so Sam came down and he admired the house very much and noted that it wasn't as good as his, which pleased him no end, and then he marched into the drawing room and leapt to a height that I suppose only qualified surveyors can reach, and he landed on his heels in the middle of the floor then listened intently as the reverberations echoed around the house from room to room. And he said, the whole house is in perfect condition, I will send you a report. And the report came and the bank manager was very pleased, and so the house became mine. And I stayed there 20 years and most of the watches I've made... well half the watches I've made were made in that house and the other half were made in the Isle of Man.

Well, it was while working on Breguet that I got  more and more intrigued with the thought of... wondering if it would be possible to emulate some of his activities in a small way, and my father-in-law had a collection of Breguets and he asked me one day how much would it cost to make a watch like that and I, without thinking, said well I don't know because he couldn't get it made anyway, today. So I went home and I wondered why not, so I decided I'd do it myself, and started to design and make my own watches. I'm bound to say my interest in antique watches declined from that moment because I had had this huge apprenticeship with the antique watches, and I had  learnt from them how thick was a wheel and what force was a mainspring and all the various details, what size screws, all this one learnt from other people's watches. So I reckoned I knew enough about it and I set to make my first watch.

So I'm now thinking seriously about making this watch and I found it was quite a hard task because I didn't have the sufficient equipment or tools. I had very primitive... I managed to get some tools together, I bought a second hand lathe, which demonstrated the foolhardiness of buying second hand lathes, they're only sold because they're worn out. Mine was worn out and there was nothing I could do but learn how to use it and get the best I could out of it.
And so I started on this watch. I made a couple of drawings of it. I got into a bit of a tangle now and again and realised that designing watches on paper and then making them wasn't the way I was going to go through life. I had to make the watch without any drawings, and then when it was finished, make the drawings to use perhaps on some later occasion. And I found that has influenced the whole of my watchmaking career, that I cannot make a drawing and then make a watch from the drawing, which is what most people do. My way suits me better, and of course, since there are no drawings, I can change my mind as often as I like in midway and change the design. One thinks of ways of improving. While one's working, one thinks of ways of improving the details of watches. And I worked for nearly two years on this watch, one way or another. First I had to spend many, many hours late at night practicing engine turning in order to make the dials and so forth. All that took a lot of time, everything needed practice, everything needed making, even special files had to be ground to shape and formed to do some of the work. And it took as I say two years, and at the end of that time, it was done and... it wasn't finished, but the movement was done and ready for final status, which meant the dial and hands and the case. And the case was a problem, because I had no experience of case making. I had no materials for case making, no tools... case making tools, and so I struck a deal with a watchmaker in Clerkenwell. I've got to think of his name. Oliver... Oliver. Struck a deal with Oliver, who had a Dickensian workshop in Clerkenwell and was a brilliant case maker, not because he had any special talent for making cases, but because he'd been whipped as a boy into doing it perfect all the time. And being in Clerkenwell, he was incapable of doing anything else, but perfect. And so, I wanted him to make the case. I noted on his bench several watch movements just lying in open boxes, obviously all taken in to have cases made and I was a bit reluctant to leave my watch there. I took out the delicate parts and I took the watch to him and he put it in a box on his bench and I went back some five or six weeks later, it was still in the box on the bench and it hadn't been moved, and I realised he wasn't going to make this case. He had every willing intention of doing it, but it wouldn't be possible for him to do it, he couldn't. You know he was too old and he couldn't get himself motivated and why anyway should he do anything for a young whippersnapper like me, you know. I mean he was a proper chap and top of his profession, why should he help me, and that was the Clerkenwell attitude. And so I struck a deal with him and I said if you show me in your workshop how to make a case, I will pay you as if you had made the case for me. And he agreed, and I think the sum was £40.  That was in 1968, so it wasn't a bad sum of money really for Oliver to take, and he showed me how to make the case. He didn't do anything, he was most careful not to touch anything to do with the case or the tools or anything. He would just point me to do that and you want to do this, and eventually I got the case made. It wasn't terribly difficult to do, but I learnt the techniques, and that was the important thing I got from Oliver.
So there was my case finished, and I took it to the Assay Office and they said they couldn't assay it because it had the wrong proportion of silver and gold. And I was devastated, you know my beautiful case, they wouldn't hallmark it. But the Assay Master was a very congenial chap and he said look, if I were you, I would remake a new front bezel for it in silver and then bring it back and have it assayed, and then you can take off the silver bezel and put the gold on. So I did that and it worked out well and I got my case hallmarked. And I picked the case up from the Hall... from the Goldsmith's Assay Hall about 6 o'clock in the evening and I was so thrilled I ran every step of the way to London Bridge Station to get the train home again, and I think that's a distance of about four miles. I ran it all the way there.

I was then ready to finish off my watch, make the dial and hands and so forth. Now, there was then the question of what was I going to do with the watch. I needed to sell it and I was a bit nervous about that because I didn't know how I was going to find a customer for it.  A lot of people knew I was making it because I'd made sure they did know, in case they were interested, and in the end, my friend Cecil Clutton, the expert on all these different subjects, bought the watch. He said he was very, very apprehensive about the whole thing because he feared he wouldn't be able to afford it, but in the end he did and he paid £1900 for this watch.  I was very happy to have the money because it kept me going for another year or so. Of course, it was quite a lot of money in those days, and that watch was a very good friend to me during the following years because after 4 years I bought it back from him and I gave him £8,000 for it. And I made him another watch, which meant that he couldn't hang on to my £8000 very long. He had to pay it back to me and I sold the watch for £12,000 and I then bought it back for £14,000 and sold it for £18,000. Then I bought it back for £20,000 and sold it for £24,000. So it did me very well and all those people that owned the first watch I'd made, and they were very pleased about that.
It's in America now and was owned by the famous Professor Landes, professor of commerce and social... I don't know, we'll have to find out what he called his book.  He's Jewish, powerful, arrogant, continent, verbose, and has all the qualities you expect to find in a professor.  And he wrote about my escapement in his book, The Unbound Prometheus, he wrote about the escapement in that book, which I'm very pleased because, I mean, he's a very famous international author, and I discovered afterwards he was quite pleased for it to be known that he knew something about watches.  So that was beneficial on both sides. Unfortunately, he had to sell the watches.  His wife became very ill and so he needed money. He wrote me a very nice letter and he said it was a tragedy, but he had to sell the watch and I wrote and told him that it didn't matter, that's what we bought these things for, you know, they're an investment which you use in the future when you need it.

So that was the first watch finished and gone, and already I'd set to to make more.  And naturally, I didn't want to make two watches alike, and so more ideas were required.  It's... it was very important to me at that time that I did produce an entirely different watch in order to establish a reputation and they always said that Breguet never made two watches alike, so what's good enough for Breguet was good enough for me and I would follow his philosophy.  In fact, I followed his philosophy very closely in every aspect of watchmaking. Once I'd become a maker, I knew then that I had to beat Breguet and that would be a great compliment to Breguet if I could get at him and publicly show that I had been able to move the watch on from him, because he moved it on from the great English makers and some continental makers, Le Roy, Mudge, Arnold, Earnshaw, all those people moved on and they were contributors.
And by now, I'd got it in my head that I wanted to join these people and I remember that as a schoolboy when I was getting books from the local library on horology, I knew the names of Arnold and Earnshaw and all those, and I felt they were friends.  I'd read about them and I understood what they were doing and no one else that I knew understood them, so they were my private friends. But at the same time, in my later years, I was damn well going to beat 'em, and it was essential that I did. And just as I've seen so many students that have come to me for advice on something, and as I'm talking to them I can see they're thinking to themselves, well I think I've got your measure mister and I'll beat you when I get back.  So, that's very important to try and beat the master, like you've done to me Roger.

Then I met an American, a man called Atwood, who was frightfully wealthy, I mean wealthy beyond the wildest dreams of avarice, and he wanted me to make him a watch and I had said I would never undertake a commission because the watches I knew would be expensive and I didn't want to be left with the watch. It's too humiliating not to be able to dispose of the watch if you made it for someone. But I took a shine to this chap and I said yes, I would make him a watch. And so I set to and designed a new kind of watch, which was inspired by the necessity for beating the quartz watch for timekeeping.  Because the quartz had been introduced in the 1960s... early 1960s, late 1950s, and they kept phenomenal rates of time. I mean two or three seconds a month in those days was very close. And I reckoned I could make a watch to beat that.
And so I gave a lot of thought to what to do to it and the solution was very simple, simply because I didn't want it to be complicated.  When a thing becomes complicated, it has less chance of succeeding, the simpler it is the more likely it is to succeed. And so this mechanism was complex, but not complicated, and it proved to be a first class timekeeper and I did a lot of experimenting because I knew very little about watchmaking. I'd only made one watch and there was a great deal to learn about, especially about timing, because the problem with a watch is that having overcome all the difficulties of design and construction, conception, you've then got to make it keep time.  You don't have to do that with any other object in the world. Once you've made it, it's gone.  I mean a sewing machine will sew and a motorcar will go, but a watch has got to go straight down the middle, and that's the problem for watchmakers. And so I experimented with ways of overcoming some of the errors that were naturally manifest in watches, and had been for the whole of the life of the profession, which was about 500 years.
And so that watch was a success and and it was that which prompted Sam Clutton to allow me to buy back the first watch I made for him because he wanted one of these new watches.  As ever I knew that once Sam was satisfied with something, the whole world would know and he'd be very emphatic you know, and always very willing to push on any new ideas that one might have and he was a great benefactor in that way. He liked progress, he was never happy unless he was improving himself and he loved to help to improve others. So I made him one of these watches and it may have been a lucky thing, but it kept such extraordinary time that on a journey to Tokyo and back, which took 32 days, when he got home, he'd worn the watch all the time, pocket watch, taken it off at night and laid it down, back in his pocket during the day, and therefore changes of temperature and position and so forth, and he found that it was just under one second slower when he got back.  So, of course, that was a great coup for me.  I mean an awful lot of luck involved in that.  I mean he never checked it at any other time excepting when he left and when he came back. And so there was no criticism of anything in the intermediate and it did subsequently prove to be a very close timekeeper, because I sent it down to Herstmonceux, to the Royal Observatory for testing. It put up a very good show. It was within 0.2 seconds per day mean variation, which was a very close rate.

So on the whole, I reckoned I'd beaten the quartz watch and I didn't want to exploit that.  I didn't want to offend the Swiss and I've always been very, very careful not to be victorious in anything. It doesn't do and it doesn't help and nobody likes it, so I've always played it very coolly. As a matter of fact, in my autobiography there is an imprint of a bird with an olive branch in its beak and it says underneath Daniels, and that's my actual cipher. You know, there is a book with all these ciphers in, you can look up your name in there. If you've been lucky enough to be born with a name that was known at the time this tome was written, and I've always behaved like that. You know, I always offer an olive branch and I never fight, never argue, I never want to be best. It's always best just to stay back a little and let people think... let others think what they want to. And so I was careful not to brag about this quartz performance I had produced. I knew it wouldn't do any good.

This particular watch that I made for Sam had this curious double wheel escapement, which I devised as a simple means of achieving the end I wanted. You have to remember that watches have a mechanical oscillator in them and you can hear this oscillator, tick-tock, tick-tock, tick-tock, tick-tock, tick-tock, but those watches don't keep such good time as earlier kinds of watches invented by John Arnold, which don't tick-tock, they only tick, quiet tick, quiet tick, quiet, but because they only tick on one vibration of the oscillation, then if you suddenly move the watch while it's on the dead vibration, it could stop and it won't start again, whereas a tick-tock watch can be made to start again and it won't have the dead vibration. So I wanted to produce a watch that would have all the qualities of the tick watch, but would at the same time go tick-tock. So I had to have two watches in one box, tick on one watch and tock on the other watch, but by that simple means I got this watch to keep time.

So Sam Clutton said look here, he said you know you've got this rate out of this watch and you ought to get a Tompion Medal.  Now, a Tompion Medal is a gold medal given by the Clockmakers' Company, and it hadn't been awarded for about 30 years and so it was proposed that I would get this and I thought it would be a fait accompli.  I thought well I've made the watch and it keeps this phenomenal rate of time, which was required by the citation. But no, not a bit of it, everybody wanted to kick it around and discuss it and pontificate on it and it took oh, two or three years to get this through but finally it was awarded. I did get the gold medal, which I was very pleased about because it was a great coup for me because at that time, we're now talking about 1978 when this citation was sent in, that was a bit of a critical time for me because I had more or less run out of customers for my watches and where was I to get more, when I automatically got more once this news was out.  It was in all the papers and the television news and all that sort of thing.  And so I got more customers, which was the object of the exercise, really. So, there you are, you can't be afraid of a little bit of publicity.

Well then I went on and made more watches and I got more and more bold. I was one day sitting in a restaurant in Zürich and having dinner with a man called Teddy Beyer, who was the seventh generation of watchmakers in his family. He is the proprietor of an enormous chronometric store, and he was a great watch collector and had a wonderful collection, separate from his business, and he wanted a Daniels watch. And we were having dinner in Zürich and he nudged me in the ribs and said, 'What have you got in your pocket?' So I showed him the watch. 'Ah yes', he said, 'that's very nice', he said, 'you just tell me how much it is. I want to buy it'.  And I said, 'Well no, it's not for sale', and I really didn't want to sell it because I didn't want to have to make another one. And about an hour later he nudged me in the ribs, 'Let's have another look at the watch'. And so he had another look at the watch and he says, 'You know, just tell me do you want cash or a cheque? Have it which way you like'. And I said, 'Well you know, really, I don't want to sell it'. And then I thought well I really must sell him this watch because it's an enormous compliment.  You know he didn't ask how much it was; he just said I'll have it. So I said he could have it and I went home.
And I regretted selling that watch and I had to make another, because I wanted it as an example myself. And it suddenly occurred to me that I hadn't fully exploited the original watch, which was two watches in one box. But I could exploit it scientifically if I turned it into one train mean solar and the other train sidereal.  So I set to... on that to calculate how to jumble up these numbers to produce this ratio, which I think is 1:1.002737942, and that's the ratio between solar and sidereal time. And how to get this figure? Well the great George Margetts built some solo sidereal watches in the days when they were a practical necessity when in order to check the time of your watch you had to have an accurate clock and the clock had to be set by the star. You choose a star and you can calculate the sidereal day from that. And if you had a watch that could give sidereal and solar time, then all you have to do is take a sight on your star and the mean solar half will show exactly what your clock should be showing. So, it was a calculator, you know, it calculated because you had to make this calculation every day, this difference of 3.555 seconds every day, you had to make that calculation. This watch did it for you. But it was only accurate to 1.8 seconds a day, and I felt...  that was quite close enough, but I felt I ought to beat it. And so I worked very hard at this and I'm no good at mathematics, but I got it down to .8 seconds a day. And I thought well that's pretty good and it's better than Margetts so at least honour is saved on my part, but I wonder if there is a better ratio somewhere?  There must be a mathematician somewhere who could give me the results I wanted, and so I made enquiries of a friend in Cambridge: 'Do you know a professor of mathematics who knows about watches?'
Well you'd think it would be impossible, but a man turned up almost immediately, and most extraordinary, his name was Daniels ‒ Professor Daniels, mathematician, fellow of the Royal Society. And he was very interested in this subject, which he treated very lightly.  He said, 'Oh it's nothing, I've got a book, I'll just go through it'. He said, 'I'll find you some numbers for that'. And he gamely suddenly he produced these numbers all within a few days and they were accurate to 0.28 seconds a day, and he said, 'I'll get closer if you want'. But, no, the numbers suited me because when you turn these equations into a practical manifestation, you're dealing with gears and there's a limit to how many gears you can get on a wheel.  You've got to proportion everything so that you can make a satisfactory mechanical explanation of the equation.  So I was happy with those figures and accordingly I set to and made the watch.
And in addition to the sidereal and solar mechanism, it had a chronograph, which you could slip into mean solar or sidereal at will.  You had a lever and you could switch it in, and I dined out on that for a couple of years because I used to say to people, 'When you're on your package tour to Mars, you need a watch like this. And when you're using the telephone, you know long distance calls are frightfully expensive so you just switch your chronograph into sidereal and it will cut your bills by 3.555 seconds a day'. So that always went down very well and I then decided that the Daniels... the watch up to that time had been called the Daniels Squared, because that was Henry Daniels and me, so we called it the Daniels Squared. And... but I thought that's not really good enough, and so I named it the Space Traveller's Watch, in honour of the American landing on the moon, which was the greatest space exploratory journey of the century.

The two-train watch, the double escapement watch became known as the solar... as the Space Traveller's watch.  The watch I'd made for Sam Clutton was also a two train watch and when he died he left it to the British Museum, where it still is, and that was a slight inconvenience to me because I had it in mind to sell the British Museum another watch. Of course, they didn't need it once they'd inherited Sam's and so I had to look elsewhere and even so, I'm very pleased that they've got the watch and they think very highly of it and they keep it on view to the public.
Now, the secret of the success of those watches was the double escapement, which produced a tick-tock mechanism without necessity for lubrication and therefore a better rate of timekeeping for a longer period. But I was becoming more and more interested in the timekeeping of the watches, so the more familiar I became with methods of making them, the more time I had to look around and find ways of improving the timekeeping and lots of little things came along, which I introduced into the watches in order to equalize the daily performance because watches are subject to changing timekeeping for change of position.  Difference between being worn in the pocket vertically or flat horizontally, or if worn on the wrist in a hundred thousand different positions every day in agitation as well, and changes of temperature, changes of humidity, all these things affect a watch. And the effects of the changes are very small, and so they're very difficult to eliminate. For example a little watch ticks say 36,000 times an hour and loses a half a second during the day and the half second represents a most minute proportion of the whole timekeeping of the 24 hours, and so it's all the more difficult to detect the cause of it and eradicate it.
It occurred to me that one must try and eliminate these problems one at a time, and the first thing to dispense with was the oil and that had worked well enough. I believed I could then construct another watch to give me the results I wanted ‒ that is, improve timekeeping, plus the tick-tock mechanism so that it wouldn't stop and fail to restart.  And so I set to work to devise a new form of escapement, which would give me all the qualities I wanted and yet be simpler than the double escapement watch.  And furthermore, I realised that if I could devise such an escapement it was going to have to fit eventually into a wristwatch because the market for pocket watches is very small.  It's connoisseurs and collectors who want these watches just for their own personal pleasure. And then outside there's the millions of wristwatch wearers and I must try somehow to produce something that would be available to them.

I came to the conclusion that I should leave London when I had fulfilled all my ambitions. I'd been master of the Clockmakers' Company and I'd got this well-established business and a good reputation as a watchmaker, not just a watch restorer, and it seemed to me that it didn't matter where I lived. I was always in touch with people and if I went to the Isle of Man, I would see more of Sam Clutton, who had moved there earlier and it's a very beautiful place. Are we in the Isle of Man now? We are, aren't we?
And it's a very beautiful place. I had a workshop built in the garden and the workshop was built exactly to my specifications.  You know, all the light was correct from different directions and so forth, and I started again here making watches again, and the first watch made here was the Space Traveller.

As regards the construction of the first watch and the subsequent watches, the object, of course, was to produce an original watch, it mustn't look like anybody else's watch, it's got to be quite individual. And then, of course, it couldn't contain any components that any other watch had been manufactured contained, because being different it would have to be different and nothing was interchangeable.  It had to be a better timekeeper, that was very important, otherwise if it didn't keep better time than any previous watches then there wouldn't be any point in making it because the object of making the watches at all was to make an improvement to the watch. Simplicity was important because I don't like to see a multiplicity of screws and levers and springs scattered all over the watch.  It lacks the simple elegance I prefer to see and so most of the mechanism would need to go under the dial and one would simply see on the back plate the mainspring barrels and the tourbillon. It was essential that the watch was a tourbillon because a tourbillon, which is a rotating carriage in the watch which carries the escapement so that it can average out all its errors of position each time the tourbillon rotates... these tourbillons were very, very fashionable, impossible to obtain unless you bought an old watch. Absolutely no one had made a tourbillon watch since before the war when Albert Pellaton was the great exponent and he died during the war and that was the end of tourbillon watches, which were considered to be impossible to make. So it had to be a tourbillon and then, of course, someone would be desperately keen to get hold of it. The dial had to look different to any other watch. Difference was absolutely important. I didn't want to be seen to be copying other people's work. So a very, very simple form of dial was contrived, which had a retrograde hour hand, which travelled over a scale of about 45 degrees and when it reached 1 o'clock, flew back again to 1 o'clock at the beginning and a near concentric minute hand and an offset seconds hand.  The hour numerals were deliberately suppressed on the dial in form because the idea was that with a high-grade precision watch you didn't need to know what the hours were, you only needed the minutes and the seconds; you can get the hour any time you like.
So that was more or less the plan I worked on, and I didn't want it keyless wound, I wanted it wound by a key because then I felt that the key and the watch would be an ensemble in themselves and I designed a special chain with... producing links to attach the key to the watch and the watch had a special pendant which is very simple and could be folded back when the watch was laid down so that it didn't rock, because a rocking watch will destroy its own timekeeping. The case was to be part gold... gold middle and pendant bow, and silver back and front bezels and silver back.

Of course, all the components in the watch had to be made from the raw material and having produced a component by whatever means, partly done on the lathe, partly done with other small machines or the hand turns or filing or sawing, all the components had to be cut out and then brought to the final shape, checked to make sure that they worked comfortably with each other and then hardened and tempered, which means making the steel components red hot and plunging them into oil to harden them.  And this, of course, leaves them black from oxidation and they all have to be polished and cleaned all over again. And there is countless hours of work in attending to small details, making the screws and the springs and even the jewels for the escapement all have to be cut to suit the watch in hand.

It would take something like 2000 hours to make such a watch, and so of course one could only make one each year because there are other things that need attending to.  If one runs a business there are all the administrative problems to deal with, and the Inland Revenue and VAT all had to be dealt with. And interesting that when I built the first watch, we didn't have VAT, we had purchase tax and it was quite a lot of money.  I can't remember exactly, but I think it was about 25% or something on the cost of the thing. And so on the advice of Queenman [sic], the jeweller in London, I got my solicitor, who was an expert on tax, and I explained to him that I didn't really want to charge my customers this... what did I call it... the tax... purchase tax. I didn't want to charge them purchase tax and what could he do about it? Well, we went along to see the purchase tax people and we had a long discussion there and we were asked to come back again the following week and we went back and they looked at the watch and they agreed with me that I didn't make these watches as a business, I made them because it amused me to do so, and if there was a customer, I was perfectly entitled to sell it. And so, delighted with this ruling, I didn't have to charge my customers the purchase tax.
All that changed when we got round to VAT and then everything had to be charged VAT, but those lucky early customers, although they were not only early on that score, they were doubly lucky because I think they paid on the average about £5000 for their watches and they're selling now at £150,000, £200,000, £300,000.  So, they were good investments from their point of view.

With so much work to do, it was only possible to make one watch each year and I did want all the watches to be different and so I began to think of ways of improving... little ideas like, when a watch is lying horizontal it keeps a different time to that which it keeps when it's vertical, due to the change in friction on the components. And I devised some jewels specially made to overcome this problem, and they were very successful.  Once again, I took them Switzerland but they weren't interested.  You know they said well, you know, if the watch keeps 10 seconds different time lying down to when it's standing up, well nobody cares. But I did care, it had to be right for me, I didn't want to fall into the same traps as others.
And then, of course, as the years went by I began to think more boldly about the watches and more complications came in, such as the watches with two trains.  They weren't more complicated, but they were more complex and there was many more components to make... twice as many components in the one watch. But these watches have got rather a special place in horology.  They are very highly regarded because they have the two separate trains culminating in a single escapement.  The two feed into the single escapement so that both contribute to the timekeeping as both are governed by the escapement. This is a system that had not been used before and it is very successful, it keeps a phenomenal rate of time. So I devised it simply to do something different, but it turned out to be a very useful invention in the end.

And then, of course, if one goes back through horology all sorts of things have been invented, like repeating work so a watch sounds the hours and the half hours, or it can have additional mechanisms to sound the quarter hours or the minutes, all these can be sounded, and they're quite an attraction to people. They were very necessary in their day because there were no easy means of striking a light in the years before the 19th century, and the only way to find the time at night was to have a repeater, push the button at the top and it would tell you what the hours and quarters and the minutes were if you could afford a minute repeater. They were all very expensive, all handmade.

Then there is the equation of time, which is the difference between true solar time and mean solar time. You get true solar time from a sundial and it varies throughout the year from 16 minutes plus right down to about 15 minutes minus. So when you take the time from a sundial, it could be half an hour out, but there are means of constructing mechanisms which can change the speed of the rotation of the hands of the watch so that they keep up with the sun when its going fast, and slow down with the sun when its going slow.  They were very popular.  In fact people like any kind of gadget on a watch.  The state of winding indicator is a little hand, which will tell you how many hours the watch will run before it needs rewinding.  And calendars... people love calendars. Put a calendar on a watch and it will double its value, they find it so attractive. And so I did all those things and of course as the watches got more complex, the amount of time spent on them increased and the final tour de force was a one minute tourbillon with coaxial escapement and equation of time and up and down indicator... state of winding indicator and minute repeating and perpetual calendar that shows all long and short months and leap years without adjustment to the watch. I don't know who invented the perpetual calendar, Breguet made one fairly early on, but I know Mudge made one 20 years before Breguet, but who made the first one I just don't know. But it's a very ingenious device and a great nuisance if the clock stops half way through the year and you've got to twiddle all the wheels round to catch up with the true time.
But I made all those bits and I still have several of them. I preferred not to part with them because I wouldn't be able to make them again.  You know, making watches is such a close task. It's such a tight experience to work two inches away from a very complex mechanism.  It's very exhausting and wearing and as the years go by you realise that you're not going to do this indefinitely because it's too draining; it drains all one's energy too much. Application is needed for it. So, I kept some of my best watches to amuse me, after all, one's got to have something to play with in one's old age.

While I was making the 30 and more handmade watches, I was also working on prototype watches of my own design in the hope that I could persuade someone to take up the design of the co-axial and I wasn't very much encouraged by what happened. For example, I first went to Switzerland with drawings and I went to the biggest escapement company in Switzerland... in the world, and showed them my drawings and they said you know... well, here is a problem and there is a problem and this isn't right and that's not going to do... and they clearly weren't very interested.  But the works foreman was interested and he said oh yes, he liked it very much and if I gave him an order for several million he'd do it. So that wasn't any good to me and so I went home and I made a watch with the escapement in, thinking that that might persuade him to take a more practical interest in it. And so I took this watch, which was quite a large watch, but then I was interested in precision timekeeping, I wasn't interested in little flat thin luxury watches, I was interested in proper watches, like the watch they used on the moon, that kind of thing. And so my watch was bulky like those moon watches... original movement, and they said no, no, no... well you know that's... I beg your pardon, I made a pocket watch before that. Yes, I made a pocket watch and took that, and they said that they didn't make pocket watches, they made wristwatches. So I went and made the wristwatch and took it back and they said well you know, we don't make thick watches we make thin watches. And so I gave up and started looking further afield and then I got involved with Patek Phillipe. And Philippe Stern, the proprietor of Patek Phillipe, for whom I have a great admiration, he's a marvellous businessman and very astute in horology, he was interested and he wanted his men to do it but they more or less didn't try very hard and so it failed.

Of course the principles of escapements are well established. We know what is required of an escapement, but whilst it's easy to understand what's needed, it's not very easy to discover how to make it available.  And I think also there's a certain amount of inhibition because one is faced with a 500 year old problem that hasn't been solved and to set about solving it without giving it sufficient consideration wasn't going to produce the results. And I realised that and... Still, I set to work and produced different escapements. It's difficult to describe these escapements, but they included the best-required principles for escapements, with the exception of the tick-tock impulse, and that was the greatest problem to find out how to introduce an impulse to the oscillator at every vibration. And finally, I produced an escapement which I called the co-axial escapement because it had two escape wheels, not side by side as with the earlier watch, but one on top of the other, and this gave the tick-tock impulse and didn't require lubrication. So, as far as I could see, the problem was solved and it only meant putting it to test to find out how it went. And I tested it during a period of 20 years, not because it wanted all that testing, but because I couldn't find anyone in the industry to take an interest in it. But during those 20 years, it proved itself to be a superlative timekeeper and some examples have run for the best part of a year without showing any variation in timekeeping. So obviously it was suited to its task. It didn't need the lubrication so it wasn't affected by a change in temperature.

Going back to the differences between the conventional watch escapements, which usually is the lever escapement invented by the Englishman Thomas Mudge in 1754 and used ever since in watches. The difference between that and the co-axial escapement lies in the method of imparting the energy replenishment to the oscillator. The oscillator must have a small amount of energy fed into it at every oscillation in order to keep the... maintain the oscillation and produce the time.  The... one could explain it by saying that the impulse to the oscillator, the energy given to the oscillator in the lever escapement is done through an enormous long sliding friction action. Can you see my hands if I do that?
[Q] Yes.
So we might say that, for example, in the lever watch the sliding action is given to the components by the wheel here, which as it goes you see it pushes up this half there, pushes it up and that energizes the oscillator. Whereas with the co-axial escapement, the action is more like pushing open a door when the two components, instead of sliding, just gently push each other open without almost no friction... with almost no friction.  Those two components will feed one into the other.

The difficulty then was, having discovered how to apply this to the escapement wheels for the impulse to the oscillator, the difficulty was to make the components and, because they're very small. The first escapement was made for a pocket watch so it wasn't too bad and it worked very well, which was very satisfying, kept a very close rate of time and was in use for two and more years before it went to the observatory for testing where it was found to produce this really close rate of 0.2 seconds variation throughout the day. But the real problem was to find someone who would agree to produce it by modern methods and I began looking in about 1976... 1977 for someone who would have enough wit to realise that this escapement could be the solution to the 500 year old problem of eliminating the lubricant from the escapement and having a tick-tock mechanism that would ensure that the components didn't stop.

It was with great optimism I started to go round to Swiss factories and became more and more despondent with each visit when I realised that not only would they not look at it, but they wouldn't have understood it if they had looked at it. And those who were showing any interest in it at all were only concerned for me to place with them an order for several million escapements so that it would keep their factory going and I would be left with all these escapements and no watches. So, that was no good. And I just kept up this bombardment of the industry for nearly 20 years and I tried every trick I knew to get them interested and even to look at it, even to try and understand it. But they seemed very satisfied with their own methods and weren't going to be bothered to interrupt their production for my ideas.
And then one day I met a young man at the La Chaux-de-Fonds Museum who was quite bright and very interested in the escapement and he engaged me in conversation about it. So I was much encouraged by that and he liked the idea and thought it was very progressive. Of course, he had no power to do anything, he was simply an apprentice. But eventually he went to the Omega company and while he was there he managed to persuade them to take an interest in the escapement, which I took along and showed them and at last I was beginning to find a company that was willing to consider them and study it to discover its merits. Prior to that I'd gone to one or two companies and they wouldn't... although they took a passing interest in it, they wouldn't manufacture it, and I did in fact spend some two or three years, four years I think, with Patek Philippe producing escapements, but their workmen didn't seem to be very interested in it. They couldn't believe that there was anyone who could make something that would be better than anything they made and it was pretty plain to me that, you know, I wasn't Swiss and therefore the old saying of not invented here was being pretty heavily applied to me and they weren't going to take an interest in it.  Indeed, my impression was they were going to some trouble to make it impossible for it to work, and so I got tired of them and left. And then I met the young man from Omega and took it up with the Omega Company, and they've been at it now for about seven years, so called developing the escapement.  There was nothing to develop, it was fully developed when I gave it to them and indeed their designs for the escapement now are still identical to mine. So they've developed nothing, excepting the methods of mass production, which were very, very difficult and one must give them every credit for cracking all the problems and producing these very, very accurate components, working to tolerances of a thousandth of a millimetre. Now that's a very small dimension, but they worked to those dimensions on this escapement.
And it was launched two or three years ago and a lot of noise was made about it. We went all around the world to almost every country showing it and explaining it, and everyone was very enthusiastic about it. The curious thing is that once Omega had taken it up then everyone was very pleased to agree that it was worthwhile, but somebody important had to take it up before they would agree that it was of any practical use.  And at the present moment it's in production with Omega who've sold many thousands of examples. Exactly what the performance of these watches has been over the past few years I don't really know.  I only know the performance of my own watches, which are made in the Isle of Man with my then assistant, Roger - what's your name?
[Q] Smith.
Smith, Roger Smith. And we made them with my assistant, Roger Smith, and we agree they keep cracking time and we had no occasion for not being absolutely honest about it. They're good watches and go very well and far exceed the performance of any lever escapement.  So as far as he and I are concerned, and it's my problem rather than his, I'm very happy that this is the escapement for the watch... the mechanical watch of the future.

La Chaux-de-Fonds


I was still going to the Basel Fair and indeed, my last visit there was at the direct request of the directors of the fair who, fearing flagging gates wanted a tame monkey to put on an exhibition for them. And so they invited me to go out, all expenses paid, and put on a show, hand watchmaking, because that was the coming fashion. I did that and all those people who weren't interested in the co-axial saw all the watches that were there and there was all my books and all my movements and all my watches, and it was a hell of a big show really for one man to put on.  But it didn't do what I wanted with Patek Philippe.

So, the Millennium watches were finished and sold, and all very satisfactory at the end of a very good project, which did a good deal to publicise the co-axial escapement and satisfy all those people who wanted a Daniel's watch but would never get one while I was only making one each year.  And that's in stark contrast to my experience in Switzerland, where Patek Philippe were working to produce models of the examples of the escapement and they weren't succeeding and they weren't very pleased with me and it was quite obviously in their minds all my fault that it didn't go properly. And then I had a letter from the manufacturer, lever manufacturers in Switzerland, FAR, Fabriques d'Assortiment réunies and they included a copy of a test report on the escapement that Patek Philippe had made and it didn't make very good reading. I mean obviously everything about the escapement was wrong and I was very cross about that and so I wrote them a letter and pointed out that this did not represent my work, it was not made by me, it was designed by me, but not made correctly to my design. And the particular feature that they had pointed out was quite wrong in the escapement was one which I had had a big argument with... with Patek Philippe, and I knew it was wrong and I knew it wouldn't run, but they decided not to listen to me. And that... I was very cross about this report and if a single word of it leaked out into the public, then I would have them in a Swiss court of law and would expose the whole farce, as it had gone on for those four years. And so they then wrote me a letter, which I still have, to say that they had every admiration for my work, they accepted all I said, they were going to pin my letter to their letter in their files so the two could never be separated. So that all ended quite well in that... insofar any way as my honour was satisfied, even if the makers of the movement weren't very satisfied.

Some 30 to 32 watches were made by these hand methods during a 30 year period, which is approximately one per year. And I rather began to run out of ideas and I didn't see much point in going on.  I didn't want to make the same watches again and so I began to lose interest, which seems a curious thing to say because I had a lifetime's interest in watches, but on the other hand, if it wasn't going to be a challenge, there wasn't any point in it and I could go and do something else.  So then it was that I had a telephone call from Roger Smith who, the young man had set out to become a watchmaker and he'd made his first watch and he was very complimentary and he got his ideas out of the Watchmaking book and he'd produced a very presentable watch, not quite perfect, but a very good start. So we had a talk about it and he decided he'd go and make it again, which he did and it was very good, and then to my surprise he phoned me again a year or so later and said he'd like to come over and work with me.    That's what you said, I think?
[Q] No, you asked me I think.
Oh, did I? OK. So you said you'd like to?
[Q] Yes. You were working on the co-axials with Switzerland then.
Yes, well I was working on the project with Omega in Switzerland, and once we'd started in Switzerland and we got the ébauche, that is the basic movement sorted out and what was going to be done to it, I got 50 movements from them to bring back here to make up 50 watches under my own name but using the Omega ébauche and my escapement.  And I needed some assistance on this, I didn't really want to make 50 watches myself, and so it was Roger and I got together and he came as my assistant and worked on these watches. I had already made the prototype, which I still have, and I'd fitted my own calendar to it and finished it off in the English fashion and more or less left it to Roger then to get on and make the other 50 watches, which he did very satisfactorily.

As I progressed along my chosen road for horology, I learnt more and more about the subject, and not only just the subject but the important people who were responsible for all the advances in horology, which were of particular interest to me because with the success of my escapements, I had reached the conclusion that if all went well and these escapements remained in production, then it would be clear evidence that I had made the contribution to horology that I wanted to make when I was a boy and read the names of all these people, Arnold, Earnshaw, Mudge and those people. What do to with all this knowledge if I didn't want to continue?  Well, there were lots of people who didn't have that much knowledge.

In particular, Breguet I had studied for 10 or more years. I learnt a tremendous amount about that, and of course I'd learnt a great deal about watchmaking, which was quite different to restoration, and what to do with that knowledge?
Well, it seemed to me the answer was to publish it in book form so that it wouldn't get lost. I realised that if I didn't write the Breguet book before I got deeply into making watches, then I would forget to do so and would forget what was in it and it would be lost. And as it contained absolutely unique knowledge of the watches and the mechanisms and... interesting information from Breguet's archives in Paris, to which I had total access, I knew that if I didn't get that down on paper, it would be lost. And so I set to... brought out all my photographs, which I had taken during all the years I worked on antique watches from about 1960, and I had bought myself a Leica camera, because a Leica camera was a beautiful, neat precision instrument, which appealed to me, quite unsuited for taking pictures of watches but I didn't mind that, I just wanted a Leica camera. And I did use it to take all the pictures in the book in the end, even holding it one and a half metres above my head to photograph something on the floor.  Still I got the pictures I wanted with that camera. I only had the one lens, which meant it was very limited, but it did what I wanted, and I brought out all these photographs and there were hundreds of them.
And then I went through them, I began to realise that there was a definite progressive pattern on all Breguet's products. He made many, many different types of products, but each one had a progression towards ultimate development. And so it then became easy to get the book into perspective and to write about it and as I... as with the English makers, I'd been very, very close to my 'friends', and so I was with Breguet. I was a friend of Breguet because we'd been together all these years and I knew everything that he had done. I'd made drawings of all his mechanisms and explained how they worked, and so it was a very easy matter really for me to write that book. I just settled down to it and I think in three months it was all written, and with another couple of week's work, it was all ready for the printers. So it was published by 1975 and was very well received because it's the only complete book, not on Breguet, but on his art, his work, that's what it was meant to be. Since then, other books have come out, which are sort of coffee table books and they talk about the customers who bought Breguets. They're jolly nice... social history, but I'm a technical man and so it doesn't particularly interest me. I preferred the mechanical aspects.
And the book was very well received and sold, and it's gone through half a dozen reprints now and it's in French and Italian and that's all very satisfying.  I never ever made any money out of it as far as I can remember, but then, you know, if you're not a professional novel writer, you don't expect to make money out of technical books.

Sam Clutton was a very erudite chap on many subjects and he was a great expert on watches, antiquarian watches and clocks, and we got to know each other pretty well. And to my astonishment one day, he said, 'I think it's time we had a new book on watches and we shall write it'. Well I was astonished, because I'd only ever written birthday cards up to that point, and I was very flattered. And I had photographed all the watches that had been through my hands, had been photographed, and drawings made of the various mechanisms, and in particular, escapements, which were always uppermost in my mind and also in Sam's. We both liked escapements. And so I photographed something like 60 escapements, different types, put them all in the book made a special device into which you could clip the components of the escapement and then move them into position if they were working.  So it added a dynamic dimension to it.
And so the book was published in 1965 and I was a very proud part author and it was signed Clutton and Daniels... as Sam said C comes before D, so it was Clutton and Daniels, which suited me very well. I was very honoured to be on the same cover as Sam, and the book sold very well. And some of the work done to it was only... only succeeded by determination, like for example the jacket, which was all coloured illustrations and we collected together the watches.  I think there were 20 watches to go on the cover, some on the front jacket, some on the back jacket. And we took them to a man whom I knew to be a very good photographer, although I had had no experience of his methods. And he was an elderly chap and had very old equipment, including this very old exposure meter, which consisted of three wood flaps which he would laboriously open up and face towards the camera and get the correct readings for it and then do a calculation on a bit of paper to get the exposure right. To my astonishment, he laid a piece of blue paper on the floor and proceeded to put the watches on the blue paper in the pattern we wanted, and he made the two or three exposures, in what seemed to me the most amateur way. He had a flash lamp and he just went round and did four flashes on four sides of the watch. And then he says, 'Well, I'm going to take these pictures into the developers and we'll go and have lunch. They'll be ready when we come back'. Well, what's going to happen to the watches? There was thousands of pounds worth of them lying on the floor and we had a debate about it and he said, 'Well, no one has ever broken in here before'. All right, so we went to lunch, which we had a very anxious lunch, I can tell you. And when we got back, we picked up the pictures. We got in, the watches were still there on the floor ready to be photographed again if the transparencies weren't good, but the transparencies were quite, quite perfect. These amateur methods got beautiful results.
So the book was published and went through two or three editions and it was put into German and is now sold out I think and I don't think it's ever going to be reissued because the plates were all put in a warehouse and the damp got to them and ruined them all. But I do believe now you can use photographic methods that will photograph books made on the silkscreen process, which the old pictures were. So, it is now in demand and it may be that it will come out again.

So that was my first foray into writing and I felt quite a chap, you know, and I'd walk about knowing that I was a proper author, you know, got my name on a book. And then I was approached... you see, notoriety descended on me... and I was approached by Abelard-Schuman Publishers in America, would I write a book on watches for them.  Well I couldn't write a book on watches, I'd just done a book on watches with Sam. So I wrote a book called English & American Watches, this was a slot of the market that hadn't been opened up before, and I found enough English invented devices and enough American mass produced watches to knit this book together you see. And it was received in... somewhat disdainfully by some members of the antiquarian society, but they couldn't deny the validity of this book. It was about English and American watches and it had covered every aspect of the development of the watch, so it could be justified.  But obviously it wasn't academic enough for these people.

Then I discovered at Basel, the Fair, that not many people knew how escapements worked. And... for example, I had a co-axial escapement there... a model... quite a big model, and a chap came up to me and asked me what was the difference between that and the lever escapement. Well, I thought, well how do you convince these people? And so I tried to explain to him, but I really wasn't interested in explaining to him. I took the view that if he didn't know it wasn't   my place to teach him, he can find out first and then come back.  But it did occur to me that it would be much better if more people knew how it worked and then they'd see some sense in it and maybe it was that many of the Swiss people didn't believe in it because they didn't know how it worked and they hadn't realised its advantages.  I've already explained the advantages, haven't I, about the impulse and all that sort of thing. And so I went home and wrote The Practical Watch Escapement. It's called The Practical Watch Escapement because it includes all those escapements that have been used for practical purposes in watches. Watches haven't always had the best escapement. Sometimes they've had an inferior escapement for very practical reasons like money, for example. You know, you've got to sell the watch, its got an expensive lever escapement you're limited to the number of customers. So, it was a book about practical escapements and it gave a complete analysis of the function of all the escapements so that with that book you can choose any escapement you like and make the whole thing and test it against all the drawings and the figures in the book. And so that book proved to be very useful and it's in its second edition now, and there may be a third edition on that. It gives a full explanation of the co-axial escapement.

So then I turned to helping those who, now having read The Practical Watch Escapement, understood how the escapement worked, but needed advice on making it. So, I wrote Watchmaking. The curious thing is that the French, who are supposed to have a very rich language, which I as a non-French speaker don't agree with, don't have a word for watchmaking.  They have fabrique de montres methods and ways, a long cumbersome title, isn't it, for a little book called Watchmaking, but there it is. And that's done very well.  It... like the Breguet book, went through French and Italian and...
[Q]   German?
No, that's all it went through, French and Italian.  Yes, but it has gone through four English editions, two French and a revision.  So, it's done quite well.

I mentioned earlier the Clockmakers' Company... livery company... and it was founded in 1631, like all of these companies, as guilds to protect their industries, and you couldn't practice your art in London unless you had completed an apprenticeship, then you could enroll as a freeman.  'Free' meaning you've done your apprenticeship and you are a free man now to move about. And the Clockmakers' Company, as I say, was founded in 1631 and I was made a liveryman in about 1970ish, '68, '70 thereabouts. And I took a close interest in it because they had a marvelous collection, which I have mentioned earlier and which I did a lot of restoration work, which was very beneficial to me.
But then, to my surprise one day, I was elected to the court. The court is an inner circle of about 20 men... I nearly said distinguished people, but I felt under the circumstances I'd better leave that out.  As a member of the court, of course, I could chinwag and help to pontificate with all the others, which I never did, I found it best to shut up and listen, and then have one's influence on more practical grounds that if I helped look after the collection to keep it wound and looked after and going.  And I carried on like that for some years, and then in the natural sequence of events, I was elected an assistant on the court and went on to become junior warden... there are three wardens, renter warden who looks after the money, and the senior warden, who is next in line for the master's chair.  And in due course I got then... I was made a master of the Clockmakers' Company, which I am very pleased about because we had 400 liverymen and only one is elected each year to the master, so I am very pleased about that.  And furthermore, I was the only master who was a practicing watchmaker. So, that pleased the remainder of the court and I came to the end of my year in 1981.
And during my term as master, I had taken it upon myself to make a speech in Guildhall in London to the effect that we needed to take a greater interest in our trade and to expand it. And the reason was that Harold Wilson, who was then prime minister, had been pontificating about getting rid of the City, this wretched wealthy waste of time and self-seeking pot bellied financiers, you know, all this rubbish came tumbling out.  But I realised that, you know, there was a section of the public who could fall for that kind of bait, and if he did injure the City, we'd lose our biggest earners. I mean the City earns billions and helps keep us all going. I know a lot of the people in the City spend it all on Porsche motorcars and that sort of thing, but still, it's trade and it's money and it circulates. And so I was very anxious that they shouldn't get away with this philosophy, and so I made a speech to the effect that we must improve our standing in the trade and make a contribution so that when the new master took in... in '81, he then asked me if I would form a committee... education committee, to form this apprenticeship scheme, which I did.  And I ran it for 15 years, thereabouts, and it was very successful and I got lots of apprentices through and I got all the money from the National Benevolent Society, because I knew the chairman.  And they had income, which they didn't need because they could only spend their income on old age pensioners and they didn't have enough old age pensioners.  So I was getting about £45,000 a year from them to educate my boys, and that all worked like a charm until eventually the chairman was deposed and another chairman put in, who didn't agree with apprenticeships. We ought to give more money to our members, he says, although they don't need it, we've got to give them more money.  So that brought that scheme to an end.

Well, we had a new chairman to take over the National Benevolent Society and he felt they should have spent their money in different ways.  And so my money was cut off at source, and I was no longer able to raise enough money to run the apprentice scheme.  With what little I had I took on two more apprentices.  I don't mean I took them on; I put them out to other... I would find a suitable master for the apprentice.  Since then, I have looked covetously at the funds in the Clockmakers' Museum and Education Trust and they've got, I suppose, about £30,000 sculling around in their trust, not doing anything. I gave them some of it and I've been unable to get any out of them. But we've now been left another £100,000 by somebody, so I'm already making forays into that to see if I can get some for my students again.
And one of the big problems, I realised, was that students who made things, and we had students who could make things, didn't have anywhere to show their work and without a shop window, no one would be aware of what was going on. And so when the Clockmakers' Company collection was revamped and modernised and made more interesting to the public, I organised a special showcase for artist craftsmen to exhibit their goods in, and we will have a turn round at very regular intervals changing the contents from work made from one maker to another.

To celebrate the 350th birthday of the Company, we formed a ways and means committee to decide what we were going to do and how we were going to do it and one section of it was a subcommittee on publications and I was put on that committee. And Frank Francis, Sir Frank Francis, the British Museum keeper was our leader in our section and it became apparent to me as the months went by that we weren't going to publish anything at all.  He didn't seem to take it seriously. Mind you, it wasn't a very serious thing, but we did want something... we'd said we would publish.  And so, not wishing to be associated with a failure, I went right through the company archives and picked out the names of all the freemen, liverymen and brothers and masters and assistants and all that since 1631 and had them all put into a book, hardbound and offered it to the Company as our publication. They were delighted to get a publication. Some of them, like Dick Pennyfellow, who was a River Plate war hero, said it looked a bit like a bloody telephone book, but then of course war heroes are not very academically minded and they don't understand the purpose of such a thing, so that didn't matter very much.  His brother, who was clerk to the company, thought it was a marvellous thing to have and he doubted that any other company could produce such a list, which may have been another way of saying no one would have been daft enough to do such a thing. But still it exists and we know who were those liverymen up till that time.

The master always had a dinner, the big dinner of the year.  It's usually a very important occasion, full of pomp and ceremony, and for my livery dinner I had the Lord Mayor and his Lady Mayoress, Lord Denning and Lady Denning, and Lord Beecham, whether or not Lord Beecham was married I don't know, I can't remember. But the evening was going very well and we were all having a wonderful time because these are very lavish sorts of dinners, and of course that was 20 years ago. So it was a very lavish dinner in those days. And during the course of the evening the Lord Mayor makes a speech, in which he compliments the Clockmakers' Company, and he described how Tompion had written a letter to his case maker saying he wanted a case made, a particular style from pollarded oak and all the fittings to go on it, and the case was duly made and he went from some other aspect of his speech, and these speeches are always designed to pay a compliment you see.  To mention the subject... [unclear], And so then it came to Lord Denning's turn. Now my wife had sat next to Lord Denning through the evening and she had got a Daniels watch in her hand and she carefully explained to Lord Denning that this watch was no ordinary watch, it was completely handmade by her husband who had done everything.  He had done engine turning and the dial and the hands and the screws and springs and everything. And Julie knew how to describe watches. I mean she'd been seeing me make them all those years, and so Denning was very interested in all this and he came to making his speech and he had a wonderful country brogue, which he would put on on special occasions.  And he stood up and said, 'Your master, is better than Tompion.  He doesn't send down the road for a case, he makes it himself'. So, the liverymen all cheered. I shouldn't give those fake accents you know.
So that was a great evening for me and the next day I got a letter from Lord Denning in which he thanked me for his dinner and he wanted to give a present to a QC friend who was retiring and could I get him a carriage clock trade price, which I could without any trouble. So, that was a quid pro quo.  It's funny, life is a quid pro quo, it's always six of one and half a dozen of the other.

So then I was virtually finished with the Clockmakers' Company, except I turned up at all meetings and I never had very much to say.  It seemed to me that they never actually did what they said they were going to do any more than the BHI does what it said it's going to do, so there was little point in commenting on it. And then after a while I decided I'd had enough of it and I passed it over to a friend, who had then just come on to the court and he took over the scheme. He's never had any apprentices you see, he hasn't got any money, but I think we might find him some now. But on my... for my part in education, after I'd resigned from this horological industries committee, I got to thinking about some correspondence I read in the Horological Journal, which... to the effect that Rolex Company were no longer going to allow watchmakers to buy materials because they didn't trust the watchmakers who did bad work and Rolex got a bad reputation.  I'm sure there's a lot of truth in that, but it seemed to me that depriving them of spare parts wasn't really the way to go about it.  The British Horological Institute took it up with the Minister of Trade, which of course couldn't possibly do any good because the industry is so small, and how could we prove that we weren't wrecking the watches? So that didn't work, and I decided that if these watchmakers weren't good enough, we'd better train them to be good enough and that would solve the problem. And so I started my Horological Industries Educational Trust and I raised the money from the Burton family. Burton, the tailors of taste who sold suits for 50 shillings for years, and I knew the Burtons quite well, and Stanley Burton, who was a liveryman of the Clockmakers, had died a couple of years earlier.  And so Audrey said, you know Stanley would have wanted to be associated with any plans you had for education. And so I said I've got one and I'm going to need £10,000 a year for five years. So she paid up the money and we got cracking on it and so far we've done very well. We have our own certificate and we have issued 29 certificates out of 90 class members. So we're not giving the certificates away ad lib, they've got to work for them, they've got to get it right. We've got a very, very good instructor and so far it's been very successful and all the students enjoy it and their work is better and I'm hoping now to see if this argument arises again with Rolex... and now other companies have started, jumped on the bandwagon... but if the argument arises again, I've got this group of men whom I can take and show them they know exactly what to do. In fact, they know more what to do than the Rolex technicians do because my students have done it; the Rolex technicians only talk about it. They go by the handbook, but we've done the work. So, it should be a stop gap against further erosion of their desire for components, we can only wait and see. But at least we're prepared.

The Queen, yes. Well, that was very enjoyable. I don't know what prompted her to invite me to lunch.  I had hoped that she wanted to buy a watch but the subject wasn't mentioned.  It's a very interesting experience. I turned up on my motorbike, of course, I felt that was appropriate, and I allowed the police to park it for me and I went into the palace by the appropriate door and to my astonishment everything was red and white and I wondered who I was going to meet at this lunch. And it turned out that I knew some of them and they'd invited John Egan, the chairman of Jaguar was there, Maggie Smith, the actress, Bernard Williams the philosopher was there. I thought he might not remember his lunch with any great pleasure because during the course of lunch the registrar of the London Bridge Hospital, he was also a guest, asked if he could see a Daniels watch and I was very pleased to show him one. Bernard Williams took it and said, 'Oh, I wouldn't find it very easy to wear a watch like this'. And I was absolutely livid that he should make such a remark. I suppose he meant that it was too big for him. However, I noticed that he wasn't wearing a waistcoat and I said to him in a very loud voice, 'If you were a gentleman, you'd be wearing a waistcoat and you wouldn't have any trouble'. And the Queen thought that was very amusing and she took a glass of wine. I suppose she didn't like to show any enjoyment under the circumstances.  But to my surprise, I met Bernard Williams again... he's from Cambridge... and I met him in the common room there and he was very affable and smiling and so he obviously he hadn't taken offence at my remarks. But I felt he had to be knocked down a bit on that occasion and, as I say, he took it well enough in the end.
After lunch, one is taken into the drawing room and the Queen proceeds and stands in one corner, the Duke stands in an opposite corner and you are led out one at a time and dumped in front of them, and it was a very unusual experience for me. Some of the others may have had the experience before, I don't know, but I had always believed that one always allowed royalty to speak first. So I'm dumped in front of the Queen and I said nothing, waited for her to say something and she didn't say anything. And so on a sudden impulse, I dropped to my knee and I ran my finger down the back of her Corgi dog... she loves Corgis... and then stood up and said, 'I promised my daughter I would do that', so then we could talk, you see.  Luckily for me the Corgi didn't bite commoners, wasn't it, I mean it could have been very embarrassing but we got away with it, and then the Queen was very affable, charming.  And after that I was presented to the Duke and we discussed some of the palace clocks and that sort of thing, nothing very much and then it was all over.  It was a somewhat anxious occasion at the beginning and very relaxed at the end, so it was quite enjoyable.

In Switzerland, I had an unenjoyable experience when I checked into a hotel and I was handed a card, which offered me a free drink at the bar. And so, when I was ready I came down and I went into the bar and I presented my card and I got a drink and the manager was there and we talked and he introduced me to his barmaid, who was blonde and Swedish. When we'd finished our drinks, it was obviously up to me to return the compliment, so I asked him what he would have and he said he'd have a scotch and would I excuse him while he made a phone call and he went to make a phone call and I then asked the Swedish barmaid what she would drink, feeling I should invite her to take a drink and she said she would have champagne and I was furious because that was expensive. I'd only had a weak scotch. So when the manager came back I said, 'I must go and I'll pay the bill', and he presented me with a bill for about a hundred Swiss francs, it was quite a lot of money, and I asked him what it was and he explained to me that there were some lessons in life we had to learn at some time or other and one was you know that Swedish barmaids do like champagne and if they want one you have to open a whole bottle and give it to them. So I thanked him very much for the lesson and asked if he'd give me a receipt for the hundred francs so that I could present it to my company and have it included in my expenses.  And he was willing to do that. And so I phoned a friend and we had a wonderful dinner and after dinner I waited to see when there were no waiters about and I left and I went up to my room and I came down the next morning and they presented me with a bill for hotel and dinner and I refused to pay for the dinner and I said I've already paid for it and here's my receipt. And he realised there was something fishy about this but he didn't quite know what to do, and I said, 'Look, I'm in a hurry to go and if you don't tend to this matter now, then I shall go to the tourist board and ask them to come and referee'. So he very reluctantly took the money for the room and I left without paying for the dinner, and when I got home I wrote to the manager and thanked him for his lesson and hoped that he found mine was a quid pro quo and enjoyable for him.
Yes, it was a very difficult situation really but, you know, I knew if I didn't get that receipt I had nothing. I didn't know what I was going to do when I got the receipt, but at least I had something and I could decide what to do.  So those were the hassles of travelling.

It is a fact that I worked very, very hard in horology and incredible hours, which I was able to do because I was young and pretty fit. But even so, you know, there is some evidence that overwork can cause long-term problems, health problems, and I seem to have had quite a few of those.  I haven't allowed them to influence me very much.  The first thing that manifest itself was migraine as a consequence of the terrific number of hours I was working, 16 hours a day, and I always tell pupils who ask me how to go about their work, they want to know what to do, and I always say to them... whether or not they can do it I don't know... but I always say to them, 'Well, my boy, practice the art for 16 hours a day and think about it for 25 hours a day, then you'll find you can progress'. And I think that's true in any profession.  You know, you've really got to put in some mind stretching hours to accomplish what you want.
And so I had this migraine and I didn't know what it was and it was a bit worrying because there were all sorts of lightening effects and different manifestations of zigzag flashing and rolling crowds, so it was a bit concerning and a friend of mine made an appointment for me to see a specialist. I went to see him and we talked about everything, about my problem, but it seemed that he'd been assessing me as we spoke because he suddenly advised me that the interview was over and I owed him £5.  So I paid him the £5 and I asked him what the trouble was and he said, 'Well', he said 'you've had migraines since the last three or four years'. And I went home in my car and I was thinking to myself, migraine, that's a woman's complaint, I don't want migraine, and do you know I never had it again.  I sort of drove it away.

And then later on I developed appendicitis, which was very annoying. That had to be attended to and meant getting into hospital for a bit of time and in those days when I had it... that's over 40 years ago now... it wasn't an in and out in 24 hours business, you had to stay 10 days in hospital. So that was very time consuming.
And then I developed cancer.  I was a very heavy smoker and I think there's no doubt that smoking does cause cancer, not in everybody, but it can.  I mean WO Bentley died at 84 and he smoked so many fags, he was almost a chain smoker, but it didn't kill him.  He died of... well, just old age, but even so I think it does... can have an effect if one prolongs the habit.  And that had to be got over and that came at a very unfortunate time because I had just been appointed master of the Clockmakers' Company and I had to make quite a lot of speeches and I really didn't have much of a voice after the radium treatment. And so I practiced and acquired a small microphone and amplifier and I practised assiduously with that and so I was ready to go to my first court meeting and I planned to put this amplifier on the table and use a microphone attached to my lapel.  And I didn't know how the court would take this but I reasoned that I was master and I could jolly well do what I liked, so I went ahead and did it and it all went off very smoothly and after a while one just didn't notice that I was speaking into this microphone all the time.  And so that overcame that problem, but the voice has never fully recovered, but you know, one is lucky to survive the whole thing so one can't really complain about the after effects, and indeed I don't.  I never stop talking so obviously it didn't do me any harm.

Then I got tuberculosis and that was due to overwork and weakened condition, and that was a long business. It took nearly two years to clear that up and every day I took what I call two buckets of sand and cement, which was a liquid called... a liquid drink called passaia [sic], which was the only - in those days - known cure for TB, which hadn't really had a cure until the 1950s... there was no cure before that. And so I took this every day and it was revolting stuff but I knew enough people in the medical profession to seek advice and I met my friend Joe Briggs, who was a sort of peripatetic physician and he knew all the hospitals and all the people and so forth.  And we went to Guy's and we went through the medicine depositories and we picked out various packets of this ghastly stuff and we mixed it with different things and in the end we found that if we mixed it with a certain quantity of orange juice and blackcurrant and so forth, it became easier to drink, so then I was able to take this stuff. The way to take it is you just open the throat and pour it down.  It mustn't touch the sides because then you might feel the effects of it. And after two years, it was said I was cured and I went back to see my specialist and he was very pleased. He said, 'A complete cure, marvelous, doesn't always happen like that. How much of the passaia [sic] did you take?'  'Well', I said, 'I took it all'. Every drop of it I took, for two years. 'Really', he said, 'that's very interesting'.  He said, 'Most people only take about 50% of it, so we always double the dose'. But it worked anyhow.

I had a bypass... a double bypass.  It's quite a common thing now, in fact I believe it's very fashionable. And I didn't know that I needed one. I didn't have any inconvenience. I first noticed that I was a bit wobbly in America once, but then I'd been flying for all those hours and I was rather tired. I remember when I got back to England they thought I must have this bypass so I had the bypass and it takes some weeks to get over it, but I didn't improve and after a couple of months had gone by, I began to deteriorate and I went back and it was discovered that they'd made a mess of it and they hadn't completed the job properly. And so it had to be done again, and I really did feel very low, for the first time in my life. I felt despondent after that second thing and my doctors on the Isle of Man weren't very pleased with me for going to London to have this operation done without consulting them, but, of course, I couldn't consult because I was in America and they weren't on the island when I was.  They didn't take that into consideration, but they obviously felt a bit peeved about it all. So I didn't get any attention from them, and in the end my friends came round and produced food for me. I had nothing to eat, and I couldn't get out of bed. I suppose I should have been in the hospital really, but they're very masochistic in the Isle of Man and they don't go in a lot for comfort, like going to bed when you're ill. In fact the more ill you are, the more they seem to want to keep you on your feet. I suppose they think it strengthens your character if it doesn't do your frame any good.
So we progressed through these things and then suddenly it was decided that I had a cardiac problem with atrial fibrillation and it's taken me seven years to get through that and I feel pretty good now, mainly because I insisted on having a particular operation, which I knew... I'd been told would be beneficial but for some extraordinary reason in the United Kingdom it's very difficult to get any medical treatment.  There's a lot of talk goes on and a lot of money changes hands, especially from the patient, but not much success. However, I have now had this operation and it seems to have made quite a bit of difference, so I'm hoping now to get back to the bench and get in a few more thousand hours of solid grafting to try and do something intelligent.

It was about 1965... 6, that I began to get a back complaint, which is quite a common thing, and like most back complaints, it deteriorated. And it was very difficult to avoid inflaming the condition unless one just lay flat on the floor and did nothing... I couldn't do that.  I took quite a lot of advice from different people as to what could be done, and the answer mainly was nothing could be done, excepting if it developed to a stage where a laminectomy would be useful.  I didn't like the sound of that. I'd never heard of a successful back operation, so I wasn't going to have one, and all the time I'd been seeking this advice, they were all lifting money off me as a regular thing, you know. It was an automatic charge the moment you go near the place, although you get nothing for it except for a few words of sympathy.  And in the end I was put in a plaster jacket, and that was an instant relief to the back problem. But after a few days I decided I would do without this and I took it off and I found then that I'd lost all strength in my back muscles and so obviously the plaster was not a good idea.  It would be all right for a day or two, but for longer than that it wasn't going to be beneficial. Then I reasoned that the plaster worked because you had a three-point contact.  It... the three points were the middle of the back, the chest and the hips, and if I could devise a frame that contacted those three points but didn't need enclosing like a plaster, then I would be much more comfortable. And so I made this thing from ¼ inch steel rods, shaped to fit, put brackets on it for the straps, and I wore it and it was an instant relief and worked tremendously well, and I lent it to one or two other people and they declared how useful it had been and taken away their discomfort. The merit of it was one could move in any direction, except bending forwards, and bending forwards is the last thing you need if you have a back problem.
And so I got again on to my friend Joe Briggs, the physician, and very anxious to exploit this, we decided to patent it, which we did, and we had two or three dozen made and they were all taken to Ipswich General Hospital where Joe Brigg's friend was consultant orthopaedic surgeon, and he had agreed to try it out on his patients for the sake of friendship with Joe. I don't think he really wanted to do it... it was an unknown quantity but he did it, and Joe and I went along with these things and I was put into a white coat the next day and given a stethoscope to make it look authentic. And the patients started to come in to be fitted with this thing and they didn't like it, and as one little fat man said to me, 'Well', he said, 'it hurts when I bend forward'. Well I said, 'Don't bend forward and it won't hurt. That's the idea of it, you see'.  'Well', he said, 'I usually get several weeks off when my back goes you know'. So he obviously wasn't interested in a cure, he just wanted his several weeks off. And that was the condition of most of the patients, you know, they weren't prepared to help themselves. And so from that point of view, it looked as if it wasn't going to be successful. However, it came to an end when the consultant was offered a glittering post in Canada and he dropped everything and went and took up his post, so that the whole experiment was dropped.  We did finally get - after much correspondence - we got a letter from the Minister of Health saying that they read with great interest all about this - they obviously didn't give a damn about it - and that as it had not been devised by the medical profession it was very doubtful if it would be possible for them to make use of it. So in other words, you know, you're not one of us, shove off.
It worked very well on me and I wore it for some years, not all the time, but just when the back needed a bit of support, and it worked very well on others of my friends who used it.  But even so, you know, 50 years sitting at the watchmaker's bench is bound to have an effect and I began to get arthritic pains in the back and so there was nothing for it in the end but a laminectomy.  So that was done, and very successful, and I was only slightly concerned when the specialist came round the next morning and he looked at me long and penetratingly and he said, 'Can you move your toes?' 'Well yes', I said, 'I can'. 'Oh that's fine', he said. And I've never seen anyone look more relieved. So whether or not he wasn't too sure of what he was doing, or whether it was customary to know whether or not you could wiggle your toes, I don't know, but I could.

Why do people like mechanical watches?  Well I suppose it is that even though their watch is not specially handmade for them, it contains all the same components in principle to a really complex handmade collector's piece and purchasers of these modern easily available watches see them quite simply as wristwatch examples of the very things that the collector is looking for. They love to see a case full of gear wheels and a balance oscillating and many, many watches now have crystal backs so that the works can be seen.  People like to see the works going round and... well all that's good for the mechanical watch industry, which itself is a far better base for expansion of the watch industry in the present financial climate where more and more people can afford more expensive watches.  And you can only put the price up on a quartz watch when you can make a mechanical watch more expensive by adding various devices to it and so forth.

My interest in mechanics is concerned... it started so early in my life that I was able early on to make comparisons in quality of workmanship and design and style and it... I think it's obvious that mechanics came quite naturally to me. I didn't have to learn about them, I could just sense immediately what was required.  I never had any difficulty in learning about mechanical things. I mean a quick glance at a mechanical device and I could go away and make the whole thing from first principles. So that was very lucky for me and enormously helpful and through long association with mechanics, you know, one learns to appreciate the elegance of mechanical things, especially if you study the horology of the 18th and 19th centuries. All the components are very elegant and graceful and obviously made by artists... people who had a feeling for the natural progression of development.  This makes them very elegant to look at.  Today we find watches almost always have a crystal back, so you can see the mechanism, but unfortunately the mechanisms are not very well finished, so it seems a pity that the most beautiful mechanisms are contained within closed backs on old watches.

There is a huge interest in wristwatches at the moment, people collect them. I'm not sure why they collect them, because many of them can be obtained new in better condition, and if you have two identical wristwatches and one is 10 years older than the other and looks it, I can't see any point in buying that in preference to the one that's unmarked.  And we find also looking at the outsides of the watches that they lack elegance there as well and the cases are obviously conjured up by stylists whose one obsession is to make the watch different to anyone else's and it's easy to do that and the results are usually unacceptable, and I think flicking through the watch magazines today, the majority of watches are crude, over styled, clumsy, brash and not the least bit appealing to me.  I continue to stick to the old style. I was always very much obliged to Breguet for those beautiful dials he made and I prefer that simple style. I've never copied a Breguet, and, as a matter of fact, an examination of Breguet's engine turning and my engine turning, or even Roger your engine turning, is better than Breguet. His engine turners were good, but they weren't seeking that perfection that we were. There was a certain element of commercialism there in their work. We don't have to include that in our work.

Yes, well of course all mechanics are based on the principle of the lever, which is the fundamental unit in mechanics and the lever is quite simply a means of altering the power available in the component.  If you want to drive... if you have a wheel driving a component and you want to speed up the rotation of the component, then you make it smaller, which is exactly the same thing as making the driving wheel bigger.  The end result is that you always divide the long end of the lever by the short end of the lever, and that gives you the lever ratio, and all mechanics are based on that lever ratio.  It's not always obvious to see it, but it's there in the mechanism. Even the wheel is based on the lever, and in fact the bit of the wheel that's on the ground doesn't move, it's the rest of the wheel that's moving.  You could only be sure if you took the rim off and rode on the spokes and each spoke would be stationary till it was lifted off the ground by the following spoke, and the lever ratio is the distance between the hub and the ground and the hub of the top of the wheel gives you the ratio, which is 50/50... 1:1.

We were talking about the elegance of watches and I think there's no doubt that the pocket watch is much more elegant than the wristwatch for the simple reason that there's less clutter.  The components, for example, of a chronograph wristwatch are very close together and the watch looks very cluttered with spikes protruding all the way round it, whereas in a pocket watch, which is much larger, that doesn't happen. And then the pocket watch offers a greater pleasure in its feel. Breguet described some of his watches as savonettes.  A savonette is a piece of soap, and many of these watches do resemble a piece of soap. They're round, they're gently tapering at the edges and very smooth to hold and you can caress them with your fingers.  They're nice to feel. Just as some people carry stones sometimes in their pockets. They find a stone they like and it's got a comforting shape and pocket watches can offer that pleasure and the weight and the proportion are very important in the feel of the watch, it's nice to feel the watch.  That doesn't really happen in wristwatches, as I said, they're too small and too many bits poking out of them.  The lugs, the strap lugs and so forth.  So the pocket watch has the advantage in elegance. Unfortunately it's... while it's very nice to wear a pocket watch in a waistcoat, not many people wear waistcoats now. I'm bound to say that I don't think very highly of anyone who walks down Bond Street without wearing a waistcoat, and those who do of course have the pleasure of their watch to amuse them.  They can be wonderfully amusing things on occasion and many is the time I've sat at ponderous wordy meetings, totally boring and calculated only to assist the progress of the speaker, and I pull my watch out and examine the works. It's a great comfort and helps pass a boring time. Again, you can't do that with a wristwatch, it's too small.
There was an occasion in Guildhall in London where the Lord Mayor was due to appear to show he'd duly been elected at 12 o'clock and at five past 12 I felt he ought to be reminded of this and I had a Tompion repeater in my pocket and I pulled it out and pressed the plunger and it struck 12 healthy ringing blows right throughout the whole of Guildhall and it was a most interesting talking point.  Everyone enjoyed it, and you see that's something which... pleasure which only horologists can have because harness makers and knitting needle manufacturers and carriage makers and the like don't make that kind of noise. They just have to wait till the Lord Mayor is ready to speak to them, but we horologists can command him to appear. He has to come; it's too embarrassing not to come.

As to the future of... for watchmakers... makers of handmade watches... I think the prospects are good because watches are much more fashionable now than they were and people do tend to form collections of watches. A different watch for each occasion. And if that trend continues, then the connoisseurs and collectors of watches will begin to want special pieces, special to them only and not available to other collectors, and that's where the manufacturer of handmade watches will come in. Already there are several young people in horology setting to now to produce their own watches.  For most of them, they use a standard movement and get the dials and cases made as appropriate, and that of course won't be good enough in the end for the connoisseur... collecting connoisseur. He will want, in the end, his watches made from their fundamentals and the conception, design and construction, he will want that done by an artist craftsman who can give him the kind of exclusive watch that he's looking for. And those are the people that I have sold watches to in the past and I can't think of any reason why they should diminish. Rather more I think they will increase in number, there will be more people who want to buy these exclusive watches.

People who set out to make watches should aim higher all the time and never be desperate to sell your product. Collectors are suspicious of people who readily offer watches. They're very much more attracted to watches that they're not entitled to own.  Then there is... I mean that is the thrill of the chase, which has often motivated my interest. I mean I also collect watches and to be told there is something so exclusive you are not good enough to have it, you know, is not something I could accept. I must then go and make sure I get it. So the advice I would give to youngsters is, you know, don't sell yourself cheap, don't set out to persuade someone to buy.  Rather more, be exclusive and let them persuade you to sell.

It would be necessary for any such maker to have a good amount of talent, basic talent, not the developable talent, but the maker has got to conceive and design and construct and finish the watch and it's got to contain something that he won't find in anybody else's watch... the purchaser won't find in anybody else's watch. And it's got to be elegant, it's got to keep excellent time, it's no good producing watches that don't go as well as earlier watches, they've got to go better and there is always room for improvement. So the successful artist craftsman is going to be a very talented person who must be prepared to work long hours at what he does and I think not become too ambitious. As a workshop grows, it grows away from its customers. Things stop being exclusive and once a workshop grows, quantity of production comes in and then the connoisseur goes away and looks for someone else.
For myself, I've never wanted to expand my workshop.  I was always very happy to be in it on my own, to make what I fancied when I fancied making it, and to be free then to offer it to someone who had expressed an earlier interest.

One aspect of mechanics which I have enjoyed very much, is the motorcar. Some people have said I have an obsession with motorcars, but it's not true. I have an obsession with horology and I very much enjoy the motorcars, but unlike horology, I've never seen the necessity for attempting to make an improvement in the motorcar. As far as I am concerned, the motorcar reached its peak of development in 1929 with the 4½ litre Bentley and there was no necessity for any change to be made after that. And if no change had been made after that, it would be a very much simpler world and there wouldn't be so many cars on the road because one feature of the 4½ Bentley that immediately becomes apparent is that it's rather a difficult car to drive, and that would keep some of these modern motorists off the road.

My first car was an MG. Often it was one's first car... an MG. Mine was a 1930 model and I bought it in 1950. And so it was quite old when I bought it - second hand, of course. And I didn't have any money, I just wanted the car. So it was when I started my hire purchase career and after that bought many cars on the hire purchase.  One could buy a car for a down payment of about £20 and £2 a week after that. Cars were difficult to find immediately after the war, there was no production of cars, and so pre-war cars became very valuable. I couldn't afford very much on those lines, I had to be content with my MG. But I felt the MG wasn't really pretentious enough. I was beginning to become rather self-important thinking I might make some progress in life and I ought to have a vehicle that more suited my aspiring stature. So I bought a Rover – very comfortable. The Rover was always known as the poor man's Bentley and they were very comfortable cars and well built and I quite enjoyed mine. I soon realised it was just a vehicle for rebuilding. You know, I was buying these cars and I liked to rebuild them and so my mechanical instincts were beginning to exert themselves.

I have earlier mentioned the Landaulet... Bentley Landaulet, which I bought, and I don't have to go into all the details about that again, but it was a stirring car and I bought it partially by accident. It weighed over 2 tons and only had a 3 litre engine of 1924 vintage, and so it was a bit struggling for power now and again but nevertheless I enjoyed it very much and my friends mainly had Open 3 litre Touring Bentleys and they would sometimes attempt to show me a clean pair of heels but it wasn't easy.  When I wound that Landaulet up through the gears it would really go like a racing car and it made a great deal of fuss about going round corners but if you were 2 tons and rather long, you would make a fuss about corners. And eventually I sold the Landaulet and I bought another Bentley, a 4½ litre Bentley this time. I wanted more speed and it was a 3 litre Bentley with a 4½ litre engine and this was the... then... arrangement that one needed to produce a car that would be light to handle and very quick and I wanted this car for racing. So I took up amateur racing with that and enjoyed it very much and have in fact enjoyed amateur racing for the past 45 years.  It's quite enjoyable and very exhilarating and of course a very good social centre. You meet lots of interesting people with like interests.

I was telephoned by a friend one day who said he knew where there was a 1930 4½ litre Bentley and I knew that all 1930 specification cars had supercharged specifications for them.  They had been intended for supercharging but they never were, they were sold as un-supercharged cars, but I wanted this car because a supercharged car had a very heavy crankshaft and strong rods and valve gear and was ideal for racing. I bought the car, I stripped it of its huge 2 ton body and built a lightweight racing body for it and in later years I converted it again into a short chassis supercharged car.  It was great fun and a good touring car, a good racing car, but I was getting a bit bored with the weight of the supercharged Bentleys. It was an enormous weight and one could sense this weight in accelerating because when you open the throttle it made more noise but the increasing speed was not proportional to the increase in noise and that was an indication of its great weight that it was pulling along. Also it made life very difficult if you wanted to stop in a hurry, because there was so much weight it wasn't easy to get the brakes to hold back the car.
I drove that car for a year or two and raced it and then to my astonishment one day the telephone rang and I was offered to buy the 1930 Birkin supercharged Le Mans team car.  I mean this was a very, very rare thing and a very famous car and of course I bought it. It cost a record price.  I mean everything I owned wasn't enough to pay for it so I had to again search around for a bit of loose cash to do it and sell a few watches... enough to cover my needs. I got the car and I enjoyed it very much, it was a very famous car and it was quite fun to turn up at a meeting with the world's most famous supercharged Bentley.  I drove it for about 12 years and then I got tired of it, the size and weight, and in spite of all its history, I decided it would have to go. But I added to its history while I had it at the Nürburgring in Germany when a race was introduced for Bentleys and Mercedes and it was retrospection of Birkin's appearance at the Nürburgring in 1926 when he was well and soundly beaten by the Mercedes. So they thought they'd honour this event, and also the idea was that they nail this once again you see. But I took my supercharged Bentley and it had been Birkin's, and Birkin was the greatest driver in Europe, excepting only... I can't remember his name now...  Nuvolari. He was the greatest driver in Europe excepting Nuvolari, and I knew the Birkin, who had been dead for some 20 years was not without capability of observing his car again and I knew he was there watching me.  And I didn't think I must win, but I knew I must put up a good show. So we set off, and it was a race to see who could do the fastest lap and who could produce the most regular lap times, and I figured that the easiest way to get the most regular lap times was to go flat out all the way, and if I went flat out all the way, maybe I might get the fastest lap, so off I went.  And the race was terrific fun and I wasn't sure which lap I was on and I wasn't sure what I was doing. I only sat there with my foot glued to the floor to keep the car at maximum speed and at the end of the allotted time, it transcribed that I had won. And so it was a great victory for the car you see, and the Germans didn't like it a bit and they very reluctantly handed me over this silver cup, which was the cup that had been given in Birkin's day to the Mercedes team but now to the English team. So that was my contribution to England's reputation as a racing nation.

It was a most extraordinary thing.  I didn't really want to buy that supercharged car but I did because, well, I wanted my name to go in the logbook with all those famous names like Birkin and Barnato, they were all in this logbook.  So I very proudly wrote my name in the bottom and signed it so that it's part of the history of the car. And to my astonishment Birkin's track record car, which was also a 4½ litre supercharged racing car single seater was offered to me. Telephone rang and I answered and it was Jack Seers, a very famous race driver sports car champion, and he said this car was for sale and he thought it would suit me. Well, I wasn't very pleased because I knew I was going to have to make a hard decision. I couldn't let the car go without my name being on it at some time. So eventually I said to him I'd come down and have a look at the car.  In don't know why I had to look at it, I mean I know it's a very famous car, but there it is. I was stalling a bit, I thought, and not committing myself too early and I went down to see it in Surrey, and there it was in all its glory. And Jack Seers was looking after the sale and he put a price on it and I said, 'I can't afford that, I haven't got that much money, so therefore there's no sale'. And, 'Well', he said, 'How much could you pay?' So I made him an offer and he said, 'Well what about all the spares?' 'Well', I said, 'you know if they don't go with the car, I can't buy the car because there's no point if I don't have the spares. I must have it'. And then Audrey Russ-Turner who owned the car, her husband having died in it while racing it at Silverstone, so that was my inheritance you see to drive this car in which my friend had died, and Audrey piped up and said, 'Well Jack, I want George to have that car'. So that was it, I got it and at a price I could afford, and I've been racing it ever since. And it's a wonderful car, very fast, and Birkin took the lap record at Brooklands in it in 1932 at 139.65 miles an hour, which was a very high speed at Brooklands, which was notorious for its rough surface which would slow the cars down. But Birkin described the race in which he got with the lap record and he said that he was racing against John Cobb who had a much bigger car, he had a 24 litre car, Birkin's was 4½ litres, and yet Birkin won. And Birkin describes it, he says, 'As I came into the bend, I felt the car shudder at the crossroads', which was a notorious place for sliding about, but he says, 'I was resolved to keep my foot flat on the floor', which he did and he won the race. He won it by a fifth of a second, but that gave the car that record, which it still holds because Brooklands was broken up and you couldn't take any more lap records.  So I've still got that car.

And I very much like the early cars. The earlier they are, provided they're big enough, provided they're fast enough, the earlier the better and nothing can exceed the qualities of a really early primitive big car.  And one day I was advised by the owner of a Daimler, belonged to the Craven family... that the car had to be moved because the stables were being knocked down, and would I like to buy the car.  'Well', I said, 'I can't afford it', and I couldn't at the time, I was busy with my watches, and Rupert Craven said, 'Okay, I'll tell you what we'll do, you have the car for £1 a year rent and if you can afford to buy it some time, so be it'.  Well I kept it for a few years and eventually I decided I could buy it and got it from Rupert, and so it was my first big primitive car.  I mean when I say big it was a 10½ litre engine. It was quite a big engine, you know, for a chain driven car.  You are sitting way up in the air with narrow wheels, you know, and very high geared steering, almost no brakes, you know. They have all their own characteristics these old cars, but I like those characteristics and I enjoyed the car tremendously.  I've still got it, still use it.
And then to my astonishment I had the opportunity of buying the Itala.  The Itala was a very, very famous car that was built specially for the Dieppe Grand Prix in France in 1908 and it finished the race and there were three Itala's. Only one finished, the other two crashed. And it was sent to England and a body was put on it by Vincent's of Reading.  The Grand Prix body was taken off, it was very primitive, and this body put on and the Itala falls into this big primitive category. It's 12 litres, even bigger than the Daimler, and it's very primitive, but still these primitive cars are very easy to drive. You know if we don't rush it, if we go about it at the right speed, they're very cooperative and wonderful sensation to lope along at 80 miles an hour at 1100 rpm.  I mean imagine that, the engine is just going like this and the car is doing 80 miles an hour. It's a wonderful experience; it's the best experience in motoring. Well I had always admired that car and never coveted it because I knew it was never ever going to be for sale. And then one day I was at Prescott racing my Alfa Romeo and the owner of the Itala said, 'You know I may have to raise some money soon and it might mean selling the Itala'. 'Well', I said, 'if you're going to sell the car I want to buy it. You just tell me how much it is and I'll have it'. 'Well', he said, 'we're looking for offers'. Well, I didn't want to offer so I let a little bit of time go by, a week or so go by, and then suddenly he phoned me and said I don't think I'm going to have to sell the Itala now because I've managed to find a way of solving my problems, and I thought hell, I'm going to lose this car now, you know. And it's the one opportunity of a lifetime to get it. And so I wrote him a letter and said that I'd understood from various people that his car was worth between X and Y pounds and I enclosed my cheque to the latter amount, which was a hell of a sum of money, and would that complete the transaction?  Of course he phoned back immediately, 'Yes, it's yours', and I got it you see, and now I'm using it for the same things that I used the Daimler for: continent, Nürburgring, driving, racing, hill climbing. I've just been out hill climbing it lately, and it's the most wonderful acquisition, you know.  You have to experience a car like this, there's no way you can describe to anyone what it's like to drive a car like that. You've got to do it and you either love it or you hate it, and I love them, they're so primitive. The tranquillity of these primitive cars is extraordinary. It's difficult to describe.  Everything is rotating so slowly and the car's really whistling through the atmosphere like that.

So the Itala is added to my stable now, and then having sold the team Blower Bentley, I was looking for something lighter for racing, and what should happen but Gregor Fiskens dealers in London advertised for sale Birkin's 1932 Le Mans Alfa Romeo and I enquired about this and it was Birkin's car and is now in a coupe body.  It had been given to Campari by the works in 1932 in lieu of wages. So they obviously hadn't any money, they'd race their cars and got no money to pay the wages so they gave him the car, and he had it converted into a coupe and sold it to Italo Balbo.  Italo Balbo was the air marshal of Italy and a very famous man and a very powerful man, second only to Mussolini, and he bought the car and kept it for a few years. He drove it all round making speeches, political speeches sitting on the hood at the back and he was a most extraordinary man because he used to fly squadrons of seaplanes in 1930 from Italy to America. I mean you wouldn't think it was possible to do such a thing.  I suppose he must have gone to Canada and fuelled up and then turned half left and come back down to America, but a most extraordinary thing to do.  You would think twice doing it now. You know even now they're only just filling up planes with fuel, aren't they, and getting to the Falklands, and there Balbo was doing that all those years ago.
Anyhow Balbo was too popular with the people and too good for Mussolini and the upshot was that bringing back his squadron one evening, he always landed last, and he was shot out of the sky by his own gunners, upon Mussolini's orders.  And so the car came to England and it's been in England ever since until I bought it in 1970, still with its coupe body on it... and the man that had it didn't know its history.  So he put it up for auction and it was bought by Gregor Fisken, who did know its history, and he made me pay for it. I wanted that car, it was a Birkin car, and I got these Birkin cars and he was the greatest, so I wanted that car.  Well, I finished up owning it... I had to buy it... and racing that, it was a wonderful car for racing.  It's lightweight, very fast, 130 miles an hour and altogether a most charming and delightful motorcar and it fulfils all my current needs for a sports racing car.

And so finally we come to my latest acquisition, which is a two-seater called the Doctor's Coupe. Why two-seater coupes are called Doctor's coupes I'm not sure, but it's a very elegant car.  It's a 1924, and it belonged to King George VI, who was in those days Prince George in 1924. And so this is not a very fast car, but I've given up driving classic cars fast on the road now because it's very hard work, you have to have all your wits about you.  You've got to be heavy on the brakes and so forth, and you know you're driving a vintage Bentley, it's doing about 5 miles to the gallon, you're doing 90 miles an hour and you go round the corner and there's a queue of Fiestas behind a tractor doing 20 miles an hour and you come right down on the speed. The old Ford banger that you passed 5 miles is running up behind you again, you've got nowhere for all your speed, so I decided to give up fast vintage motoring and I now use my Georgian coupe.
So that's my interest in motor cars. All for purely selfish reasons. Never made any contribution to them.
