harold.lambert

British doctor Harold Lambert (1926-2017) spent his career tackling infectious diseases, helping in the development of pyrazinamide as an effective treatment for tuberculosis. He also published work on the rational use of antibiotics and was a trustee and medical advisor for the Meningitis Research Foundation.

I was born in 1926, which makes me 78. And I think the only star of my birth was it was the general strike, so my granny had to get a lift on the back of a motorbike to come and see the baby. Otherwise there are no particular distinctions. And that was in Hackney in East London, in the East End, and middle of three brothers. And when my father had managed to get out of poverty he moved to Willesden, Cricklewood, and we lived there until the Second World War started, when the children were all evacuated. And then, various places in the country until the very end of the war when I went to university. So that was my sort of physical movements in that era.

I come from an immigrant family. I was born in Hackney and both halves at different times come from Poland; my mother's family in the 1890s and my father arrived by way of Germany — and, thank goodness, only staying there for a year — in about 1919. And my father had left school at 14 and my mother, I suppose because... a poor family in Britain would also leave school at 14 or maybe 15 in those days... the same. And when he'd... they were very, very poor initially and we lived in a flat above a shop in Commercial Road, now demolished because I once tried to look for it, it's in a roundabout or something or a traffic thing and then when they — rather classical immigrant fashion — they'd... he'd made enough money to go slightly more upmarket, we moved then to Willesden, Brondesbury, Cricklewood, until the war when the children were evacuated and all broke up in various directions and bombing and this sort of stuff.
And my father was a very... well, one thing, he was an extraordinarily hardworking chap and although he had no education he was a terribly searching chap. When he had more time he was an avid reader, mostly history and politics and he was, you know, as I realised later, perhaps a bit too late, an interesting bloke to talk to but as I got older we talked more together. And, you know, he was, I now realise, a quite... a one-off, you know. He was an unusual chap and he had this burning interest. He felt... he wasn't the least bit vain and the question of university degrees he couldn't have cared less about, they were absolutely irrelevant to him. But he felt the lack of an educational structure on which his interest would hang. I mean, he didn't need it actually but he felt it and, and as he got older, of course, you know, the old age things are history and gardening. I don't think he did much gardening but history is the great old age activity and he got into that in a big way.
[Q] People seem, often seem to be, to use a word 'proud' about their parents or about their parents for children. Did you feel he admired your work or he understood your work, or...?
Oh yes. Oh yes, they were very, very proud and I think one was, as a young, brash person, not exactly dismissive but you didn't focus enough on these old people's lives and that's why my wife, Joan, is very, very keen on people of my age writing down or recording their experience because you know you love and know your grandchildren, then you die off and then the grandchild, then an adult, says, yeah, I remember that funny old boy, what, what did he do with himself, what life did he lead? And I don't know, I know something but not all that much about the previous... I know my father's and mother's life, of course, and my mother came from a big family and seven children. Her father died very young and she was the middle of them. Yeah, I do think older people should relate to what they have experienced, especially people who have either lived through or been part of the wars and the great things. I mean, you know, Tolstoy is quite wrong. All families are interesting, not just the unhappy ones.

[Q] What started your interest in science then?
Well,  I think it probably started when I went to the main school at 12, which was St Paul's Boys' School, then in Hammersmith and then in the country when the war started and I don't exactly know why but I got grabbed by science very early. And I suppose the main time was the years between what was then called school cert and getting... and going to Cambridge. When I... I read hugely, absolutely totally indiscriminately; I think I read books about things which I didn't know anything about just to keep reading but the... one of the central things was science and I think I was really very influenced by my reading about science. There were a lot of... I suppose there were the earlier equivalents of people like Richard Dawkins and so on: James Jeans, Arthur Eddington, above all JBS Haldane and they made me feel how very interesting science was and I think that there were probably other ones. I think I read Inquiries into Human Faculty by Galton, a rather weird thing to read.
[Q] And what did that... I don't know that, what...
Well, it was really a first attempt at finding out how people's minds worked, I think. And another one was The Grammar of Science by Karl Pearson... even then would have been a much older figure. I mean, I can't now remember what they were all about actually but they influenced me a lot and especially Haldane and things like Lancelot Hogben Mathematics for the Million and Science for the Citizen. They all... many of the authors had a very strong left wing agenda, which I didn't actually kind of register on or appreciate at those times but they thought very much of the social function of science and popularising it.

[Q] Was there anything that moved you towards medicine in your family?  I mean, there weren't doctors in your family but what... 
No, there was one sort of second cousin who was a doctor.  He was killed in the army but, I mean, I remember him vaguely but not very closely. No, I don't think... I think it really came from my interest in science but science of a human application. I think it would be quite pretentious to say that I wanted to help suffering humanity but I did want it to be something to do with people.
[Q] Were you ill as a kid?
Was I ill?
[Q] Yeah. 
No, I was incredibly healthy except I now remember when I got a cough I got the most awful graveyard cough and, of course, in those days, before X-rays, I'm sure my parents must have been very worried about TB. I mean, I've got a perfectly normal chest but... and have been, apart from old age and coronaries and stuff, I've been a terribly healthy person but I did have this dreadful, dreadful cough when I got a cold and that was... In fact both my brothers were very well, thank goodness. But there was fear at that time about things like polio. We weren't allowed to swim when polio was going around and we did have immunisations. I remember the doctor coming to the house and giving them, or the flat or wherever it was. But there must have been, I suppose, a lot of anxiety about things like TB, which was very rife. I mean most of us were infected with TB. When I went to Cambridge, everyone had the Mantoux test done; not because they wondered about our health. It was just some study somebody was doing and I don't really remember but I think nearly everyone was positive. Now that would be quite, quite the reverse now except for BCG positivity, wouldn't it, and that change in the epidemiology of tubercle, which has muddled a lot of people's minds about what to do about positive Mantouxs because people don't relate it to the age of the patient and the setting. And I've met a lot of muddles about that, but that... even in Wandsworth, before I retired, only a very small number of children at BCG age were positive and this is a big immigrant area.

In those days, probably still, you had to specialise after school cert so I did science from then on until going to university but I actually have to say that in those years when I was specialised in science I read more of everything else than I think I've ever read before or since in my life because,  although people are dead against early specialisation — and in a way I am too — it liberated you from stuff which you thought either was rubbish or you didn't particularly want to do. I had a particular loathing of school history and I now realise why I loathed it so much, because you were pretending to know about things which you couldn't possibly know about. So... I remember you had to write essays on the motives of Philip II in invading the Netherlands. I mean, how the hell would I know anything about... what it meant was you'd regurgitated what bit of the book you remembered. And I felt, whether I brought it to consciousness I'm not sure, but I actually felt in my bones this was a bogus operation and it really offended me so I hated the history master and I gave up history. Now, of course, in old age, you go back to history in a big way.

[Q] Were there any special science teachers that, that...
Oh yeah, there were very influential ones, yeah, yeah. And, one of them, a man called Pask, has been mentioned many times by Jonathan Miller, who is of course much younger than me but was a Pauline as well and in Jonathan's... some of his utterances he harks back to this inspirational teacher really.
[Q] And was it his style or...
I don't really know. He wasn't very factual. He didn't sort of, kind of get you geared up for the university exams all that much but, he did inspire you with what the subject was about, I think.
[Q] Yeah. And then was Cambridge an open window or...  I mean was it exciting or was it...
It was exciting but it was a difficult time because of... I went up a year before the end of the war and, for the two years after the end of the war, thereabouts anyway. Yeah, there was that. And, it was... I now look at it as rather a sort of cloudy time but I suppose I did enjoy it. I listened to a lot of music, made a lot of friends, some of whom are still friends and really enjoyed the work actually.

Yeah, Cambridge was very formative. It was... it was very interesting, met a lot of friends, heard a lot of music – and I'm not a performing musician – and I took what was then called a Part II Tripos, which now you can do in a vast range of topics, but I did it in Pathology, which involved a lot of microbiology as well and I got terribly interested in this. I got very... entranced particularly by how infections happen, the pathogenesis of infection and that stayed with me, but I had no idea that it would form, you know, a big part of what my life has turned out to be.
[Q] Did you go up to read Medicine?
I read up to... went up to read Medicine, took Part I, as everybody does, and then took Part II in Pathology and that really interested me and there were some very good teachers. One feature of there and at UCH, the medical school I went to in London after Cambridge, was that, because it was just after the end of the war and, and... sorry, the end of the war and after the end of the war, that,  some people were 'dugouts' who were retired people and had been brought out of retirement to teach, and then at UCH, the other end, there were people who were then what we call now kind of registrars who actually had been through the war and had got a huge amount of experience. So I think actually we had a lot of privileged teaching as a matter of fact, and there was an old boy who taught us some lectures on plague. He was called Colonel Whitmore. He was very small and very incisive, and he told a lot of funny stories, but he had actually been the first man to recognise and identify the cause in Melioidosis in Rangoon in Burma in about 1912 or something.
[Q] Good heavens. 
And there were other people like that who are historical figures, really. And one didn't realise it at the time, but they were.

I think I better say that this business about careers, everybody now knows what they're going to do and how they're going to do it. I would say, apart from those elements of interest in science and doing medicine, it would be wrong to say my career was disorganised. That would imply some level of organisation, which had stopped. It was totally unorganised, and the reason I went to UCH rather than any one, coming as I said from a non medical background, I went to my advisor of studies at Trinity, a chap called Willie Rushton, a nice man who'd only reluctantly got a medical qualification because they said he couldn't go on being advisor unless he did, and I said, 'What about this business of medical school?' and, he said, 'Well I don't know, I went to this place, UCH, University College, and it was quite nice, there seemed to be some quite reasonable people there, why don't you go there?' So I did. I mean, it was ridiculous, that was exactly the story. Like going to Trinity. I... we were working for our scholarships at school and I met a chap in the drive at the, where we were evacuated in the war and he said,'What are you putting in for, your first choice?' and I said,'Oh, Trinity, Cambridge'. He said to me, 'You're aiming rather high, aren't you?' and I was really horrified because I'd put in Trinity because I'd heard about it. It sounded rather, sort of, you know, good place to go and that was my level of ignorance really about what was going on.

UCH was a good medical school and I got grabbed immediately by clinical medicine.
[Q] Was that the first place you'd seen patients or had you...
No, there'd been a long vacation course at Addenbrookes, about six weeks, and we'd seen patient, but at a slightly more remote level and UCH was the first place I'd seen patients properly and I got grabbed by... I never looked at people's hands properly how to observe and so I had these two trends of interested in science and interested in doing medicine, really. Well... there were some very good teachers, and some very bad teachers, and there were some very good things and some very bad things and I learnt a lot from both of them. You looked after patients as a clerk, as you know, and it was very sort of big experience. It's so far back, that was 1946 to 1949, that it's almost hard to imagine now how different medicine was and the world was. We didn't have all that number of drugs, some but not very many.

As well as the... as the medicine you learnt a lot about what... about the actual patients, you learnt a lot about what the medicine was about. I realised very early, maybe as a houseman, that there was a conflict between scientific medicine - going into things in depth – and the fact that you didn't know what was going on most of the time. And although there's been all this modern teaching about evidence-based medicine and, you know, getting science more into medicine, I think it's in a way slightly demeaning of my generation. I think what students like us and the ones I began to teach found difficult, was the different levels of evidence that you were contending with, that some things, you know, insulin lowers the blood sugar were very tight and very real and you knew all about it. Other things were a bit sort of woolly and a lot of the things, you didn't know anything about at all, you didn't know what was going on and I think most reasonably intelligent students realised perfectly well that they were working at different levels and they weren't claiming that everything was cut and dried.

It did make me realise that I had a difficulty that I wanted to do medicine very much. I realised that medicine's so big you can never never encompass it and in fact you don't understand a lot of it, but there was another element which I wanted to go into things in greater detail, focus down on them, and I suppose that's why I decided to do medicine as opposed to surgery or whatever as a speciality. We... on, on the sort of personal side one realised the difference between the doctors who taught you, who really were on the side of the patients really, who felt what, what they were up against and the people who didn't. And we're all children of our time, but things like children's wards where, I don't remember the visiting hours, they were probably one hour three times a week or something, and now that would seem to us totally horrifying, but the paediatricians they weren't nasty people, they were kindly people, but we're all... we need some person who says, 'This is awful, you shouldn't do this', and then it changes.
[Q] But, presumably, it was how all sorts of things were being done? I mean, people being taken to... evacuated and such like, it wasn't, there wasn't a feeling that, that the children should always be with their parents like they, they were now.
I suppose that's right, yeah, yeah. I mean... I mean, Joan, my wife, was an evacuee with her twin, with a little box with a gas mask and a label round their wrists saying... and a postcard to send to your parents saying, 'We have arrived at somewhere', but there were other things. I remember in surgical outpatients there might have been 30 students sitting round this surgeon and then he said, 'Oh come with me', and we swept into a room, one of the cubicles and a woman was lying there naked to the... to the waist with a, she had a lump in her breast. I remember thinking, 'This is a terribly, terribly bad thing to do'. I was obviously much too cowardly to say to the surgeon, 'Get out of here, we shouldn't be here'. Obviously I didn't do that. I mean not... I don't know, but obviously anyway  I didn't, but I remember thinking at that time there are, there are things that are really wrong about this, about how we're doing it and rather strangely, going to the very end of my clinical career, I got more and more impatient of ward rounds as I got near retirement. You... the people, your juniors and the people who are visiting, very much wanted to be in on the discussion, and I didn't think it was wrong to go in – like everyone these days I went in and said to the patient, 'I've got some students on a visit, would you mind if I bring them in to see you?' and, as you know very well, if you involve the patient in the discussion they're usually only too delighted to be in on the act and tell them, tell people what they think about it. But I, I began to think it was just bad manners. I just thought going in with about ten people just was a kind of... it used to irritate me despite all those caveats and that, in a way, goes back to the beginning, doesn't it?
[Q] And did you find that actually stopped you wanting to teach at the end or... did...
No, I always wanted to teach. I just loved teaching, but that particular bit of it I just, I sort of went against. I didn't like the idea of going into a room with a lot of people.

The climate of the times was you went round to beds with a great huge horde of students, but my boss who was my first chief at UCH when I was a house physician, Max Rosenheim, was a very distinguished guy and later became a Lord and president of the college. He was, he was a bachelor and he was kind of very clear-cut chap. He was a physician with a physiological turn of mind who liked bringing science to medicine but he... was civil, he had respect for patients and he would never have done a thing like that, you know, sweep in with 30 students. So there were good people as well. And some people were so pompous it was unimaginable, really unimaginable. There was a senior physician. He's now dead. I don't know how the slander, called Kenneth Harris. He was unimaginably pompous, and I just couldn't stand him at any price. He was also extremely stupid and a very bad teacher.

That's another big theme that... the whole theme of communication with patients, and patient relations generally was purely implicit. It was what you picked up by what you saw for good or ill and, and I suppose what your own nature was. No, I mean, I don't think at all, I don't think anyone discussed the question of how to break bad news, what to do with dying patients, and they were all things which I found terribly difficult and, and painful and, you kind of had to learn as you went along, and although I think because of my age, I think there's a lot of... a certain amount of nonsense about the intensity and level of... of modern discussions. I do think I would have probably done it a lot better than I had done... if I'd had some teaching about, about it. You go, tend to go on making the same mistakes which...
[Q] On the other hand you've done a lot of deep thinking about it probably.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. I think also things like patient's responses to bad news, denial. I think I told you a story about, a patient which told me what denial was about. When I... my second job was the, the surgical professorial unit with, again, a very excellent boss called Robin Pilcher, not widely known in the world, but a brilliant diagnostician, a very stern man. He seemed very yield... unyielding, unbending, but he was an okay chap and, and the children loved him. And there was a man who came in with cancer of the bronchus, widely spread to everywhere, totally untreatable, even now. I mean, cancer of the bronchus, as you know, hasn't come on all that much.
[Q] No. 
I mean there's, there's treatment for one form of it, but it's amazing that most of it is as bad as it was when I was a student. So, what... I asked the ward sister to ask his wife to stay after visiting hours because I wanted to have a chat with her and she came with her sister. So I explained as best I could what the situation was and I think I came to the point, which is hard to do as you know, and told her what the... you know, it was really bad news and he didn't have long to live and stuff and there was a pause and she turned to her sister and she said, 'Thank God it's not TB'. And that taught me more about any textbook or any teaching or any lecture about denial. I mean obviously you knew exactly what was going on, but... and we've all had millions of experiences like that, but that, and I think really it's the individual episode that sticks in your mind. I mean I've listened to a million lectures in my time and I can't remember any of them, but I remember that woman perfectly clear, and I remember other things of the same ilk where you thought, that's what's, you know, what's important, what's going on.

You start teaching when you're a houseman, don't you? The students come, then you're a registrar; you teach more and when you're a consultant you teach a lot or you don't teach much and then you do lecturing and you do seminars and you have individual groups and nobody has ever said anything to me about teaching. Now, I'm sure even more than patient contact that's an area in which I do think there's a lot of rubbish talked about it actually but I do think that people like me would have done it a lot better if we'd been taught about to teach and I think there's element of both. You do need the experience and you need some guidance about where you go right and wrong. I should, I should imagine you'd know much more about this, these videoed things about... I mean I... I would guess they'd be terribly, terribly useful.

Talking to patients about things. I mean, like you, I've done a huge amount of it and I'm sure I've done a lot of it completely wrong. I mean one thing I know I did wrong, I tended to over-explain. I was so keen on the patient understanding where we were at, that I think I said too much detail really. I'm sure a lot of them went away and said when they got home, 'Yeah, he seemed all right but I don't know what the hell he was talking about'. I mean no long words just you know.
[Q] But you were very unusual, weren't you, in doing that, Harold? 
I don't think so.
[Q] That's my... my feeling that actually a lot of people didn't do very much explaining at all so that actually most people were just told what to do and, and left in the dark.
Yes. I think that's partly the people, that's true, and partly the, the climate of the times. It was a much more authoritarian climate and the doctor knew best and some people I found incredibly difficult to talk were ex-servicemen, you know, hair slicked down, standing at attention in bed, 'Yes sir, no sir'. 'Yeah, well, this is the situation, Mr Brown, and we're going to cut your head off tomorrow'. 'Just as you say doctor'. I mean that was the sort of sight. It was impossible to get them to come across and say what they felt about it. So it was both sides of the equation I think, but it's a very interesting thing and we're talking about this at a very junior level but I think actually these are nuggets which are incredibly important.
[Q] But you must have seen that change in patients as well as in doctors. 
Yeah.. that's right. Yeah, I think so, very much in recent years with... and of course with the web it's changed entirely. I mean that business about notes with the doctor, patients in my generation always felt very shy of this, bringing up bits of paper. I used to say, 'Do this, you'll forget and bring up some notes', and when I was ill some years ago they came and had chats with me, very nice, my colleagues, you know, and when they went away I thought: oh no, what I've really got is this and I forgot to mention that! And so I think it's very important for patients to have notes about what they want to say to you.

It wasn't true to say we didn't have anything to treat patients with. We had morphine and, and its analogues. We had Digitalis and other heart drugs. We had diuretics. We had some, quite a few, antibiotics by the time I was around. I mean, you know, diverting. George Orwell died of tubercle when... not, I didn't look after himself, but in UCH in the private wing when I was a houseman and streptomycin had come in. By the time I was a registrar on chest diseases some years later we had almost the whole panoply of anti tuberculous drugs.
[Q] What an extraordinary time that must have been. Were you aware that it was, there was a, a sort of revolution in the, in the, in the offing or... 
No, I don't, I don't think I was actually. I don't think I was, but there were... The second year I was a clinical student, maybe the first year, there was a polio epidemic which was too big for the fever hospitals, and it happened that the, registrar on the firm I was on was allocated to look after this ward. So I went in there a lot and saw rows of people in iron lungs and this was a long time before polio vaccine actually, quite a long time, about 11 years. So there was that kind of experience. I mean people do say, in talking about this to me, they sometimes say, well, you couldn't have had much to do because we haven't got all these drugs but of course in some ways you had more to do. You spent a lot of time aspirating fluid from people's chests and tummies, even their legs, and there were people sitting up in bed with, with valvular heart disease for weeks and months on end and people dying of tubercle and... it, well, it seemed very busy at the time, that's for sure.

There was still a lot of widespread pulmonary tubercle, and there was the beginning of anti-tuberculosis treatment, but it was still at the stage where there wasn't enough to prevent drug resistance and it was a big element on the chest department at UCH when I was a student, and still a big element when I was the registrar some years later so it was, it was big all right.
[Q] And presumably at that stage people weren't sure how long you had to treat for?
Oh, no idea. No idea.
[Q] So that actually small, short treatments were given and then resistance emerged and everybody was... how... was that handled? 
Well that... that was really in a way the first... this was science, it really was. Almost the very first controlled clinical trial was the Medical Research Council's trials of streptomycin in tuberculosis. Streptomycin had been discovered by a soil biochemist, Waksman, who'd gone from the Ukraine, I think, to New Jersey, and he looked at all these soil samples and that was really, yeah, pretty well almost the beginning of... antibiotics, not quite. And the thing was what did it do? It killed the bug, nasty drug, as you know. And they did trials of streptomycin in pulmonary tuberculosis and also in tuberculosis and meningitis, which I was involved in later in Sheffield at the children's hospital and... and they found that it... it was amazing, it was, you know, people who had been dying, livening, getting awake, their sputum becoming negative, walking around the ward, absolute, really miracle and then a couple of months later started getting ill again, and then dying. And the reason was that the germ had become resistant to the streptomycin in quite a short time, six weeks, two months, three months. And, this was only alleviated when PAS, a horrible drug as you know, para-aminosalicylic-acid, came in in about 1949 or something, and then the big change was isoniazid which I think was 1952 because that was an extremely powerful drug, given by mouth, very non-toxic and if you gave two or three drugs - I don't think I'll go into the mechanism here particularly - but if you gave two or three drugs it prevented resistance developing and from then on the MRC did a classic series of trials over 30 years in many, many countries, which really solved the problem of how to treat tuberculosis. And to me one of the real tragedies of the last decade or so is that we know exactly how to treat this disease and it's running rampant because  people... there are various factors, some doctor things and some patient things, which have led to widespread resistance, which is much, much more difficult to treat and yet... you see, I don't think we know how to treat, how long to treat a lot of illnesses, a lot of infections and, you know, I wrote this paper, I gave it to you, called Don't Keep Taking the Tablets because it was an iconoclastic assault on the convention of courses of antibiotics. But... but the MRC trials of tubercle, we know exactly how long, which ones, how, for this combination, for that combination, for the other combination and now it's all vanishing. Like malaria...  we knew how to treat malaria. And it shows, you know, the important things about medicine are, you know, economics and anthropology, and we do the best we can but you really need to...
[Q] You, you, I mean, the patient things are in a sense more understandable, aren't they than the doctor things, which are destroying it? What, what...
Well, if you're in... in a poor place in Ghana or in Uganda and there's a, there's a market stall and there's a treatment for tuberculosis which, it might have isoniazid there and it might – it'd be labelled isono – it might have some, it might have none, and you know you're ill with a cough. I mean, what do you do? You take it. Absolutely reasonably, and then it gets resistant and you get ill again. But, but I think a lot of doctors were giving it the wrong way.    Yeah, so I think it's both elements. And then, I mean, obviously hugely magnified in the last decade by AIDS because, as you know, AIDS and tubercle are really, really bad news as a combination, and one of the major causes of deaths from AIDS is tuberculosis.
[Q] Right, and did you find as an infectious disease physician that, that actually you were seeing tubercle getting out of hand and you, when you didn't... when AIDS wasn't fully worked out, was that something...? 
No. No. I think it was in hand in rich countries then, but not in poor countries. And at that stage, which you may want to go onto later, much, much later, we had the Ugandan Asian immigration after Idi Amin and...  this was when I, a really fairly senior person. I mean, must have been, I must have been a consultant about eight or nine years, and we had a huge flood of non-pulmonary tuberculosis mainly and had to re-learn tuberculosis, but we could treat it very well.

When the big immigrant community arrived from Uganda, and I mentioned that we see a huge amount of tubercle, we were very worried about the children. We thought we were going to start seeing TBM and a lot of childhood tubercle. In fact, we saw extremely little. I think probably the main reason was, I guess, is that it was mainly non-pulmonary tubercle and the parents had reactivation or they weren't actually infectious most of them.
[Q] Oh right.  Yes, yes. 
So, actually we saw a lot of adults and adolescents, but we didn't see many children with tubercle.

Well, I suppose it started, as I said, at Cambridge but, after my house jobs, I went into the army, which was National Service for many years after the end of the war. It was two years National Service and three years on the reserve, when you did two weeks a year of extremely idle military service, and I had an old friend, he's dead now, Bob Torrance, who was a physiologist, a don of the dons, wonderful man. He was Oxford actually, but we met as students at UCH and he went to work at Porton, where the secret stuff was done, and also a lot of public stuff and he said there was this interesting place called the Microbiological Research Establishment, where there was really interesting work on microbiology and infection, which was in the public wheel and it was all published and everything and he said, 'Why don't you apply to go there?' So I applied for Porton first and the Far East second because I thought if I didn't get there, the last thing I wanted to do was to be stuck in a boring army camp in Germany, which was sort of the other thing you did mainly. So it was Porton and then I did two years full-time research, which led to my MD and all that sort of stuff and papers, and it was on how mucins promote infection. What happens is that in an experimental model if you inject, say, typhoid it might take, say 106 or 107 organisms to kill the mice. If you put it in with a bit of mucin, the lethal dosage is grossly diminished by say 103, 104, 105, 106 even, so, hundred, a thou... maybe 103, 104, and why did that happen? What was the process that was allowing the organism to get going? And anyway that was what I worked on for two years.
[Q] Was that your concern? I mean, was it something that you found yourself interested in or was it a programme already going? 
No. No, it was a new thing. The boss of the place offered me three projects. I can't remember the third one but one was a very, very biochemical thing in pharmacology. I knew, I knew I definitely wouldn't be up to that. The second one I can't remember what it was, but the third, that sounded interesting to me and it was very interesting. It was.

I realised I would never be good at research. You need to be really... first of all, you need to be very dextrous about how things work and I'm not particularly and the other thing is you... they thought I was good because I was careful and, but that's a different thing really and, you have to also be able to cone down on a very focused, accessible problem. Didn't Medawar call it this, the art of the possible?
[Q] The art of the possible, yes, yes, yes. 
Wasn't it, is that right? The art of the possible. Absolutely bang on. Now, I think there are two kinds of research folk. There's a very rare chap, Watson, Crick, who... Brenner, who don't do that, they go for the jugular and they're able to do it. I think the rest of us go for little things and that's the way you do it and... and I knew I wasn't terribly good at that. I could think of big questions which were totally useless to think about, except for the Watsons and the Cricks, and so I... I wanted it to be part of my life because of this business of coning down. I wanted really to try and get to know about some things. I mean, you know, if you're doing medicine you've got to... the patients asking you a question, you've got to... either got somebody else or see what you can do. I mean, if you were doing history, you wouldn't do it that way. You'd say: China between 43BC and 69AD, oh Europe, oh well, I don't know that. You know, you can do... you can't do that in medicine, can you? You've got a... you've got a problem before you and I couldn't... I couldn't really do with that as my whole life. I needed to have something I focused on.

I finished with the army, not having the slightest idea – really this isn't modesty, absolutely true – how that would go with medicine but I know I wanted to do medicine and when I came out of the army I went, about a week after I came out, I started work at the Central Middlesex Hospital which was an outstanding place with extremely good people and I worked for a remarkable man called Richard Asher who was very clever, very eccentric and we got on very well together. We enjoyed it, with a, with a New Zealander called Don Beaven who became great friends and it was a, it was a huge thing in my life. It was an incredibly busy place, incredibly busy. It was so busy you saw not only lots of the common things but quite a lot of the rare things and I look at my house jobs before the army and the year at the Central as a kind of great unformed nugget from which medicine sort of evolved.  Yes.  It was so busy. You saw everything all the time. It wasn't like the house jobs, by modern standards, cruelly sleepless because there was actually a rota but it was very busy.

It was stupid. You, you, you were on...  this is houseman, both surgical and medical...  you were on duty all the time pretty well and not quite all the time, but most of the time and there was a casualty officer in the day time. So at night you were also, as well as your own affairs in the wards, the casualty medical officer or the casualty surgical officer. You were the casualty person. So you got extremely short of sleep, and I know a few young doctors and they told me it's no good, they're not getting enough experience, I can tell you. Well, there must be some halfway house, mustn't there really? We must have been a considerable menace to the patients because we were so tired. It was a squalid casualty department in UCH. Again, you make these generalisations, you remember the episodes which show you what was going on and you sat on a sort of stool looking at a chap's cut or abscess or whatever it was and I used to sit on the steps and I used to nod to see, show the patient I understood what he was saying but the reason I nodded was to kind of close my eyes then I'd lift up and open my – I mean ludicrous. And, the surgicals I thought there might be three perforated peptic ulcers and a couple of appendices in one night, but you were at work the previous day and the following day. I mean really silly. And when I went to bed, there are tunnels at UCH between the bits, and I was three floors up, which is four floors from the basement. I sometimes used to sit on the stairs before I could feel strong enough to get up to my own bedroom.
[Q] So what were the rotas?
There were no rotas. You, your department...
[Q] No rotas? You just did, you worked for six months?    For that firm... 
Yeah. No, the surgical one was very, very good. You had one half weekend off every three weeks, and I wasn't married then, and I used to get on the train going to where we lived and fall asleep and by some miracle wake up and my mother used to say, 'Oh my God!' she thought I was dying. Actually, I felt perfectly well but she... actually, I have to say, the thing is, it sounds as if we were total slaves, but, again, climate of the times, it was a bit macho, really stupid. You felt you could take this. I mean really silly.
[Q] I mean nowadays one would say that actually such people were putting themselves at risk of illness in some way, wouldn't you? 
Yeah, yeah, I suppose we were.
[Q] But... you don't...
There was the occasional tragedy, but I've seen the odd tragedy in much more recent times too, doing medicine is so taxing. Another big element, now I think about it, is partnerships were much later. There was one chap married in my intake before we qualified, and he wasn't thought to be crazy, but he was thought to be pretty unusual really and even non-married partnerships. So you lived in the place all the time and your home was the Mess, as the army would put it, at UCH. And you... I mean, it... that was your life. So it wasn't actually as bad as it sounds. It was bad, particularly from the patients point of view, because you wouldn't know what mistake you were making, would you? I remember... but even now, you know, you see these tales of people giving the wrong injection, particularly intrathecally and they... they really curdle my blood, because at my junior stage as a houseman we knew the rules about that. I remember once sucking up some stuff into a syringe from a bowl on a trolley and giving it to the patient. It was the right thing, but I remember thinking: I must never, never do that again. I'll suck it up from the syringe that I've read the label of.
So these aren't new lessons. They're incredibly old ones. I remember once, it was in the middle of the night, I was injecting somebody with aminophylline and she had terribly, terribly difficult veins and I kept slipping out so I gave her the rest of it intramuscularly, and I had forgotten that the intramuscular injection, it was the right stuff, was a different concentration. It was very painful and she complained of terrible pain and, and I think that's the one, I must have made other mistakes because, you know, you do, but that's the one I remember. I told her what I'd done and she was very decent about it and then I gave her something for the pain. It wasn't, it wasn't a major error, but it was an error and, you, these, giving intrathecal!  When I was young, in infections you would get a lot of intrathecal treatment, but it was even then a thing to be pondered about, to be thought, doing it at all and giving what and how much. So when people kill people by doing intrathecal injections I don't... I don't know quite what can be happening really.
[Q] May... maybe the fact that drugs were relatively... the volume... the numbers of drugs were relatively new, your generation was perhaps more careful. 
Maybe, could be, could be but also, of course, we were also, the legal side was much looser. At night in UCH you got the key to the pharmacy and you wandered around the pharmacy till you got what you wanted. I mean, you'd be put in prison now for that, wouldn't you? And at the Central Middlesex we had a thing called 'resurrection mixture' which was – some registrar had invented – this is true. You know when people are in left ventricular failure, which of course you don't see so much nowadays because it was mostly hypertension or aortic valve disease, we saw a lot of people in bad LVF and you know they get to a point where they're not any longer sort of almost struggling for breath, almost got to somebody not breathing and really near to death, and this chap he invented this. We put in the syringe. I mean, would I be put in prison for this now, I don't know about this...
[Q] We'd better decide that. 
Decide that later. Nikethamide, which is a medullary stimulant, make him breathe, diamorphine which as you know, it's the great thing for... and aminophylline and we all mixed this up and gave the patients and they sort of woke up, started breathing. No clinical trial. Anyway, that's what we got. So you can see it was, a lot of stuff we did would be absolutely not on nowadays.

UCH was one of the... one of the medical schools, one of the few which had always been co-ed from the beginning. There were some purely female, the Royal Free and the West London, I think it was called, and a lot of the traditional ones which were purely male, and there was a thing called the Good Enough Report, I think in 1946, which saw how grizzly medical schools were and made various recommendations including getting professorial units, which a lot of them didn't have, and also I think it said they should all be co-ed. So, I remember this very well because there wasn't a sort of feeling; men and women at UCH. There weren't as many women, I suppose. Well I, I don't actually remember, but 10, 20%, something like that, and I remember friends who had gone from Cambridge to other medical schools, came to have coffee with you or whatever, you know, friends meeting, and they used to comment to me about there wasn't a sort of, 'Who are these women?' because it was never like that, and even then there were several consultant women. Miss Nightingale was the first assistant on the surgical unit. I worked with her a lot when I was house surgeon. Miss Wadge who was an ENT surgeon. Miss Dickens and Josephine Barnes, the dread Josephine Barnes, were gynaecologists. There's another thing. We were on ward round in the gynae ward and this woman, she became a dame, very famous woman, she died a few years ago, and she stood in front of this bed and said to us, 'You must remember that 5,000 women a year die of this illness'. That's one of the things I remember. And, so, there were quite a lot of women.

We had really good teaching, partly for what I mentioned before that a lot of people had come back from the wars, and I don't think I appreciated this at the time, but there were people there who, as supposedly junior doctors, had seen the most incredible amount of stuff of all kinds – tropical medicine, war wounds of course, everything – and they taught us mostly, I have to say, I don't have a sort of great father figure thing about this place, I have to say most of them were very conscientious and very good teachers. They could strip you off. There was a good deal more, you know, kind of aggression and sadism going around but, you know, it wasn't all that bad really. The women did get into a bit of, but they could get... give as much as they could... whatever it is – they could give as much as they got, you know.
So I do remember a lot of unnecessary sarcasm, which I thought was completely ridiculous. I remember there was a hand clinic even then. Pilcher was a forward looking chap and realised that people didn't treat hands with the respect they deserved and there was an incredibly arrogant surgical registrar that was doing this clinic and the patient was sitting there and he examined me about my knowledge of the finger anatomy, which was I would have to say, dismally absent then, he handed me the scalpel and said, 'Open this chap's finger', and I thought, that's a rather stupid thing to do. So I had plenty... I'm remembering the bad lessons, aren't I, more than the good ones.
[Q] Well, they obviously stand out, don't they?  They do stand out.  And I suppose that's one of the things one can say about, about, about education that, that you, if you're a sensitive person you, you do learn from the bad things but not necessarily to follow them one hopes.  You really do. 
Yeah. Yeah, it's true.

He liked Shakespeare and we happened to have read the same plays, so he got this illusion that I was a Shakespearean expert, and I'm afraid I was much too vain to dispossess of this, except very, very sort of tentatively, so this became a great thing about, 'Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erping... Erpingham', and all that sort of stuff but, no he was great fun, great fun, and brilliant diagnostician in the, in the current... in those terms.

When I left the Central I had... I was havering between doing paediatrics and adult medicine, and I went to the Sheffield Children's Hospital. Again, a very famous man called Ronald Illingworth who wrote lots of books about the normal child and development. Very stiff, stern man but, you know, a good chap, and I worked with him for one job and I realised first of all I was totally lost, I didn't know what was going on at all. I thought I knew everything, that I'd got membership and I was a typical, arrogant, young doctor. I started seeing these sick children and also were neonates then, before neonatology became a specialty and I hadn't the slightest idea what was going on. It took me, oh, I suppose six weeks or two months before I felt I had the slightest notion, but I also felt it was too veterinary. I even knew less what was going on than I did with the adults and I felt I couldn't do this as my speciality. It's really too vague. But we had enormous...
[Q] You had thought of doing paediatrics?
Yeah. Yeah, I had seriously thought of it. Yeah, yeah. It was the other thing, adult medicine or...  I knew I couldn't do surgery. I wasn't gifted enough with my hands and... I... well anyway, there were a lot of things I knew I wouldn't or couldn't do and the analytical side of medicine, trying to work out a difficult problem with the patient's rights being respected, it was those things together, really. But we had, it was the last phase of tuberculous meningitis and we had a lot of it in Sheffield. It was quite a poor place, and we had a number of patients, it was the last phase of it and, would, you believe this, I used to give intrathecal injections of streptomycin six times a week for six weeks. I mean... I mean it shivers your timbers, doesn't it, to think of it? But that's what we did and actually, to be fair, at that point it was uncertain whether intrathecal treatment was essential to get the good results and the reason for that was the MRC trials had shown before isoniazid had come in that – as you know, tuberculosis and meningitis are lethal diseases, everybody dies – they'd shown that intrathecal plus intramuscular was better than intramuscular. So the people in the trade at that time had natural fear about whether they would give complete treatment without intrathecal because, as you know, strep doesn't get across into CSF very well, not at all well.  So this is what we... we did, and the results were good because by that time we had isoniazid so maybe you didn't need to give intrathecal, but people didn't know so they gradually gave less and less and less trying it out and seeing if they could get away – meaning the patient surviving a good neurological state – without it. Actually, to tell you the truth I'm still a bit uncertain whether you wouldn't do better with a few intrathecal injections and it's still a little bit unsettled like most things, but nobody would believe me if I said that.

Well, one thing that happened only a few years after I got to St George's was, there was still quite a lot of smallpox coming into the country because there was a lot of immigration, and it was almost inevitable that the odd person would come in incubating it and would then develop the disease when they arrived. And at that time – long, long before the eradication of smallpox, which wasn't achieved until 1977 – it was a big problem because the older generation of fever doctors, as I mentioned before and in the context of the hospitals, were retiring or dying and the Raj had come to an end so there weren't very many people, in fact there were very few who knew what smallpox looked like and how to diagnose it. So what the Ministry of Health, as it was then called, did was to send one or two people away to learn about it, and they sent me to Madras, now Chennai, on the Coromandel coast of India. And there was a very famous smallpox man there called Dr Rao and I saw in a few weeks I think it was 238 patients with smallpox and I took photographs of nearly all of them. So I accumulated that wodge of experience of what smallpox was like and so when I came back, I was put on the panel of consultants who were called out if there was a question about whether somebody had smallpox or not and, of course, the vast majority didn't. They had chickenpox or insect bites or this or that or the other or erythema multiforme or, you know, some peculiar thing, but there was always the question of whether they might have smallpox, and on two occasions, one in my own unit and one elsewhere, they did and this was a terribly... most of them were quite easy because they were quite clearly something else, but some of them were very difficult. The problem is that when it's classical smallpox fully developed you can do it from a picture in the book. It's a terribly easy diagnosis.
[Q] Yes. 
But when it's developing or when it's very mild and modified or when it's very severe it can be a very difficult diagnosis, and the last outbreaks of smallpox in Britain and many others elsewhere had their origin in unrecognised haemorrhagic smallpox. That means when the person gets a haemorrhagic rash and dies before the characteristic smallpox rash appears, before it can be seen to be smallpox and nobody realises what it was and it's spread...
[Q] At that stage the patient would look like what, just... be a, a lot of... 
Septicaemia with haemorrhages and stuff, people would... haemorrhages, right?
[Q] Yes, yes.
Yeah, yeah. Like what we would now say, a Lassa Fever or an Ebola or something.
[Q] Yes, yes, yes. 
And that's something, I mean, unknown. People would be saying what on earth is going on.
[Q] Yes, yes, yes. 
And so you were called out quite a bit and you went out with this little box which contained various bits of kit, slides and syringes and capillary tubes to take specimens to send to the public health laboratory and they were, they were quite taxing some of these occasions because you might be sent out... be called out by a medical officer of health,  those are the people who actually rang you and said please come...  to some casualty department where the, all the patients and all the nurses had been told not to leave until this chap arrived, so you'd be met with 26 eyes looking at you with hatred while you, while you could...
[Q] And that was because, being so infectious, that everybody had to actually, as it were, like you, they were, they were frozen. 
To be recorded: your name, address, phone number so they could be followed daily for 16 days to see if they had a fever and, there were some, I must say, some quite funny episodes, but some quite taxing ones as well and, in actually fact, in actually fact, there were a couple of laboratory based things, as you remember, in Birmingham and in the School of Hygiene, but the first... sorry, the last imported case of smallpox was diagnosed by me at what was then the South Western Fever Hospital, which you remember.
[Q] Yes. 
And it was an elderly Indian gentleman who wasn't at all ill and he had modified smallpox because he had been vaccinated many times, but he quite clearly did have major smallpox and, as you know, the point is he might have been mild, but the virus could be just as likely to kill you or somebody else as anybody else who weren't vaccinated. So that was, I wouldn't say it was a big part of my life because the callouts were pretty rare, thank goodness, but it was a rather interesting, taxing bit of medicine going on at that time and then, of course, it all disappeared.

It is unusually rather a tough virus. Most viruses disappear, you know, if you don't get them into some other body. But it is a tough virus. It always has surprised me that the eradication campaign worked because it could be grown from various bits of other stuff and, in fact, when they used to dig up old graveyards when they were rebuilding the City of London, they always used to call out some smallpox person or some PH&S person to make sure about this, but I don't think they ever grew any smallpox from any of those sources.
[Q] So, theoretically people were still concerned that there might be, there might be smallpox in, in a body that had been buried several, even 100 years before?
They were concerned, but I think the concern was theoretical because I don't think it has been the event and the reason why smallpox was able to be eradicated was for that very reason. It's not wild in the jungles of Wiltshire or anything. It's not an animal disease, although there are many animal pox viruses which are pretty similar and probably related to the phylogeny of smallpox viruses where they come from. But smallpox spreads from person to person, doesn't hang around, apparently, for a very long time, at least it doesn't seem to be infectious for a long time and the disease, if you're careful, can be identified. So you can... you can, if you're very clever, like Henderson was, and very energetic you can trace a chain of contact which you can control and that isn't the case for many infections. And that, that was the, very theoretically, the basis of eradication, with of course huge political administrative logistic difficulties, but which was eventually achieved, and now is threatened by bioterrorism because there's undoubtedly a lot of smallpox virus in odd corners we don't know about.
[Q] When you talk about odd corners, you mean in laboratories or...
Well, I mean, the former Soviet Union had a huge programme, biological warfare programme, not just smallpox, a lot of other things, which they concealed very, very effectively and with huge mendacity, and then the Union broke up to all these many, I don't remember how many republics. Who's got it where, you know? We don't know about botulinous anthrax. It's almost certain that a number of people in Russia were killed by anthrax by escape from a biological warfare facility and so, you know, it's rather sad, again, like tubercle, after this extraordinary feat of eradicating a major world killer, which it certainly, certainly was, we're not sure if it's really out of danger now.
[Q] Oh right. Right.
I mean there's all the business of weaponising and all that but...  because another big lesson about smallpox, which is relevant to many, many other current viruses, is that Jenner published his book in 1798 and it became widespread very quickly – vaccination, and variolation – you know, the one before, was probably also pretty effective in the previous century. So that, from, well, it was eradicated in 1977 so it was about a century and three-quarters from having an effective method to eradication and what's been found with more recent viruses – measles, rubella – is that you have to achieve a very, very high level of control and keep the very high level before you've really any chance of getting rid of the disease, otherwise it springs up again.
[Q] So what would, why do you think that... is was a... that it was possible to do that with smallpox which hasn't, and it hasn't been possible with these other diseases? Is it just, is it about...
Well, I think for that, the thing is.  We used to see – you see measles and we saw bi-annually, you couldn't grow virus, virus for love or money any other time. It was there somewhere, sub-clinical infection, chronic infection, chronic carriage, animal – there are various reasons, it's different in different cases, why bugs can't necessarily be found from the patient. It's that really.
[Q] So smallpox must have been always rumbling on in a population somewhere?
That's right. That's right, yes. In density of population is the clue. If it was in a big dense population there'd be recurrent epidemics. If it's drooling around from village to village, you wouldn't know how to deal with it.

When you were called out to see a possible patient with smallpox you came out with this box, which had a form to send to the public health lab and this canister, which I can't open, yes I can, and the canister contained 31 ounces, it would be called, glass jar, some slides in a slide holder, some capillary tubes – can't get it out, let's get it all out – a little bulb to stick on the end of the capillary tubes, and a needle and another sort of tube, I've forgotten about which was which. And you took the appropriate specimen scraping the base – oh, and a hagedorn needle. That's a needle like an ordinary needle with a flat, flanged edge so you didn't have to pierce, but you could scrape things with. It's called... is it here somewhere? I can't see. I haven't got my glasses on. That's probably that. And you took specimens, appropriately, from mostly the patients' skin lesions, both fluid if you could get it into the capillary tube and scrapes to slide on... to scrape onto slides and dry, and then you called up some Hell's Angels and these motorcyclists would take this to Colindale. It wasn't... and they'd electron microscope it, but it wasn't 24 hour cover as it is now and they'd grow the smallpox virus or, in most cases, the chickenpox virus and... it wasn't much help at that moment because you had to make the decision about whether to... it was like pressing a bomb thing and the whole public health system of the country, voom, or not. So it was actually pretty onerous. The only thing was that you knew perfectly well what most things were and they weren't smallpox. But when you thought it was, you actually, you made a phone call and everything went up in the smoke. All the people, surroundings, all the families had to be kept in where they were, be followed up for 16 days. The patient had to go to then a smallpox hospital which was open specially on the edge of a fever hospital and, as you can imagine, endless admin and public relations and tracing and where the patient had come from, where they'd been to. The patient... of the two patients I saw in England with smallpox, one was the Indian man and the other was a child who had come into my own unit. It was the receiving room for fevers and my registrar at the time rang me up and said, 'I think we've got smallpox here', and I said, 'What do you mean, another generalised vaccinia?' which is one of the things that looks like smallpox. He said, 'No, no, I, I think, I think it is'. And he was right.
[Q] Gosh. 
And this child who was three had been twice in the previous week in crowded doctors' surgeries in Tooting, being diagnosed as chickenpox and nobody got smallpox. Extraordinary. It's this capriciousness of infectious disease. And, nobody actually got it, although it was technically an outbreak because the child was obviously very distressed. It was an Indian child and mother and, the mother although it had finished feeding had put the child to her breast to comfort it and the child had, although she was fully vaccinated, she was very highly protected, but he, he'd, he'd bitten her breast slightly and she got one smallpox lesion. It's called variola innoculatae, an inoculated variolar lesion and for that reason it was technically and in the World Health records it's an outbreak because somebody else got it but it wasn't really an outbreak and none of those doctors' surgeries. But you can imagine the work of going to that surgery, finding who'd been there and what happened and tracing them for 16 days. It was a hugely onerous thing actually.
[Q] And who did all that work? That was... 
Medical officers of health.
[Q] Right. 
It was before the decline of Public Health and the ascent of Community Medicine, whatever that was and, and then, in actuality there's quite a serious point there. The Medical Officer of Health used to be a person of immense power and authority and knowledge, they'd all done fevers, and then it all became Community Medicine, about committees and, and arranging things and one thing and another and, they didn't have the experience or the training for that. But they were, they were put in a very difficult position because if somebody came in querying Lassa fever they were meant to be the people and for many, many years before they kind of rebounded into Public Health Medicine more in the old-fashioned sense and there were consultants in communicable disease control I used to get endless phone calls from MOHs who, who, poor chaps, didn't know what to do because it... there was nothing... they weren't being silly or ignorant. They just, it wasn't their trade and yet they were being put in this position of seeing the most acutely daunting pubic health emergencies.
[Q] Do you think we're back now in a safer position in the UK? 
I think we are, partly in a way bioterrorism, but even before that. The idea of communicable disease control people whose... actually, their sharp business is what you do when you get queried Legionnaire's disease and very...  but it was still, it was still... I don't remember when infectious disease became respectable. When I was made a professor, which was in, I think, I think it was 1972, the medical school made me a Professor of Microbial Diseases and the reason for that, would you believe it, was because Professor of Infectious Diseases sounded so incredibly old hat. Isn't that amazing? And now, of course, all the best people want to do infectious diseases, except general practice of course.

Coming back to the interest in infection and medicine partly was this business of an intense interest versus the generality of medicine, and partly the actual interest in how infections work, both epidemiologically and in the patient. And the other reason I found that quite intensely interesting is that it's a wonderful teaching tool that... you know, host and parasite, the host is that patient there and the parasite – what's it doing, how do they relate, what happens, both at the individual level, how do you treat meningitis, and what is this bug doing? And that, again, is communication with patients. The patient says, which is an only too reasonable question, 'Why did my child get meningitis?' That's an extraordinarily difficult question, and we do have answers, but rather kind of high-tech, fancy answers. It's very hard to bring those to come to terms with the patient's or the relatives' biological understanding. Do you see what I mean?  It's trying to...
[Q] Yes, yes, yes, yes. 
And when we talk about communication that's exactly the kind of point which crops up. But, I mean, it's also a wonderful tool because I think medical students, they're very nice but they can be pretty boring, aren't they, with textbooks and stuff and you... when you see, sometimes it directly impacts on what you see. Now, take gastroenteritis. We saw Shigella – that's dysentery – and Salmonella and all these bugs, and unknown ones, epidemics, individual cases, lots of them, and then we started seeing ones with multiple resistance to antibiotics and I found this intensely difficult to understand that the actual mechanism, the biochemical mechanism by which... the gene coding for the protein which makes you resistant to streptomycin, is a completely different product from the one giving you resistance to tetracycline or to penicillin. How is it they could all be jumbled together? I mean, that's really peculiar thing, isn't it, really? And, some Japanese workers found a fascinating thing, which, of course, none of us read Japanese so we didn't know, but the year after one called Naomi Datta at the Hammersmith published this book on transferable drug resistance and in those days I used to read The Journal of Hygiene, as it was then called, and it's one of those eureka moments – not that I found it, but I thought, read the paper and think, Ha! That's it! Which is a terrific thrill, isn't it, when you see a science thing linking up with what you're looking at.
[Q] Yes.
And the basis of it is, as you well know, it's horizontal gene transfer in this case, by plasmins bits of DNA floating round free of the chromosome, which, as we now know, have incredibly ingenious mechanisms to gather different genes together, and it's a major – it's not the only mechanism – it's the major mechanism of drug resistance and this absolutely precise and exactly was what you were seeing, and it also explained why antibiotic resistance... well, one of the reasons why antibiotic resistance was a huge problem. So, it was one of the, I mean, mostly you don't know that, you just don't know what's going on, but this was a case where the science and the medicine and the epidemiology, bingo, they came linking up completely really.

Because you were the infection man, as it then became, the question of what drug to treat what disease became a big issue and then... I never actually did major research on antibiotics, trivial things really, but I was sitting in a lecture room and next to me was Francis O'Grady who was Bart's chap who became foundation professor of microbiology at Nottingham, the then new medical school, and he said, 'I want to discuss something with you, Harold'. We'd already  made, made medical films together about antibiotic usage, and he asked me to become co-author of a book called Antibiotic and Chemotherapy, which he'd been writing with a chap called Paul Garrod, grand old man of antibiotics. And they were both microbiologists, and I'd read that book avidly and I don't usually think, you know, I'd like to write that book, except maybe War and Peace or something like that but, I... looked at this book and I thought, you know, it's very good but, you know, if they were clinicians they'd do it this way or that way. So, actually when he said this I leapt on it. Instead of saying, 'Oh my God, what a lot of work!' I said, 'Yes I'd really love to do this', and then that led to about, what, I don't know, 25 or 30 years of writing successive editions of this book.
[Q] A series of it. You went through, what, three? It's got to number eight hasn't it? 
I think I did four editions, I think, with successfully more and more people involved and now there's the first, the last edition out was without Francis and me, but with a lot of other people. And for that reason I got asked to lecture a lot and write a lot about antibiotics and how to use them and it wasn't so much basic biology of antibiotics - that was really another... other people's job - but it was to do with rational use of antibiotics. What is the right way of using this drug so that the cost benefit to the patient is best and the risks of resistance are lowest and, although it sounds incredibly easy: that bug, treat... as you know, it's actually quite a difficult thing to answer in many ways.

The main thing is what Ehrlich would have said was the 'magic bullet' idea. You want as much action on the bug and as little on the host. That's obvious, isn't it? But you've got to balance that as an equation, maybe subconsciously with every patient really. Are they allergic to the drug? Have they got kidney failure? What's their age? What's their size? The, the stuff which we do kind of semi-automatically, but maybe not quite consciously enough in many cases. And then, when you know the bug, relatively easy you know which drugs or you... can look them up in a book, which drugs are appropriate, then you put the rest of the stuff together and say, do that in that dose. I think that all sounds so incredibly elementary, but most of the terrible mistakes I've seen have been because people don't do that quite at that level. They say, 'I want a drug for septicaemia or for pneumonia'. There's no such thing. I mean, antibiotics don't resolve inflammatory exulation of the lung. They don't stop the inflammatory cascade, which is killing somebody with septicaemia. All they do, not quite all, but for practical purposes all they do, is to inhibit or kill bugs and unless you go to the actual nub of the thing to say which bugs do I want to kill because I know or I think it's this one, but it could be that one and, then again, it could be that one, it doesn't matter because the patient will get better anyway, but it could be that one, but although it's only 1% it will kill him. So, again, there's that equation of the importance of the possible pathogens. I mean, it sounds so incredibly banal, but I really think that most mistakes are because people don't go through... go through that elementary ground of saying which bug does the patient... has the patient got an infection? What's the cause of it? Do I know? Do I think? Do I... how should I go about that thing? And then what's this equation between the drugs and the bug? I suppose actually the truth is we should be doing this with every, every medicine, shouldn't we, but we don't all the time.
[Q] Yes, yes, yes. 
And I think a big part of my life was trying to teach people about that.
[Q] It's almost about you were trying to teach a... process of clinical reasoning. Is that, is that...
Yes, actually, that's right. I when I started reading a bit, which I didn't really understand, about, you know, rational diagnosis and decision theory of medicine, which was a bit beyond me, but I realised in a dim sort of way that actually that's what you're doing. It's decision theory, and I don't mean intuitively in the sense that it's by some mystical, magical insight which I got. What I mean is that you're subconsciously or consciously balancing up these factors as well as you can, in the light of what you know, exactly that.
[Q] Yes, yes. And, and do you feel that we... that, that you've been able to get that message across, or do you think it's, it's slipping away from us? 
Well, no actually. No, no, I think the mistakes are just as crass as they always were, but I probably got it across to some people some of the time, including myself. No, actually, I, I don't know really. There's all the pharmacokinetics of the drug. I mean, without joking about it, we still do see terrible things about using drugs, which people don't need. I used to have a slide when I was teaching to... at the London School of Hygiene, and the end of it said, about antibiotics, 'Most people who get them don't need them, and most people who need them don't get them', which is, I'm afraid, the case in the world. But, no, no I wouldn't say it was completely futile. No, no, I wouldn't say that, but I'd say it was still a pretty hard thing to follow.
Probably the biggest influence has been the influence mainly in general practise to say surely not everyone needs drugs all the time, and the fact that that's spread to patients with their more anti-doctor, anti-medicine, anti this horrible poison because in my early years of this specialty I would give lectures to, forgive me, GPs. I'd make some very modest remark about maybe you could be a bit more restrictive about, in this particular situation, this mild sore throat and they, they practically attacked me. They said, 'What? Not give an antibiotic?' And practically drive me out of the room. Years later it was the other way around, and patients, too, not quite so... but let's face it, most people want some drug, don't they, when they come to see us.

You see I think the... the magical moment about this would have come not in your generation or even in mine because people always talk about penicillin, Fleming and Florey and blah, blah, they're all very important, but the really biggie - which is funny, people don't write about so much – was sulfonamides. And sulfanilamide, I think, was about 1936 and some of the sulfonamides came into general use in 1938 and what did you see? You saw meningococcal meningitis being cured. Children now that's growing up, well. You saw puerperal sepsis – a lot of abortion, septic abortion. You saw women dying of puerperal sepsis, living. You saw pneumonia being cured. I mean, to me, it's funny people don't say sulfonamides as much as they do penicillin. It must have been the most amazing time. Within a year or so, the... there was a chap called Stanley Banks who was the grand old man of infectious diseases at... at a hospital in South-East London, one of the big fever hospitals. He was sort of Dwyer, very energetic chap – I must tell you about that... he interviewed me at my consultant interview. He... wrote a series of about, I don't know, about 30, 40 patients meningococcal meningitis, and there was one death – unthinkable. By 1943, there were thousands being reported with mortalities of between 5 and 9%, which is about now. This was before penicillin.
[Q] Really, yes. 
Can I tell you about being appointed as a consultant?
[Q] Yes. 
Again, it was very stately at St George's. There was a board of governors and they had prayers before the meeting and the new, no I'm... no, that was different. That was not getting my gold watch. No, the interview for the... for the consultant thing was, mostly was... would have been just, you know, kind of trying to talk about your career and what you were interested in, but at that level it wasn't a viva. But Stanley Banks – there was this strange chap, general physician, coming into the fever territory, not having seen 50,000 cases of... which he obviously thought it was a put up job by these teaching hospital bastards, you see. So, rather to my surprise, he gave me a viva in, in the, in the consultant interview, you know! It was quite comical really. So, anyway I obviously answered to satisfactorily cause at some point he said, 'Yes, yes, fine, fine, go on', but it was a steep learning curve, yeah. Sorry, I diverted on...
[Q] No, no, I think that, I think it's very, very interesting. I mean the... am I right in saying sulfonamides were, it M&B, what... 
Yeah M&B, M&B693. Very poisonous things, but they were a whole lot less poisonous than dying of meningitis. That's for sure. Yeah. No, they were... we, we used them quite extensively for many years after I... they're still used for some things, rather unusual infections but, for many years we used them for meningitis among other things and if you used them carefully... I did make several people ill by using them not right but, they, they, you know, they're better than meningitis.

[Q] Was meningitis something that you, you found yourself working with because it was just so much a, a feature of, of a fever physician's life or... did you find a... 
It, it wasn't so hugely common. One of the chap who came to work with me from Thailand, he did a study of about 10 years of meningitis, and I think it was about just under 300 patients. It wasn't... maybe like 30 a year, it wasn't... and some of them were viruses, so it wasn't so incredibly, but I did find it very taxing and you were always so terribly worried about the risk of neurological damage and...
[Q] Yes, and the speed with which people can go off. 
Speed, speed. Oh, terrifying, terrifying. Meningococcal septicaemia kills people faster than haemorrhagic smallpox.
[Q] Yes, yes. 
Unbelievable.
[Q] I remember running with you down the corridor. 
Do you, really?
[Q] My first case, case of... 
Really?
[Q] I remember thinking this is very interesting. I don't think I'd run with a physician before except to a cardiac arrest. 
Really? I don't remember that. How extraordinary.
[Q] But we... but we needed to run because the patient was beginning to get sicker in front of our eyes. 
Yeah, we... felt ourselves extremely lucky to have got somebody round then. Now it's all intensive care stuff, complicated management. When I realised the circulatory side was a bit... getting too hard for me, I used to call in... long before intensive care units, which Tony Dornhorst said in his sardonic way, 'We're more intensive than careful', a... chap called Brian Robinson, I don't know if you remember him. He was a card-carrying cardiologist, but more interested, too, circulatory issues, and I used to ring him up at home. He would come in and we'd work together with this patient, trying to, I haven't got figures, anyway, you were jolly lucky to get away with it. That's the septicaemic end. Meningitis, pneumococcal meningitis was the great dreadful one. If a person had meningitis, but not septicaemia from meningococcal you really felt you should be able to get away with it.

One saw the... the phases when things were still major epidemics. In the one case, measles because there wasn't a vaccine, and in the other case pertussis. There was a vaccine, but it wasn't quite widespread enough, and one thing is they were both very bad diseases even in a relatively wealthy country, and in the Third World they're major killers of children. And the vaccine controversies that happened, they were long apart. The pertussis one happened in '79 and '80 because there was a report of children being brain damaged by pertussis vaccine, and it was never really authenticated. It's very hard to disprove a thing like that really, but it did lead to a huge lack of confidence and a huge diminution in the, in the amount of triple vaccine being given, far greater reduction than the recent one about MMR. And the result of that was, two, well actually I think three, but two very substantial epidemics of pertussis, and it illustrated an interesting scientific point and also a public point. The scientific point was that you need to immunise a large proportion of the susceptible population, and keep that level of immunity up before you really control the disease and the... the sort of public policy side is that a good vaccine is really its own worst enemy because as the vaccine works more and more any, either known or putative adverse effects, get thrown into sharp relief. I mean the really gross example is polio, which is of course a dreadful disease, and as its vanished the odd person, one in a million, gets polio from the vaccine, but one in a million's too many if there's no polio.
[Q] Yes, yes. 
Actually it's quite interesting. I was reviewing a recent book on smallpox and, you know, variolation happened before Jenner giving, you hope, attenuated smallpox to prevent further attacks, and that whole issue came up about the cost benefit, as we would put it now. And the... chap who was the secretary of the Royal Society did research on this and showed that despite the harm from vaccine it was still a jolly good thing to do. That was when smallpox probably killed about 7% of the  population, because as it became controlled was vaccine harmful became a much more cogent question and that's still... that issue is still very much with us today because, in fact, this chap Jurin said some quote to the effect that people see potential harm much more when they don't feel a... in danger themselves, which is perfectly true.
[Q] Yes, yes, yes, yes. 
So it was, it was an interesting phase that. But pertussis is really a very nasty disease. I think the Japanese, which I don't know, but I think the name means 100 days cough and the children could be awfully ill and coughing in the most awful prolonged way and really very sick for weeks and weeks on end and driving their parents to distraction. As I say, in a rich country, except for the neonate, it's not really actually a life-endangering disease, or very rarely so, but it's still a singularly unpleasant disease and the cough... actually to see a small baby taking a breath and going completely blue and not breathing, I've known very experienced ward sisters who felt really panicky, as I did, I mean they, well, mostly, thank goodness, they start breathing again, but it's, it's really a terrifying. I once gave a lecture at the Royal College of Physicians and I took a tape of, a child having a coughing and apnoeic spell with pertussis, and you could feel the audience's toes curling up because they felt... it's really terrifying, a really just frightening thing to see and to experience.
[Q] And, and does it sometimes happen that a child does die? 
Well, yes, small. It's obviously more lethal for neonates and small babies and they can die. They go into intensive care now, of course, and in, in previous generations and in poor countries today there's a very substantial death rate, but it's mostly, parents are naturally terrified. The other thing, which now I think about it is that mostly between these attacks the child looks perfectly all right. So the, the mother brings the baby up to casualty or the child up to casualty and says she's having these terrible... and the doctor looks at the child, listens to its chest and... there's nothing wrong with it and what are you fussing about, but once you see the attack you know what she's fussing about. Extraordinary difference really.
[Q] And, and the death in pertussis is that usually, does that, the apnoeic attacks that you described, just so that people understand, is that, the breathing usually continues, doesn't it? 
Yes. That comes good nearly always or nowadays with proper ventilation. It comes good with that, but it's pneumonia I think mainly in poor countries. I dug up the old autopsy books once for the Old Grove Fever Hospital and these really dreadfully painful lists of deaths with children from pertussis, bronchial pneumonia. And that chap Morley showed that, both in the case of measles and pertussis, the death rate and complication rate and complication types in, as he was there in Nigeria in these, I suppose in the '60s were just like they were in the 1900s and 1910s and 1920s in Britain. It was a, an ethnic thing or a genetic thing. We don't know, probably, probably nutritional and it was a devastating disease here and elsewhere but if, if you're not seeing it... you used to hear people saying what are they fussing about, measles.
[Q] Yes. Yes. And internationally is it still a, a threatening... 
I don't know the recent figures. Measles and pertussis immunisation are much more widespread, but I imagine in the poorest places it probably still is. I don't know the answer to that.

You're proposing to do something to a normal, your normal child, so maybe he'll get measles, maybe he won't, you know. It's actually, a lot of the public controversies of... about this don't recognise that. I'm not saying you should yield to that naturally and don't immunise people, but I'm saying it's very difficult because I'm obviously strongly in favour of immunisation.
[Q] What about measles? Is, is... 
Well, measles, the main complication was pneumonia and the other big complication, which people trivialise, is otitis media, which as you know often leads to deafness, and is itself a painful and miserable thing. And then about one in 1000 got encephalitis which was sometimes... so, I mean, one in 1000 doesn't sound much, but if everyone gets measles it's a lot of people. So, you know, when the disease was common, that's a substantial thing to contend with, which I've seen a number of times.
[Q] And... and the modern, controversies with the MMR vaccine and such like, has that, did that make you gnash your teeth or...
Well, it does a bit because a lot of it is really nonsensical really at an intellectual level, but it's not nonsensical emotionally. And it's extraordinarily difficult. One of the bits of research we did on pertussis, a chap called Ian Johnston who's now a chest physician in Nottingham, was really a very, very detailed epidemiological study of, I think it was about 170 children or something with about... with two controls for each child, and in order to not to confound for the social background it was done in schools so, roughly speaking, people in the same school in Merton, would be more or less the same social class and the same family structures. And he did enormously detailed lung function studies on children known to have had pertussis at various times before with their controls. And the answer really was in British children in that time, which would have been, I suppose, the '70 or '80, '80, there wasn't evidence of lung damage following pertussis. Now, there are two snags about that. First of all, poor countries as opposed to here, and the other thing is a rare consequence and, as I said before, we used to do chest surgery on children who'd had... who had bronchiectasis and said to have had it following pertussis, and if you said would that exclude... it was a good study, I'd stand by every word of it, I think it was just actually a very good study. I mean, it was in combination with Ross Anderson, you know, the professor of epidemiology and, and, and Alan was a very careful chap. It was really good. But if you said,  'Oh, does that exclude the possibility of a patient getting bronchiectasis, maybe one in 1000 cases?' Well, no, it doesn't because you can't do that sort of... the work is too big. So, I think, I think most of the... I was on the joint committee of vaccination for many years, the main pontificating body about this, and I think it was a jolly good committee which did very good work and I think the public health relationships of the people concerned, not on the committee, but in the Department of Health and the Public Health Service, with what was about as honest and straightforward as you could make them within the limits of mutual understanding. I really would defend them, what they did, not because I was personally involved with that aspect, but I think it was valid. But at the end of the day there's this thing we were saying. At the end of the day you've got: a) doing something to your normal child, which he might not get or might not get badly and the other thing is, you know, rare, what about rare things. Do you think one in 1000 children might get this. Actually, as you know, it's extraordinarily difficult to say that. You can't really. So, you can't really totally, honestly answer people about that.
[Q] And also quantification of risk is such a difficult thing to take on board, isn't it?
Very hard. And I won't go into the modern Wakefield thing, but the... the old pertussis one, which I knew more about and was on various studies and committees about trying to work it out, it really was this classical epidemiological thing. They saw children in Great Ormond Street with bad neurological conditions and some of them said they'd had pertussis and the mother said it followed the vaccine. Well, you know how faulty that can be, without any evil intent. All our memories are faulty and if something terrible happens... We, we had one child, I remember, who was... the mother told me that she was wheeling the pushchair on the way to have the pertussis vaccine, the triple vaccine, and the child had a fit. Well, now, if it had it an hour later wouldn't you yourself and I would, I'd say I know it's not epidimial, but I truly believe that was caused by the vaccine and that's what epidemiology partly is about, isn't it really? It's extremely hard. I think it's really, you really do want a cause for things. It's funny that people call witchcraft irrational. I mean, it's not irrational at all. It's, you know, you want to know a cause for something and you look for it. So, anyway, that, the answer, the actual scientific answer to the pertussis brain damage answer is, if it happens at all it's so rare that you can't measure it. Now, that still wouldn't comfort a parent worried about it,but that's, that's the true answer.
[Q] Yes. Yes. Yes.
It might be like one in 300,000 or something.
[Q] Yes. Yes. Yes. And it must be some form of comfort to, to blame the government or the, or the scientists.
Oh yes, absolutely.  One gets contamination, that contamination happens.  It's dirty vaccine really. I mean, as you know what it is, the toxoids of diphtheria and tetanus are, are toxoids, they're pretty clean things and if you think of the millions of people who've had those, nobody's said they're causing harm. It's quite remarkable actually but the pertussis before the acellular pertussis vaccine, which as you know is coming in more and more, it was killed pertussis bugs. I mean, disgusting really when you think about it. All those antigens, which you don't need, might harm you. I mean, when you think about it, it's horrible. It just works.
[Q] And the early measles vaccine was pretty grim, wasn't it?
Well, yes, and some were rejected because of that but the later ones, they did cause some unwanted effects, which were mainly really essentially mild measles but there was, again, controversy about that... things about that.

There were other dangerous pathogens, Ebola and Lassa fever, or the threat of them and this was, curiously enough, much more worrying than smallpox because smallpox you could protect, I saw all these patients. I wasn't worried because I was vaccinated up to the eyes. In fact my children got terribly fed up with this because I'd come home and say, 'You've got to be vaccinated', and they'd say, 'Oh dad, not again!' They were, they were the most vaccinated children in the world. But Lassa fever, which actually turned out to be pretty non-infectious unless you're looking after a patient with advanced disease, was much more a worry because you couldn't protect your staff or yourself so that really, although it was a rare issue, it was a more worrying one, but I suppose, if we're going on a bit, the biggest thing was the advent of AIDS. Do you want to go onto that now at all?
[Q] Yes. Yes. That was... 
Well, AIDS started and came, started to come in a relatively big way in about three or four years before I retired, and it had huge effect on, well, the world and our unit. On the sort of scientific side, you had to rejig your whole diagnostic process for things which were quite unfamiliar and not seen before at my advanced age; it was really interesting in that way. I remember being in America, in Atlanta, when it had already got going there, but hadn't really got going here, and my old friend took me to a clinical meeting in the Grady Hospital, and they were talking about this patient who, who'd been taken in of the street. He wasn't a chap with leukaemia or anything like that, and I could see what they were going on. He had a sort of pneumonia and I said, 'Are you trying to tell me this chap's got pneuomocystis pneumonia?' and they said, 'Yes, doctor, (idiot limey)', not realising... I mean, in reality I couldn't think of the idea of apparently a previously healthy person coming in with this rare disease which we associated with profound immuno-suppression, and then of course we started seeing it here as one of the previous, as one of the primary presenting features of AIDS.
[Q] And at that stage were you seeing it without having... before the idea of, of AIDS had been understood? 
Oh no. We knew the idea of AIDS... all the San Francisco. No, it was a familiar idea, it just hadn't arrived. So we saw, I don't remember, it was nothing like what they see now, I know from my successors, but we saw a lot of AIDS in my last three or four years. And as I say, it was extremely interesting clinically, but it was... there were many, many problems. One was our unit was, on the whole, an optimistic unit. We tended to have patients we reckoned would go out well because, not because of us being clever, but the sort of diseases that they had and we had to get used to the idea of young people, all young people dying in the most horrible, horrible ways, and it was... it was a shaker to the morale of our unit. And then we had big troubles administratively, getting funding for community care and had an enormous amount of trouble screwing money out of people to undertake this care.
[Q] Why do you think that was? What happened? 
Well, I think one thing was a purely sort of technical thing, which was that at that time most of the patients went to the old major STD clinics, as they were then called, which were the Middlesex and at Mary's and the London, but of course, the patients came from everywhere including South-West London so they came to us as well and the, the, whatever it was, district or... no, no, the Regional Medical Officers had great trouble in accepting this and I... I wrote them a really stinking letter telling them they had to get a grip of this and asking the Sir the somebody, somebody, the regional chairman, to come to the unit, which he did, and the sister of our unit, Jenny Yates, now Jenny Moore, was a tremendous, marvellous character, very good technical nurse and very calm. She took this whole thing on board. She trained as a counsellor as well and I have to say – it sounds a bit arrogant – the... the unit was a bit of a haven of... of common sense and sensibility in a sea of prejudice and horribleness.
[Q] Really?
So the chairman came down. I made sure Jenny was on duty, and in about five minutes she had him waving his paws in the air, and about two days later we got £1.6 million. So, you know... I went round saying to people, 'Look, I've written this letter and all this money's come in. I must do this more often', and the chaps were saying, 'No, no, Harry, it's because you don't do it often you got the money!'

It was mainly prejudice of an order which, in my naivety, I hadn't realised was possible, and you realised that the undercurrent, which you knew about vaguely, among doctors and nurses of illness is a punishment for sin was rising up through the undergrowth and especially sexual sin.
[Q] Yes, that's extraordinary. 
And we found that, everybody found, not us, surgeons wouldn't look at patients. I mean the risk of infection, as you know, it's either blood or sex and the idea of, you know, being a danger to any ordinary... it was no more dangerous than gastroenteritis to an ordinary doctor. But it was so common. I'm, I... as you know, I'm not a particularly touchy-feely kind of doctor, but I started shaking hands and sitting on the bed in a big way because the patients were so isolated. And many doctors, not just surgeons, GPs, consultants, I mean, most of them took it on board. It was just a terrible thing. But some were very prejudiced, and I remember we, we made some really bad things. A dying patient with, I think he had toxoplasma encephalitis, I think, but they often had many, many infections, as you know – wanted to go home and his partner who was, as so often, extremely loyal, wanted to take him home and we thought we'd organised everything, and then he died at home and they, they – the partner wrote me a very bitter letter saying how much we'd let him down and the GP had refused to go and visit.
[Q] Good heavens. 
And the district nurse had refused to go and visit and I didn't actually realise this was possible. I mean, I suppose nowadays you'd report him to GMC or something, but now, I have to say, that was the early days. People on the whole got over the sort of thing and realised where they were and these were sick people and, of course, it was long before HAART – Highly Active Anti-Retroviral Therapy – is was actually, it was before anything except the beginning of, of the, nucleus side analogue drugs. So actually they, they died basically.
[Q] And what, what was just... what was the date that you first started seeing patients? 
Well, I retired from St George's in 1988. So, I suppose it was '83, '84 mainly it started coming and there still wasn't much actually by the time I retired, but I probably looked after 35, 40 patients, something of that order and it was a really big moment for all those reasons, all combined together.
[Q] And did you have actively to educate people in the unit or was it just a process of diffusion? 
Oh, I don't think I did. Jenny Yates was, she just acted in a sensible way and were the junior staff and nurses worried? I don't really remember actually. I don't remember, but she... she, you know, she was an old-fashioned sister. She was there a lot of the time and she then became, she has just retired actually. She went to her retirement party from being, I suppose, the equivalent of the matron of St George's and, I mean, boy, it was a big, big thing.
[Q] And did you, did you see a process of change in attitudes and, and... 
Yes.
[Q] ... and organisation?
Yeah. I wouldn't say in my unit particularly because as I say, I think we started off on more or less the right wavelength because of Jenny but, oh yes, people got calmer over the years and it's still, it's still a dreadful disease with awfully difficult treatment, as you well know, but, you know, people can deal with it.
[Q] And, and your optimistic unit, not used to dealing with people dying, did you find you had to start talking about dying in, in a different way or... 
I suppose the truthful answer is I should have done but I don't know that I did. I think it was sort of osmosis more than – yeah, yeah, I think that's probably we should have done more going over it with people than we did. Yeah.

I think there is a certain thing about doctors thinking of patients as slightly below, and I think it comes up as a question of manners, of civility and politeness. I think you often see... I suppose, as a student rushing into a room with a lot of people and a lot of things you see, and I'm sure I must have been as guilty as the next man of it, were to do with of civility and, of course, the patient is the underdog. How much more of an underdog can you be if you're in fear of your life and, and your health or your fam... or your loved ones? I mean, you know, Virchow, Rudolph Virchow, the founder of cellular pathology, was a great social reformer and he said, I don't actually, remember the exact quotation, but something to the effect that doctors are the natural attorneys of the poor, which is that thought, really. So I think, but I think truly, although that is a point and, as you know, from various things I've sounded off about, I think doctors could be a hell of a lot more polite, quite apart from the official care, but I think the, the much bigger issue is the whole business about communication and how doctors and patients understand each other, which is huge and maybe we could go into that a little bit. I think the misunderstandings are immense. In fact, in my gloomier moments, I think most of doctors and patients is to do with misunderstanding actually, it's so vast. And I think there's, there's a bit where people do get it slightly wrong, which is that everybody knows the emotional blocks, or they should do. People are afraid going to a doctor is... I mean, I'm not talking about trivial illnesses. I'm talking about existence or fear of bad illness. Actually, I don't believe in the word trivial about illnesses but... old Alec Cooke, who's the, who just missed his 100th birthday, had a lovely saying which is that a minor operation is one done on somebody else. I think a trivial illness is somebody else's illnesses. And I think really that's quite true. What was I talking about? About misunderstanding, and they, the emotion box... denial, fear, anxiety, I mean, not wanting to go to this awful thing of, the awful thing about hospital is the awful escalator you tread on with great trepidation, including you and me, I would imagine... and that's all known about. I don't think I need to expand it. We all know about it. The question is how you tackle it and the, the thing, the enormity of the thing when it's really bad that it's so terrible for the patient to be at these risks... all of us, any of us... that I think is quite understandable that doctors and hospitals do become slightly detached, depersonalising places because I think it's the only way they can handle it and it's the balance between that and, you know, being au fait with what the patient's experiencing. So I don't really feel very critical when... I think doctors are better now. I think we were a bit arrogant when I was a young doctor and student. You didn't really, and I suppose you are much younger, you don't feel, feel death, I suppose, to knowing about it, and I think probably we didn't really take on board this huge difference between our situation and the patient's as much as the young doctors do now, I think, because they're told about it.

What I think people underestimate are the intellectual blocks. I'm not talking about language blocks or long words. I'm talking about what's going on. I mean, we say, let's think. The patient comes in and says, 'I'm short of breath', and you say, 'Are your ankles swollen?' I mean what the heck is this chap talking about? That's really bizarre, isn't it, if you haven't got a scientific training, and you could think of endless examples of that and you really, even in supposedly very educated people, you find the most enormous... what is the liver, doctor? You know. Well, I mean, I actually don't know exactly. It's very complicated, but that, that sort of thing, enormous blocks, and I think people underestimate that. And, I mean, what you're doing in medicine is I think two different things. I don't actually do think they fit together very well. You're trying to interpret the patient's problem in your own mental structure of scientific medicine and, at the same time, if you've got time, you're trying to understand how the patient sees the problem, and she obviously may need time. And I think those are two pretty difficult horses to ride at the same time, but that's what you're trying to do, and what I'm saying is that we all know about the fear and all that, anxiety, but I think we often underestimate this thing about what is this chap going on about.
I... I had an experience last night because our builder in Wales, a very nice chap, an old friend, I rang up and I spoke to his wife, who was very worried about him. He's diabetic and his daughter is insisting he should have a CT scan and I know what the problem is, in general. It's something to do with diabetic eyes and he's going to see the doctor, who's a very good GP they trust, today. And I was thinking that's a good example, isn't it? He must have a CT scan. Well, we would say, what, what has that got to do with a CT scan? But that's how they saw the problem. And, unless, of course there's no way the gap, the barrier between how the doctor sees it and how the patient sees it is so big, the only possible solution is giving the patient time to cough it up, which often they don't do either because you don't listen to them or they don't have enough time or... or they're too shy, diffident that they're talking nonsense. And another thing about that is answering patients' questions. You know, 'What does insulin do?' Yes, it lowers the blood sugar level, that's all right, but a lot of the things the patient asks they're not stupid questions it's just we don't know what they're about. So a patient says something to do with, oh, I don't know - why do I get an itchy nose when my left ankle hurts, or something? Well, it's not actually... if he gets that, he gets that. It's just you have no idea so we, including me, often just ignore those many questions or you say, 'I don't know', or you kind of get onto what your agenda is, which is trying to find whether he's got pneumonia or something. So, I mean, I think people do terribly underestimate... I mean, you as a general practitioner know this, all this stuff very well, but... so I think when people come back and say, 'I saw that doctor, but he didn't tell me anything', I mean, it almost certainly is factually completely untrue, as we know, from what people have come back and said that they have said to us, like we've said to them, but in understanding it, it's got to be true because that's what they say and I... that's why I say it's mainly about misunderstanding because... I'm not saying I can do this, I'm just saying that's what the problem is and a very, very deep, deep problem.
[Q] You say, I'm not saying I can do this, but you did do it and you do it, I wondered whether you'd consciously thought about explaining things in a different way to patients or, or whether you...
Well, I thought about, as you know... I'm rather gabby, but I've thought about giving them more time to talk to me and that's the main thing. I've had experiences which, when they have said what they wanted to say it was so totally outside my mental structure. There's no other way I would have even thought of that as a problem. You can feel your way to whether the patient's worried about cancer. I mean, it's, it's in a bubble coming out of the front of their head, isn't it. But then the difficulty is do they want to bring this out or don't they want to bring it out but often you, you actually can't quite get what's actually going on and time is really, I think, the only thing. I haven't found this particularly to do with geographical origin or anything. I think it's just as much in a sort of posh, public school English person as it is in a chap from Nigeria who's just arrived. I, I think that the same problem arises.
[Q] But working in South London you must have seen a lot of new peoples with new...  did you find that a... a difficulty, an inspiration, a...
Yeah, that, that does raise another point about how we structure our thing. We had this huge influx of both Gujarati Indians, mainly Hindu, of Muslims from Pakistan and then West Indians, who are kind of more easily on the same wavelength, and I found... I realised a bit what I was getting wrong, which is this; that the patient comes with a lump in their neck and I'd say, 'Well, look, you know, Mr Patel, this could be, as you know, it could be tubercle or aborted pyogenic gland or maybe something funny, rare, and I don't know what it is but we've got... what we need to do is these tests and then maybe we'll have to give a little anaesthetic and take a bit out', and they'd say, 'And the diagnosis doctor?' And I realised that there, what you go to the doctor for is treatment. This sort of Baconian inductive, deductive system of my line of thought about this, that and the other it wasn't that they disagreed with it. It was completely meaningless, and what they came for was the diagnosis so you had somehow, I mean, I don't think you could resolve that one except to do the things you wanted to do, but that was another conceptual gap which is quite important really, isn't it. Yeah. Yeah. I'm sure you could have many examples of that.
[Q] And, and do you... did that alter the way in which you, you dealt with them or dealt with patients?
Well, I mean, it did in the sense that I kind of tried to come to terms with it and, of course, the biggest thing is psychological symptoms in that and, there again, it was a learning curve for me, when I realised that I could remember the, the first person. It was a, it was a little Bengali lady who had a small baby, a small child, about two or three I think, had a dreadful husband and they were all experiencing a lot of, I don't think physical assault, but prejudice and to my way of looking at her she was clearly very depressed. It was obvious. Anybody, you didn't have to be a doctor, she was a very depressed woman and I started feeling towards this and she got very shirty. She said, 'No, it's my headache, doctor', or something, whatever she said and didn't say no. She just... what we call depression wasn't the way in which the illness expressed itself and, again, not being a psychiatrist, I found that quite difficult to handle. So that's another very big thing about what, I think, your somatisation of what we would call mental symptoms.

I'll tell you a phrase I... I use quite often, which I said to patients, 'I'd like to tell you what's in my mind about your illness'. Now, that was true, but it wasn't completely true so if I had a... I pretty well thought I knew what was going on but, you know, you have these sort of ticking off orders of probability in your mind, and somewhere at the bottom end was some horrible cancer, which I was pretty sure they didn't have, I didn't mention it, of course. So it was true, but it wasn't the whole truth.
[Q] Right. Right. 
Yeah.  And I did lie. When I saw more dying patients I lied to them, too, when I sensed that they didn't want to have that kind of conversation.
[Q] Lie in the, in the... do you remember it? 
Well, I remember the very first time actually. It's funny, these individual things. I was the house surgeon on the surgical unit and a man was dying of cancer of the pancreas with secondaries and I went on the night round, which you know in those days when people did night rounds, now they're so busy, poor devils, they couldn't possibly, they're rushing from one person to another. It was the really big time for knowing what was going on. And he, he could just lift his head off the pillow. He said, 'I will be all right, won't I doctor?' And I took a deep breath and I said, 'You'll be fine. What does the ethicist say about that?
[Q] What does the practical doctor in you say about it? Would you change that now or... 
No. No, I wouldn't. No, I wouldn't. No, no. And the hospice movement, although it's tremendously valuable – I mean, hugely changing – you do detect sometimes there's a bit of an agenda: this is the moment when we have everything out. Well, some people want it, and some people don't.

Hardly need to talk about the obvious things people know about better antibiotics, although badly used, about some cancers actually curable and some children with leukaemia being okay and, say, transplants. I mean the idea of doing a liver transplant, being a non-surgeon, the idea seems to me amazing, and there are thousands done every year. All that's true but I... I would myself pick two things, which aren't terribly spoken about as things which I think have changed. One is geriatrics as a specialty because it's radiated out into other things because just as, as students we didn't really... we weren't taught about 90% of what a general practitioner sees every day. It wasn't on the agenda. The same thing was with old people. I mean, what old people... it's feet and corns, and worry about dementia and about joints not working and all those things, which we really weren't taught about, and those kind of seminal geriatricians they were really people who thought ahead of their time. They weren't, weren't in great teaching hospitals. Well, one was I know but mostly in places like West Middlesex and they produced this specialty and then, of course, the lessons from it, 'Oh there's a person blocking the bed', you know. We all... I said that certainly and what are we going to do and then, you know, you come to the important questions in medicine. You know, who's looking after the cat and all that sort of stuff, but... I think geriatricians... and the other thing, looking back, you know, we might talk about getting things wrong, but the thing I really am sad about is not being able to relieve pain properly or really not knowing how to relieve pain properly, and the hospice movement has told us how to do that. I think that is really a huge advance.
[Q] And do you think that's spread out enough amongst other physicians outside the hospice movement now? 
I'm not sure about that. I'm not sure. You would know better than I would. It's certainly spread out but not enough. I mean, of the times I've known about it, in one case it was not spread out. I had to twist the arm of the general practitioner, and the other case was very well known about and done very well by the general practitioner and the hospice support.
[Q] Howard, were there, were there any advances that you saw coming or that you had experience of that you really didn't like or didn't feel should have happened or, or felt reluctant to accept? 
I... I did have a sort of emotional block about things like dialysis and transplants. I did feel, 'Gosh, you know, is that really the right way to go?' and then you see people walking around the streets or striding into the clinic, well people, and then you very soon see what the real things are happening. There's a neighbour of ours here who's got a renal transplant and she's a tall, beautiful lady who's a district nurse and you see her dealing with her children, rushing off in her car. You think: how can you argue with that?
[Q] So can you remember sort of feeling a conversion as it were?
I don't remember a moment. I don't remember, you know, Road to Damascus, but it's changed all right, pretty quickly.

In general I'm sure I have hidden things from patients. I must have done. You just, you just adjust your memory... either from vanity or just feeling stupid, all the various reasons... but on the whole I found saying to patients you don't know what's going on, which I very frequently did, is perfectly all right as long as you give them a plan, where you're going to go from there. And I think that... in nearly every case they might think you're an idiot and you should know, which is okay, but I think in most cases, if you tell them what you are proposing to do about it and that's the most important, open thing you can do.
And as regards serious mistakes, well, I suppose I probably suppress most of them, but I do remember some things, some things where you weren't quite on the ball, you didn't kind of see where one element in the diagnosis had gone off too far to be right and you didn't rethink the thing from the beginning, and some things where you didn't actually understand it. I remember a young girl of 17 who died rapidly of septicaemia, supposed, and... after years I thought about her and I thought, she had toxic shock syndrome, which was not recognised. It was published years after that and I didn't feel guilty because, I mean, but I thought, oh, that's what that girl died of. And another thing as an example because of dealing with all these very acute septicaemias and stuff was what I call the slippery slope of people who have rather mild, apparently mild features and then six hours or 12 hours later you're, you're really on the slippery slope, you're in really deep trouble, and I think now, with all the intensive care work and people like Mike Levine at St Mary's studying children with septicaemia in much greater depth and I think the education side of that has got better. This charity I work for has been very active in that.
[Q] This charity? What was that? 
Well, I'm involved with a, a meningitis charity called Meningitis Research Foundation and I think they've done excellent work, both in research portfolio and in both public and professional education. We've done decision pathways for casualty doctors, both for children and for adults, in query septicaemia, and I think decision pathways are, in a kind of way, they stop you thinking, but I think for this kind of thing, where there's so much noise in the system, so many things going on, I think they're extremely valuable tools and one of the things they've shown is how to be ahead of the slippery slope, as I call it. Now that's the thing I... I'm absolutely certain I can remember at least one, and I'm sure there are other cases where I got it wrong, and the patient died because I didn't realise the speed of the process.
But, no, I don't feel incredibly guilty about most things. Most things, you know... you know, I didn't know how to handle it or it was beyond anybody's care, but I do feel sad about pain. No I, no I don't spend my time mulling over patients who have died, no I don't actually but, you know, obviously one terribly regrets it and I did find the AIDS deaths incredibly painful. They were awful, awful illnesses.

I'm terribly sort of, kind of logical type, rational type chap and I found the intellectual challenge extremely interesting. I mean there was this... bad things. I think, I think more towards the end of, nearer retirement, but not for AIDS. People said to me, 'Aren't you sad to be retiring and not seeing patients?' And I... I got twinges, you know. You know, we're all very arrogant. I'd hear about some patient with, you know, meningococcal... one of my bits that I'm interested in and I'd say, 'Gosh, I wish they'd come into my unit', which is ludicrous really but anyway that's... that's true. I felt I should be looking after that patient, but actually I wasn't... the truth is I wasn't particularly sad at retiring. It wasn't that I was fed up with medicine, but I think medicine was being taken away from me in the sense both, all the, what I call the hassle ratio, which you know all the admin stuff, which is very important. I mean it's quite wrong to just dismiss it, but it's just I wasn't terribly good at it. But also I felt I slightly lost my nerve. When I went into intensive care, I knew what they were asking me was have I any idea what's the infection, what antibiotics should we use. They weren't asking about the rest of the stuff, but I felt the noise in the system was so huge I felt... I'm really not sure I'm getting a complete grip of this. I'm not sure I made any terrible mistakes, ask somebody else, but I did actually feel, I think probably the... your shoulders got a bit more cast down, you know, weighed down because, I think it was just medicine getting so incredibly complicated and, of course, you're nearer your own death so the thing comes to you more. Now, I... I wasn't actually sad to retire, but I would have been desperate to retire from some teaching or writing or activity to do with medicine and some people can do it, even when they've not been clock-watchers, but I couldn't have done that. I went grinding on for a long time with other things, yeah.
[Q] Did... did the administration grind you down as well? I mean a lot people, doctors often complain about administration as being as something that... 
Well, I... I did think there was a kind of... we were being led down a false road of supposed managerial competence in many cases, and that in many ways... I don't know enough to know whether they've cured this, this layering effect of management was completely wrong. We did layering and a single line. By what that I mean you had house and registrars and you've got trainees and all that, but at some level you're also seeing the patient and we would lose credibility pretty rapidly if we didn't do that. We might see less or more. You know the old joke about professors, you know: a professor asks, 'Who does your work when you're away?' He says, 'Oh, the same people who do it when I'm there'. And, so there's a bit of guilt about that. No, the thing, I did feel terribly guilty about not being able to talk to more relatives. You couldn't. I think, you know, 1,000, 1,200 inpatients a year, I don't know what, tens of thousands of outpatients, it would be physically impossible, but I felt a twinge and, and the chaps and girls are perfectly good, probably better than me because they'd been trained more, but I did feel an awful niggle about not actually being face to face with relatives. I mean, it was... it was silly but, you know, anyway, it was a feeling I had. No, I wasn't sorry at retiring in that way, but the, the management layers, I think they were ridiculous in some of the younger ones. I... they didn't get, get to seeing the place clean. You know, I mean, terrible.

We don't know how much of cleanliness is symbolic, but even if it's not... even if washing the wall didn't actually get rid of the bug, it's certainly a very important symbolism of your care, and there were two elements to that. One is I realised that – it's probably not true of the modern generation managers – but those early managerial system people... I realised it wasn't a thing they thought was up to them, whereas I thought it very much was up to them. And the other thing was changing contracts for ward cleaning and, you know, you had these ward... what were they called, orderlies or whatever. Anyway, they were part of the staff, and they took the tea round and they knew the patients, more than I did because I wasn't there much and they were, in that sense. And, you know, Dolly would come and say, Mrs... and all that sort of stuff, and they were promised their jobs, but within weeks of the contract they got rid of them and they had perfectly pleasant, nice people but a) they didn't know how to deal with this, and b) they moved from ward to ward. And I regard that as a very, very important moment in... plus the managerial feeling of distance. I mean, I remember what... I was going to a meeting in London and I walked out to go to the tube at Tooting and the hall of ours was filthy. And I rang up to speak to the senior executive and he was somewhere else. Then I had to go to the meeting and I came back and rang again and I got hold of some junior administrator and the really depressing thing was that he was quite interested in what I said, he wasn't defensive at all, but he obviously didn't think it was what he was doing, part of his deal. Isn't that amazing? I mean a hall of a hospital should be cleaned many times a day, shouldn't it?
[Q] Absolutely.

I'm a bit ashamed to say that most of it passed over my head because I was a student. I mean what happened was the act I think was '46 and... what do you call it when an act comes into, enacted or whatever the phrase is, the parliamentary phrase? It was '48, and then I was a clinical student, a year from qualifying and I think you have other concerns at that stage of your life. But I do, I do recognise from talking to other people I did... I'll tell you something not from my experience, I did a few of these things, not video, but sound recordings of even older than I ex-St George's doctors for this sort of archive and porters and patients and what not, and a GP who'd become an anaesthetist told me about working in Edinburgh when the act started. He was a GP at that time and he really brought it home to me; patients were paying and he'd see some ill child and he'd go the following day and pretend he was just happening to be in that district and, you know, 'I'm just passing just to say to the mother I'm not asking for money and I just thought, oh well, as I'm passing I'll look at Willy' and he... said what a, you know, huge thing. And, as I think I mentioned, before the upping of the status in staffing of the district general hospitals. I mean we grumble about them, I know, but they're serious places with the main types of medicine and surgery catered for now and they weren't. And, no... I mean, most of my life was within the health service so I can't actually say I, I personally saw it hugely when it was. It was...
[Q] When, when you started talking about yours... the... the scientists you read you said they had a vaguely left-wing agenda, I think, most of them. Would you say that you had a particular... you made a political choice in... terms of for yourself or... 
Not in an... I mean I've always been on the left side of the spectrum, but never an activist really and, and no, no, I've not been actively engaged.

There was another thing I wanted to mention about this terrible business about misunderstanding or how patients and doctors talk to each other, and it's... it's got a real bit and a kind of bogus bit so, I mean, one of Richard Asher's examples is the patient comes in and says, 'I've got this terrible sore tongue' and the doctor says... looks at it and says, 'You've got glossitis', and the patient says, 'Oh thank you, doctor, now I know'. Now the real bit is the word. It really is deeply comforting to have a name for something. It's sort of part of your uncertainty and doubt is resolved and, of course, the bogus thing is it's a tautology. You can read that sentence from right to left and it has no more meaning than if you read it from left to right. And we do tautologies in medicine all the time, absolutely all the time, most of them unrecognised by us, and I... it's just another thing where a chap like Richard Asher, who wrote things like Talking Sense; he did a kind of medical equivalent of George Orwell in a way of... penetrating look at the words we use and what they mean and in which ways the... we obfuscate or conceal what we don't know, which we do a great deal. And so, I mean, that's why I think there's a great deal of misunderstanding because there's all these elements we've been talking about which make it difficult but, on the other hand, you know, mostly you get along all right and the patient and the doctor more or less know what, what they're on about.
[Q] And presumably the patients can also make the same obfuscation with their own words that...
Oh indeed. Yes, that's true.
[Q] Do, do you, do you feel, looking back, that when it came to those... that sort of obfuscation or that sort of unpeeling of things that actually you were able to change the way in which you talked about things or, or do you feel that you were very much the product of your education, if you see what I mean?
Yes. I don't know. I suppose as you realise these things, often from a particular episode rather than from a book you, you kind of recognise it. I suppose actually part of the problem... part of the solution is recognising it. Once you recognise it as a problem it's... you don't exactly explicitly solve it but it makes it easier to deal with. And the reason I came back to this thing about intellectual barriers is that a lot of people think the intellectual barrier is doctors using long words. I think that's a totally superficial judgement; a) most doctors don't now use obscure words, and b) as I've been saying, it's much deeper than that, about how the patient and the doctor understand the process of what's going on.
[Q] Do you think we're actually looking for those barriers? That they're in a sense... the, the patient's looking for them as well? I mean, looking for, looking for a barrier, something to heap up their anxiety against in some way? 
Oh I... I don't know about that. I hadn't thought of that really.
[Q] Patients seem to want a, a name for things, don't they? 
Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
[Q] And even if the name doesn't mean very much it's, it's something, which you can... 
Yes. It is comforting, isn't it?  Yeah. Yeah.  To all of us.
[Q] How did you find explaining research to patients? Did you find that that was something that you could explain? 
It's becoming much more formalised, hasn't it, in recent years, the explanatory sheets and all this kind of thing and... but I, I think it is difficult if the technique is a difficult technique, but I think it is possible. I think the general thing is if you understand it yourself you can explain it to somebody else; if you don't know what you're on about you, you can't. But I think it's perfectly possible but, again, rather like medicine, sheets about medicine, there's a balance between too little and too much. And if there's a potential danger to the patient it's obviously extremely important to be absolutely fully informed, but if it's not in any way a hazardous thing, except maybe, you know, taking blood from a vein or something, I don't think it's difficult at all really, on the whole. I mean, the pertussis one - and we did a lot of other work on pertussis - was really saying about the lung function tests, which as you know, are not invasive and saying what we were trying to find out and I think that was easy. But there are much more difficult ones. I think it can be a bit bogus, the explanation, if it's, if it's explaining... trying to explain something which is extremely technical and almost impossible to understand.

There's this phase about systematic reviews and evidence-based medicine which goes a bit together because that's often one of the roots into an evidence base, and I do have a rather, I have to say, a rather ambivalent attitude towards them. It's true, on the good side, that there's so many things we do which we don't know what the evidence is, if indeed there is any good evidence, and medical history is littered with examples where people were doing things with good intent and with an apparently good theoretical reason, but which turned out to be either no good or harmful and, no doubt, we're doing the same today except we don't recognise it until it's shown to us. So these reviews do have a very strong function in... the Cochran reviews and things like that... in penetrating the existing body of evidence and saying where do we stand? The reason for the other side of my ambivalence is that, I don't know, you'd have to tell me this, but I think if you sat in a consulting room and measured off the questions or the issues which you have to do concern... or the forks in your diagnostic road, I think there'd be huge numbers in which you wouldn't have enough evidence for an evidence-based review. So, in other words, it only covers a small component of the problem. I think... you can... you might still say there's a good side to that in the sense it brings up the issue, but some of them are really so trivial. I mean, they're not exactly Emperors No Clothes, but he's jolly badly clad for some of them, and also they're stupefyingly boring to read. I read one not long ago in the BMJ about evidence - one of the things I'm interested in - in giving contacts of people with meningococcal disease chemo prophylaxis. And I read this quite carefully because I was interested in it, and they screened about, I think it might have been 22 papers and they'd found four which were so solid they needed to be analysed. So when you analysed their paper itself, you had I think there were three sets of authors from different countries - you can imagine the money involved in all this - and quite a big paper, several pages in the BMJ which in fact was an analysis of four previous papers and it resulted in saying, well, what we're doing is about right and I thought this is totally ridiculous. Also there has to be a bit of personal pique, because seeing patients, as you will agree, is quite taxing at times, and doing bench research is quite difficult; and planning and doing a clinical trial is much more difficult than people give it credit for. These chaps sit with a laptop, looking up Google and Medline and come up with this paper. I mean I think it's quite insulting as a matter of fact. That, that's a bit extreme, I agree, but it's... but, but I think the larger issue, which is  a serious one, is if it is the case, which it is, that quite a lot of what we do doesn't have a very sound scientific base, what are we doing the rest of the time, which in fact then comes down to question of is there a real craft in medicine? Is the stuff without a statistical base just us talking nonsense and saying, 'In my, in my experience I do this or that', or has it got some real basis? And that's quite a difficult thing to answer, isn't it? I mean, I think on the craft side it, it must have a real basis. I mean, say an orthopaedic surgeon dealing with hands and how do you get a person better after some hand thing, I'm sure he knows a lot of stuff that we don't know and his physiotherapist knows a lot of stuff and what they do is based on a lot of experience. So, although old Hippocrates says experience is fallacious, it's not entirely fallacious and I... I mean I've got to believe this because, after all, most of what I've been doing and you've been doing we don't have an evidence base. But I do think there's stuff which is so compelling from an individual doctor's or nurse's or health visitor's experience that although we have to be cautious about it, I think there must be a huge amount of stuff which has got a real basis and which is not a statistical or trial basis. So I think both things. It's just that, you know, the BMJ has got obsessed with systematic reviews. I mean you can't bear to read it it's so boring.

I, truthfully, am a bit suspicious of the word 'holistic' medicine which is roughly what we're talking about here and the reason I'm suspicious is this: that I think when people say a holistic approach what they basically mean is taking an account of the social and psychological and societal issues as well as the 'scientific' in quotes one – you know, who's looking after the cat, as I say, that sort of thing and all much more – no, not more important. Anyway, other issues of that nature, but they use the word as if you could see the whole thing in a unified way. Well, I don't think you can. At least I can't. It's true that you... you do have often a feeling, or sometimes, a feeling with a patient of how their, their life in some way relates to their illness. I think you do have that, but I think to claim that you can really see it as a unified thing, I mean, you'd be God or something, wouldn't you, really? I mean, I just don't think you do. I think what you do – and I really do believe in the scientific basis of medicine – is a reductionist thing, which people rant about, they're against it. But you think about, the elements in the illness, the pain in the big toe and the worries of the patient, all these things, as items, but I personally have to think of them in individual bits which need tackling maybe together, but maybe individually in their own right and that actually is the only way I can tackle it. So 'holistic' to me is a slightly suspect word. I know what we were talking about, but I don't think in the way, the literal meaning of the world... of the word, I think it's too large a claim for most people to undertake really.
[Q] Wholes with a 'w' rather than with just an 'h'? 
Yeah, that's right. Yeah.
[Q] Do you... do you think you've learnt from being a patient at all about... 
Yeah, I think I have actually, and I think there's some things which you can't learn without being a patient. Everyone can feel pain and, you know, you can see if the patient but that... I don't think anyone couldn't feel that, but there are lots of things that patients suffer, which... I mean, some people have got more imaginative insight into others... than others, but I think there are lots of things patients can suffer which, at least I can only know at an intellectual level. You can't really feel that. I can't really feel it.
As regards being a patient, I think, I had a heart operation some years ago, and the chap, the surgeon, who's now sadly dead, an extremely good surgeon, John Parker, you know, a wonderful guy. So they went into... he went into it all with me and he said he thought that I ought to have a coronary bypass and he was, you know, certainly didn't terribly like going into sort of... kind of emotional things and stuff, but he said, you know, what the chance of dying was and what the chance of serious complication and I thought that's really about all you want to know pretty well: how likely you are to die, you want to know pretty well you're likely to have some awful complication, but then when you get into more detail, like on a drug sheet the basic thing - do you trust the guy who's treating you, and you can go and see somebody else if you don't. I... I didn't think myself, for me, that this wouldn't apply to everybody of course, that knowing a vast amount of detail, the nth degree of the 20th possible complication would do me much good. I mean, I wanted to know the main things and whether I trusted him.

I think really that has been transforming and people don't talk about it. There isn't any age at which you can't anaesthetise a patient for something to their benefit, like pinning their hip or something and that wasn't the case when we were young.
[Q] Yeah, yeah, true. 
It was a really serious balance. I remember gangrene of the legs in old people and the awful agony. What are you going to do, you know, and... and now, well, you can do whatever's necessary now, and not add to their chance of dying by giving the anaesthetic.
I, in fact, I remember when I had this cardiac bypass about – I was in intensive care for a day or so, then I was in a general ward at St George's, and I don't remember, it may have been the sort of second day in there, I was going down the hospital, the ward to have a wash and a shave. I mean I wasn't exactly running, but I was thinking: I wasn't thinking particularly good old John Parker, I was thinking this anaesthetic's, I mean, it's... it's amazing! I've been on bypass, had my heart cut up and here I am walking down the ward and, I mean, the anaesthetics is a wonderful thing.
I've got an old friend from Cambridge and UCH who's a Professor of Anaesthetics and he's writing up the history of the muscle relaxant side of it and, again, people don't talk about it, but in our lifetime that's been a huge change. I mean giving, say, an open operation of the gallbladder because you can do keyhole stuff now, an open operation of the gallbladder was really something to contend with, wasn't it?
[Q] Yes. Yes. Yes. 
Pain and pulmonary emboli, disability, were you going to get better at all? And now, I'm not saying it's, you know, anybody would like to have it done, but it is, you know, workable, not too bad procedure.
[Q] It was a strange thing, wasn't it, that general anaesthetics were invented before local anaesthetics. I often wonder if it had been the other way round we might have had a different approach to it. 
That's interesting. Yeah, that could be. Yeah, that's interesting, yeah.
[Q] Knock the patient out, and we can do what we like. 
It's still an amazing thing, isn't it, awesome? I mean a patient coming out more or less – I did think I was slightly knocked off by... by having cardiac bypass. I thought there's something about the few months before it, which aren't quite the same, but then I was having old-age memory loss anyway, so it was hard to tell which was which.

I doubt if I would have got away with, what would it have been, 38 years of medicine or something without being sued nowadays and it is more the culture, that's quite true and some of them are unforgivable things, in any culture. Somebody's been terribly, terribly careless or done an overtly wrong thing. I don't think doctors should be exempt from that, but, as people have said repeatedly, both writing and saying: a lot of it comes back to that misunderstanding business. Has anybody talked through the problem enough? Now, I know that certain patients or patients' relatives, however much it's discussed with them, will still go out, go out saying: I'm going to sue this chap, but many cases you see there's been a chain of lack of contact, which has gradually accumulated into something which gets to the law. I'm not very keen on it, both because I'm on the doctors' side, basically being a doctor, and also because it costs a lot of money to the health service. And some are overtly money-making things, but you have to say a lot of them are. There are some I, I mean, particularly about brain damage following encephalitis or meningitis when I do really wonder where the truth lies and where... well, I don't know if you feel this, but sometimes you read and you think there but for the grace of God go I.
[Q] Yes. Yes. 
You think that's a series of mistakes, which without being particularly careless or particularly stupid, you could perfectly well have made yourself.
[Q] Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. 
So, but there is more of it. I, I don't actually know how a, say, an obstetrician could get away without being sued these days, there's so much of it going around.

We had a lot of paediatric infectious diseases before it went over to paediatrics, and I kept it going longer than, than I felt myself was right, partly because the paediatricians weren't kind of taking it on board. It... they were a long time taking up infection as a specialty. They now have some very good people doing it, but they, they said, 'Oh, we know all about infections', which they didn't and, everybody does it, which they did and... and also to train my junior staff. I so valued people seeing responses to bugs at different ages, but I was very conscious about children in isolation, which you had to do either because they had an illness which would spread to other people or because of the kind of social and societal reasons which made it impossible for them to be nursed at home, but I was always well aware of this. Obviously it's not a thing you really wanted to do. So at that time there were things called play therapists, which at that time were run by the NAWCH, the National Association for the Care of, Welfare of Children in Hospital, yeah, yeah.
[Q] When you said that time, Harold, what... 
Well, I mean, before those, that became entrained into the health service provision. And actually I got a play therapist, a play leader – we had several very good ones – before the paediatricians did and they were extremely beneficial. They played with the children. They got to understand what that particular child was worried about. And then, on the communications side, I got some big industrialist to cough up a reconditioned telephone system so every child had a telephone in the cubicle, and they could talk to each other or to the office with the sister and the nurses and I, I really feel good about that actually, but, I mean, obviously you wouldn't choose to isolate.
About children's infectious diseases, what happened was there was a very nice Australian guy called Bill Marshall at Great Ormond Street who was the only paediatrician – this is true – doing infection. You know I've said about infection being a gone subject, and he died rather young. In fact, I gave a talk at a memorial meeting for him a... a year or so ago and we didn't know each other terribly well, but he used to ring me up and to discuss problems and stuff that he was faced with and that I think gave them a jolt and the professor of paediatrics at Great Ormond Street asked me to come along to a committee to appoint a welcome chap who's going to become the infection chap, and he went to Nigeria and to Denver and this was Mike Levine, who of course is, you know, about the cleverest chap in the business and that's how it all started. Now there are some very, very good infection people in paediatrics, which of course there should have been years ago.

I went to a lot of places but I never – which was rather a sadness to me when I started teaching at the London School – I never was in a tropical country for a very long time. But I went, let's just see, I went to the West Indies several times to examine and see things and I went to America a lot of course, as everybody did and does, I suppose, and I went to Malaysia and Burma and South Africa, briefly, and India for smallpox. So, quite a lot of places, but none of them for very long sojourns.

When you qualify, especially if you're in a teaching hospital environment, you really start teaching as a houseman in a small way, and then more and more as you go along. And then when you become more senior it's a combination of the ordinary ward round teaching and lectures and seminars and all the usual sort of stuff, and it's always struck me as rather paradoxical that, in actual fact, my generation, we've never been taught anything about teaching. And I think, although a lot of it is, you know, some people can and some people can't and some people like it, which I do, and some people don't, I think the... the trend now to do a bit of teaching about teaching is a very good one because clearly, if you don't know you're making mistakes you'll go on making the same mistakes and as you get older, more senior, people are obviously less inclined to tell you, 'By the way, professor, you... this is absolutely not the way to do it'. And I think it would be – I suppose it is now that people are taught about teaching, but I think it would be very beneficial if it was more general and particularly because there's so many medical students. They're all over the place. They're sent here, there and everywhere, where decades ago there wouldn't be any teaching going on, but now there is. So I think, I think it is very useful and I think I said before that involving the patient in teaching is not just okay, it's positively beneficial to everybody, if the patient agrees with it, because the student likes to be taught with some real person there and the... and it feels more real really, it's more valid. The lecturing side of things, that's a bit more dodgy because a lot of people don't find lectures at all useful and lecturers, again, like other kinds of teaching vary so much in whether they grab people or they don't. But actually I do think, although I can't remember what they were about, but I do think that I have learnt a great deal from good lectures. I think it gives you a sort of, a sort of glue about the subject, which other things stick onto in a way. So I think there's a lot of teaching that could be going on better than it, it is now. Yeah, I mean, I think that's really what I wanted to say about it.

I've involved the patient in... you know, saying, 'Can we come in, you know, what do you think about this, is the pain getting better?' and sort of batting around but not in a more formal- but they can teach you about, about how to – I remember a chap with tetanus – because I used to look after the ventilators before the intensive care phase started- and he was a young footballer. He was, thank goodness, basically a very healthy chap. He was on a ventilator for 17 days and he didn't even get a chest infection. We were very proud. I mean, we thought it was... it was marvellous actually, but it was probably mainly because he was young and healthy. So we showed him in a clinical meeting and somebody, as you know, after the first bit of time he was conscious or nearly conscious but ventilated, but couldn't talk and he said... they said, one of the doctors wanted to know how he felt about this. 'What did you feel about there was all this going on and you, you couldn't say?' He said, 'Well', he was quite a jokey chap, he said this all in front of the clinical meeting, he said, 'Well, what happened is Dr Lambert', I don't think I was a professor then, 'used to come in every morning and he used to rub his stethoscope on his white coat' – it was winter – 'and he'd listen to me all over and we'd have, he'd talk about it in discussion, and one day he came in and he said, 'That valve's making a funny noise', and I thought, that valve, that's my life. And, and it was a wonderful lesson, wonderful lesson to everybody. You'd remember that, wouldn't you? And that kind of thing can come out very well, I think.
[Q] Yes, yes, yes.

Where patients could come in much more, is adverse effects of drugs. Because we know all the bad ones but, again, this, this word 'minor', I mean, somebody having a drug for a not very lifesaving situation and getting some awful itch or diarrhoea or sore mouth is not a trivial thing, is it really. And it's all in the lists of what drugs can do, but I think it's very useful to hear from patients in what way they have come to harm from the drugs as well as to the good; apart from, you know, major things like giving old people too many drugs and making them faint and all that sort of clear things.

[Q] This balance between the science and, and the more, and the approach to the patient, put it that way, is very hard to teach. How... do you have any feelings about how you get across to the next generation how to use, use evidence and how to...?
Yeah. I... I actually do I think that's, that's an area in which the example – as a role model, as they say – is incredibly important and probably much more important than any overt teaching and, you know. I mentioned in the earlier part of this video how I learnt for good and ill as a student at UCH and I do remember that pretty vividly actually and I think this business... I mean you obviously can't get it right and doctors obviously do come, get to odds with patient, at odds with patients and patients often feel they haven't been considered properly. But I think you could teach more about the rather silent things like manners and civility and asking permission about things. I think that could be taught, but the general way of going about it, I think, is probably best done by people showing how they do it.

[Q] How do you think we should bring back, bring together the reductionist side of things and the more imaginative side of things? Is that, is that... 
Yeah. I suppose I'm a bit depressive about this. I don't actually think you can do it all that well. It's mainly... you know thyself, as it says in Delphi. I mean you, you have to know that both elements are important and I do think of it as a sort of... parallel but separate process. You...  the scientific side, the reductionist side, is very clear to me. I mean, I don't know if it's clear individually, but it's clear what you're supposed to be doing and want to do, and it does seem to me, in its nature, pretty Popperian. You're setting up hypotheses, which you are successively trying to demolish. You know, I mentioned these early books. I remember in Arthur Eddington, Nature of the Physical World, I read when I was about 14 or 15 or something, and he's talking about science and he says it's like a chap doing a jigsaw puzzle. You come in one day and say, 'Ooh, that's a nice bit of blue sky there,' and the chap says, 'Yes, it's lovely, isn't it? Really lovely blue sky', and you come in a week later and you say, 'Oh, what's happened to that sky?' he says, 'Oh it was sea, there was a boat on it'. And I think that's exactly what we do in medicine all the time and I... I, actually I feel as a conscious thing that as you're sort of walking along the corridor trying to think what's going on, you're trying to consciously balance those probabilities and in recent years, with far more investigations... there's... I was talking about the noise in the system, and I know I very often, quite often with a difficult problem, I'm not pretending all medical problems are difficult, but I'm talking about the difficult ones – I actually mentally quite often, having seen the patient, had to mentally stand back and say: now look, there's all these things about his blood this, and his chest that and his this the other, and the other and this germ blood culture and I sort of think to myself: how do I actually see this problem? Now, you could say that is integrationist, but I think it's really just trying to put the reductionist thing in a kind of context. But, no, I actually don't see them very much together, the two halves. No. I see them going along properly at the same time.

I was so interested in medical education that when I was a senior registrar I went to my boss, Max Rosenheim – at that time I didn't think there was any way in which my infection interest could come together, which by accident it did – and said, 'You know, this education would be very interesting. What do you think if one could took, take up medical education as your specialty in medicine?' And he sort of pondered and he said, 'I don't think people would take you seriously'. They probably would now, but he... I'm sure he was right then, and that was how interested I was in the whole process and then you got these associations for the study and these sort of minute sociological studies about seven interviews with four students. I thought it got pretty boring really, but the... the other thing is of course they all kept going on about the principles of medicine and we mustn't overload them with facts. Well, actually, I don't think there are many principles. There are a hell of a lot of facts and I think, you know, there's a huge amount of stuff out there and you've got to know a lot of it. There's no escaping that. What I think is valid, which is that they... you shouldn't at undergraduate level be expected to know facts which are almost certainly going to be totally irrelevant except if you go into a particular specialty. So, you know when we were doing anatomy...  there are four layers of muscles in the foot or something and, you know, I can't remember even their names let alone what they were about, and a lot of operative surgery you were expected to know about, which is completely ridiculous. But if you talk about the general context of a patient and a doctor together, I think there are a very large number of facts you need to know, actually.

I remember once I was woken at night by some houseman, who asked me about something on antibiotics and I said, 'I don't know. I'll go and look it up in my book', and Joan, who'd stirred to the surface, said, 'How do you know what you think until you see what you've written?' and I thought that was quite a smart remark. Which is good, isn't it?
No, of course you have to keep looking things up more and more, but there's quite a lot of things... you see that's a phoney business about medical education. We're supposed to have this... learn all this pharmacology and physiology and then derive our medicine from it. I call that the 'Oxbridge fallacy' because as much physiology has come from medicine as medicine has come from physiology. Well, I mean, if you think of it, certainly, certainly students should know the general... the generalities of clinical pharmacology. Of course they should. Absorption, excretion, where the stuff goes to and how it gets rid of, of course they should. But if you're saying, if you're extending on that and implying that you can derive from that any kind of adverse effect or how drugs – it's completely untrue, isn't it? It's just not the case, partly because most of us as doctors don't know that much pharmacology and partly because you don't know what's going to happen. I mean, did anyone actually know with AC inhibitors that people are going to get a terrible, frightful cough which would go on and on? I don't think it was, as far as I know it wasn't reported at all and I suppose there's probably a science behind it now which I don't actually know but that was totally unexpected so it, it just, it's just bogus to say you could derive all this from your scientific thing. You've got to actually know a lot and, above all, of course, take time to find out. Like people forgetting to ask about drugs and stuff, which is the obvious example.

There's this conflict with an individual book written by one or two or three people, and this multi-author thing which it has then become inevitably. And I suppose it is quite a good illustration of the 'progress', if that's the word, about medical knowledge because I've got all the editions of the book and the first one, which was in 1953 by Barber and Garrod was quite a small format book of, I think, 332 pages. And the last one, which is the eighth edition is an enormous volume written by, I don't know, 30, 40 people, with about 1000 pages. So there you have one bit of medicine and antibiotics, so of course you can't know it all, obviously not, and I suppose what I'm not up to date in is the tricks of how to get at stuff more easily in a way that the modern generation does. I do use the web and stuff but really getting, because that's got its own danger because you can get a lot of stuff from the web and not really actually think through what you're... want to do.

Certainly the patients benefit from it and, again, to be fair, it's got two sides. If you see one patient and you're proprietorial about it you may make mistakes, which if seeing a few other people like a medical student or a professor or somebody or other might have put you right on. But from the ill patient it is extremely disturbing, specially as in a hospital they often just don't know who's who. And my old friend, Keith Sykes, who's the professor of anaesthetics, he was at Hammersmith for a long time and this is before even the current climate of time off duty and he said he counted that in one 24 hour period a patient in the intensive care unit had seen, one way or another, 25 doctors and it's...  Good heavens.  It's in a way inevitable because of the specialty and then, and then nowadays it's much more the case because of the off duty rotas which have... they're obviously a sharp contrast to our youth and quite rightly so but they've got to the point where people tell me that the juniors are driven off the wards if they're not on... at five o'clock so that the hospital doesn't have to pay them overtime and terrible stupid things like that but... so they, they don't see as much and I think, again, the anaesthetist sees most of the game and they... one or two people have told me that the newly appointed consultants just don't have as much surgical experience. I mean, they're going to go on getting it, it will be okay, but at that point they haven't seen as much stuff as they should do.

The business about, going on slightly from there, about the... the consult and all this new work about education and communication does puzzle me a little bit. I mean, at the end of the day, when all this is said and done, I truly believe that there's a silent centre for medicine. And by that I mean there's a doctor and a patient into a room, trying to come to terms with what's going on and for the doctor to make the diagnosis and the patient to see what he's on about and the doctor see what the patient's on about. I mean, this of course is rich, Western medicine. This wouldn't be in a Darfur refugee camp and it wouldn't be in a rural clinic in Nigeria with 250 children outside where you need Morris King's famous four-minute consultation. You know, look at the mother, is the patient breathing... you know, sort of I can't remember all the four minutes. Brilliant, brilliant, brilliant way of assessing a child's illness in four minutes and, and valid, but we're talking about this kind of medicine in a country like this and I just have this sort of puzzled sense, all these studies and all these trials and all these things about communication, video tapes and, and patients doing this and they're all sort of swirling round and round the silent centre and wondering – it's probably just being old – but wondering to what extent that all gets through to actually improve that silence centre and what goes on in it. And this is only a question, I haven't got a... an answer to it, but in a way I sometimes feel a lot of the work you see, especially the qualitative research work is to do with analysing what's happening without necessarily improving what's happening. It's obviously – its long-term intention is to do that. I don't know if I've been very obscure or, or muddled about that, but that's... that's what I... I ask myself and there are some things I've already said which I do think are clearly important, like teaching certain basic things about how you relate with patients and on the teaching side how you relate with students. That's for sure. It's just I don't know how much of it gets home.

I wasn't... in the event very sorry to stop doing clinical work for reasons of administrative hassle and feeling it was all... getting a bit much for me, all the amount of stuff going around my head and more and more that I didn't really understand. And so that wasn't sorry, although at times I very much wanted to go back and my successor, who's close very often rings me up and we chat over a problem about clinical medicine in a way, which is for me theoretical. But I... I was – a chap who was the Professor of Medicine at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine heard I was retiring and asked me if I'd like to go teach there, which I did for many years actually, about maybe 12 or 14 years, maybe more, I don't know, a long time after retiring. And I mainly taught in the Diploma of Tropical Medicine, the Masters. Obviously I didn't treat it, but I said to them I'll do anything, but I won't do worms. You know, I won't do things I don't like and don't understand. But I did the things mainly I, you know, knew a bit about, and I just loved it. I just loved it. They were all postgraduate and that was another change in my teaching. When I was young and a registrar, I liked nothing better than teaching brand new students who didn't know anything about anything, partly because I think they were brands to be saved from the burning, and partly because they had very interesting notions, which of course people even at registrar had usually stopped thinking about and some of them were rubbish, but you were thereby thinking in a different way. And then I, as I got older I really much more enjoyed postgraduate teaching, teaching some – not, not from feeling about the students, it's was just I got, I felt – didn't quite feel I was as much in rapport with them as I got older and I preferred doing postgraduate teaching. And the London School, they were from all over the world, absolutely all over the world. They were very motivated. They'd come a long way, they were paying a lot of money and they were burningly interested in teaching and also they came from completely different, diverse medical backgrounds which was quite humbling in a way because you realised even after a huge number of years doing medicine how narrow your actual medical base was. They'd done, oh, all sorts of things and I... I love those, really interesting. And I did some other things like going on with the writing a lot, many years after and some lecturing.

I'm still doing some data safety and monitoring committees for the Medical Research Council, AIDS trials. The deal there, as you know, is as clinical trials got more and more complex, partly for scientific and particularly for ethical reasons, it became the norm to have a committee which was overarching, didn't plan or conduct the trial and where the people involved, who obviously included a layman, had no financial or academic glory or interest in the trial. I mean, not... you were interested, but not anything, there wasn't any bonus for them about it. Who actually - it was quite a taxing thing. The code of the trial is broken at set intervals, which are predetermined by the nature of the trial, and the people doing the trial don't know the code is broken. Oh, they know the code is broken, but they don't know what, what it says. They know the total result, but they don't know the difference between the placebos and the test group or between the two test groups and the data safety committee ponders these results with the help of the statisticians, and there's always a statistician as part of the committee. And you have... basically, in principle it's very easy: if the trial is doing so much good it would be unethical to prolong it, you say to them, 'Would you stop?' They don't actually, you don't actually have the final word. They could argue with you or take... say, 'We don't take any notice of you', but it would be quite difficult to do that. Or you may say, 'You're poisoning the patients more than helping them'. I mean, in principle, that's what it is. In actual practise, it was remarkably difficult things; equations to, to ponder between the numbers, the likelihood that something else would emerge with another six months of the trial and we've had, particularly in AIDS trials – I don't think it's appropriate to go into them in detail – but with AIDS trials many, many... there's  scientific, but there are also kind of operational problems. Is it possible for the people to do on doing it and all sorts of operational and ethical things, but the basic thing is the ethical one. Are you doing too much good to go on or too much harm to go on? In principle that's what it's all about actually.
And the other big medical thing I've gone on doing is, you know, as you know, I've been interested in meningitis for a long time and I'm involved, I'm a trustee actually of a trust, of a thing called The Meningitis Research Foundation, which I think is a very good charity. Always watch for low overheads, spending most of the money on the action and not on the office and all those criteria – and don't have a separate fundraiser and all those criteria which you... kind of judge whether you're doing something serious. And they do a very good research programme and also a lot of both public and professional education – bits of decision pathways or pamphlets for junior doctors, paediatricians, ambulance men, general practitioners, nurses, all things directed at early diagnosis of meningitis septicaemia. And I really do feel we, we... they, they disperse hundreds and thousands of these things and I really do feel... We've had specific examples where somebody has rung up the charity and said, 'Oh the baby's ill and grizzly and I didn't think it was anything very much, but I saw these spots and did your test and I took him hospital, you know, and they detected... you've got septicaemia', and I think it has done a lot of good and also there's a 24-hour helpline. They can ring up night and day, 365 days a year to get help and I really do feel, you know, really proud of that charity. I think it's done well and very good administrative people who keep their eye on the ball.

We've always been mad keen about trees and we have some trees around our cottage in Wales, but it's high up so it's really only Upland Conifers mainly. And we had this mad idea about restoring a bit of ancient woodland and we got one in Gloucestershire, and we thought actually doing this kind of thing after retirement – Joan's two years younger than me so we're not... not very different in age – it was kind of crazy, but, in fact, you know, you won't see a dashed great oak tree, but you see an awful lot happening and you see a wood coming to life, a neglected wood coming to life in two or three years. Amazing. I mean, in a mild way and then it gets better and better year by year.

I think there have been quite substantial ones, particularly a continuing decline of deference, thank goodness, which of course is part of a  larger societal thing and a longer historical background. I mean, you can only think about, about the affair of King Edward VIII and Mrs Simpson being totally hidden from the country before the Bishop of Bradford blew the gaffe, and then even more recently nobody knew about Churchill being so ill and having strokes, because...
[Q] And he was actually, actually receiving people, wasn't he, while he, while he was ill and nobody, and nobody was kind of allowed to know that. 
And we, you know, hoi polloi, just the general people of the country weren't supposed to be involved in this. And people like, say, Harold Nicholson going in as a parliamentary candidate to some poor place, where he'd never even look at the actual constituents at all because that was what you did and the people just followed or accepted it.
I think the analogue in medicine was the fact that, certainly when I was a student, it was doctor telling patients what's what most of the time. And I think that has changed quite substantially although as you, you and I know, you still see pretty big echoes of it sometimes in, in medical practise.
[Q] What do you think it was that started the change, Harold? I mean, because, post-war, for me anyway, it was still quite a commanded, controlled sort of society, wasn't it? 
Yes, yes.
[Q] I mean there were ration books, there were, you know, people did what they said. I mean the... Caribbeans came to Brixton and were told in the first, the... Empire Windrush this is where you sleep tonight. It was very...
Yes. It was like that. I don't really know, was it to do with the general economic well-being? There just weren't as many terribly poor people who couldn't possibly have a say and having some food and housing, I suppose, makes you feel a bit more entitled to say what you think your rights are. General, general rise of feeling of, of your rights over automatic subservience and you still see when people talk to people the body language shows that somebody is addressing somebody and somebody else is receiving the address. I think you see that quite commonly in medicine too as well as in ordinary life and it, it... I have to say, it irritates me extremely.

[Q] I suppose this went in parallel with a couple of other things; one, maybe the, I mean, the type of dilemma you described of, the... of not transplants, but of renal dialysis, of new technology. So, suddenly doctors were revealed as being not quite sure what to do, which was perfectly reasonable, and then other people beginning to realise that actually doctors only deciding didn't quite make sense. 
Yes, that's quite true and another thing is of course that respect for doctors' status has absolutely no relation to our ability to do things. And if you look at, say, pre-Second World War, the great lords of medicine who had to be called in before you had permission to die or get better, were people with almost no therapeutic options open to them. But they got huge status, they became lords and they got huge chunks of money, but now we've got all these wonderful drugs and people think we're all terrible. It's rather strange, isn't it?
[Q] I don't think they do actually because, but at the same time, it's... I... I think the, the idea of opening up the decision making is, is an extraordinary fascinating one because there has to be a limit to it, doesn't, doesn't there. At the same, if you feel that someone is, is dictating to you, nowadays we feel naturally we want to... 
Yes.
[Q] Even politically, I mean, if we're told by the government, 'You must do that', there's a tendency for people to say, 'Well, hang on a bit, I don't think I want to'. 
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think you're right. There is a limit. There's a balance that when you see the other extreme taking place now, a doctor saying: X% of this and Y% of that, and you can do this and you can do that, you go and decide, talk to your husband or wife and decide. I think that's frankly ridiculous. I mean, the doctor ought to say to the patient how he sees the problem and although it's often denied that it's often said that it's an unfair question for the patient to say to the doctor what would you do. I think it's a perfectly fair question. The only thing is the two positions do differ and I think the doctor's entitled to say, 'Look, we're not in the same situation because, well, partly because I'm not feeling what you're feeling, but partly for various other reasons, but, as I understand the situation, if it was me I'd do this'. It's not saying do this but it's... and, and I don't think the, that patients often do want guidance of that sort. They... there's that balance. They don't want to be said do this, do that, do the other, but they do want to have a feeling of, of direction from the doctor because, although we do all these attempts at, at explanation and discussion, as I said previously, I think there's inevitable misunderstanding because of our concepts of disease and illness.
[Q] Yes. And also the containment of anxiety, isn't it? Because, being faced with a big decision is... one has quite a lot of anxiety in that. If somebody else says, 'Well, it's up to you what, what you do', that doesn't feel a helpful – I mean, some people talk about 'holding', which I think is quite a, quite a nice term in some way, that there is someone there who is on your side as it were, even, even if they're not actually telling you what to do. At least they're giving you some form of direction.
Yeah, I do see that actually and, and I suppose another facet of that is if the situation's not too urgent, if, say, you know, you can't take all this in, go and have a chat about it and write down things you feel you can really sort out and then come back whenever and have another chat about it. I think it's very important.
[Q] That, that seems to be a... big lack in, in modern medical care is that ability to have a second bite at the cherry in terms of discussion. You know, it, because of time pressures most people don't get the chance to go away and think and come back at it in the same... way which, at least that's my impression, that you don't have, whereas most of us for a decision would, would want to discuss, I don't know, with an estate agent and go away and think about it and come back or... or even with a car salesman or whatever decision we're making. There needs to be two, three attempts at it and, and it's even written into insurance, isn't it, that, you know, you've signed for insurance, but you're given ten days in which you can change your mind and I... I think that that gradual process of decision-making is something that hasn't really been taken on by the system of, of medicine, that actually we ought to be saying there are always two or three consultations with someone who's taking a difficult decision in some ways. 
Yeah, I think that's absolutely right.

The patient may be in a position where he thinks the doctor would know all about it and he's... sometimes we've got a pretty definite, we're not all totally, you know, hopeless. There are a lot of things we really do feel we know the right thing to do but there are many, many important things where we're... we're in a state of uncertainty ourselves and I know the feeling of horror, as you do, that you see dawning on the patients when they realise we, we're not quite sure what's happening. There's this balance between openness and direction, you might say. I mean, I think it's just like gardening in a way. I mean you suddenly realise after you get into gardening it's all... nobody knows anything about it. They've got these absolutely arbitrary things about seeding trees trunks off or cutting roses and how to prune them, endless books. It turns out if you take the garden shears and chop the ends off that seems to be about as good as anything, you know, it takes... it takes centuries to work that one out. And the other thing is don't just stand there, do something. We know very well that very often the very best thing to do is to stand there and do nothing, I mean, you know, in a technical sense. But that's terribly hard for us to swallow with an ill person, isn't it? Very hard.
[Q] But even within our own training there is this, I mean I've observed younger doctors having huge difficulty taking on the idea of uncertainty, that actually they feel that somewhere they have to know and that they ought to go on doing something until they do know and, and finding it terribly difficult to stand still as you're saying and, and accept the fact that we don't know the future. But that actually, I mean, the corollary is that actually I want you to stay in there, in there with the patient rather than actually say off you go, you know. But as you were saying before the idea of saying there is a plan and even if the plan is only we're going to meet in two weeks time or... or whatever that might be so that some people can see where they go next rather than being left completely on their own. 
Yeah. It is waiting that's so terrible, isn't it? You... you say... if some patient is worried about something and you say to the patient, 'Look, we've got to do these tests and the other tests and do this, that and the other and come back next week', or in the case of an inpatient you might say, 'I'll get the results in 48 hours' and you think, 'Oh my God, 48 hours is an absolute lifetime!' This person's sitting in bed and, you know, it's, we can say 48 hours and go off, but for them it's, it's a terrible thing and you, you just have to, sort of, do it.
[Q] But I've experienced within my family one of the difficulties about the false reassurance during that process, I mean, we would usually say to people, 'Let's keep hope alive', let's say, I mean, if you say, 'We're doing these tests, it, it'll probably be fine', but then, of course, if it's not fine then, then you haven't quite given yourself enough manoeuvre if you've been too certain about it, and then I watched somebody's faith in the medical process gradually seep away because of false... too... over, over reassurance, 'It'll be fine', and then the tests aren't fine, you know. So I think that, that, again, that we have to learn to sit on the fence in rather a more comfortable way. 
Yes, that's true and patients want... different patients want... different things.  Different levels of certainty. I don't know if you've found it, but often very successful businessmen, they've got this sort of mechanical model, you press this button that happens, you take this lever and then you get better or you get worse, and they find it very hard to take the actual situation they're in.
[Q] But it... it's always fascinated me in general practice because if you look at the people who turn... who show, mothers bring boys more often... sons more often than they bring daughters which is sort of, I mean, Freud would understand that. And then once the teenage years are past, women come much more often than men and then until the, the gender balance evens out later on. But actually then if you look at casualty figures men are turning up there more often than women so it's the... it seems to me it's the 'fix-it' thing in a lot of men, you know, that they don't like to, you know - so they'll leave it and then, and then the businessman, you know, fix it for me and I think that often shows itself in a... different way in which they use the services, even if the services are there. I find... 
That's very interesting, I hadn't noticed that at all.
[Q] I mean the figures almost seem to be like, you know, like South America and... and Africa, so sort of fit in together, between general twenties and casualty.  Yes, tectonic plate of medicine.

Earlier, you know, you had to have an antibiotic for everything and in the latter years before I retired you had some patients, mostly sort of middle class as they say, who said, 'Do we really need to give this?', which would have been unthinkable 20 years before, really unthinkable and you could have the discussion about the pros and cons.
Alternative medicine? Not a great deal because people, on the whole, didn't tell me about where they'd been, but I did have one really very touching episode where a chap came in and he, it was... I don't actually remember what the problem was, but he told me about... on several occasions people told me they had been using alternative medicines, and I was quite interested in this and asked them about it. And the thing that really shocked me was the amount of money they were spending. And it wasn't, you know, people had this image of people prancing through the fields picking lovely herbs which will do you good, which they might and they might not, but they don't say these chaps have to earn a living, and they charge money for the herbs and for the consultation. And one chap said to me: well, I've tried this and I tried this but I... I ran out of money so I thought I'd come and see you, which I thought was wonderful. And, they, people underestimate... it's the press, they have this sort of image of the evil doctors trying to kill you off, and these herbal chaps helping you with natural... I mean, of course, I'm terribly against Nature, as you know, because having spent about 38 years trying to counteract Nature, I keep saying to students, 'Nature is very dangerous', and, you know, to sort of bring them to think about it in reality. If you'd asked me what I think about herbal medicine or complementary medicine, well, at a practical level, if patients raise it, I say, 'I'm perfectly happy, this might well do you good, we don't know enough about it, and if you feel it's helping you that's fine by me as long as I don't think it's... and I'm going to stick to my own guns about, I'm a very conventional, as you know, Western type doctor.' And as long as, you know, I give them my opinion what is the right thing for their illness, if it doesn't conflict with that or do harm that's fine by me. I think the... on a more general way about the arguments about it, I think they're really on the wrong battleground actually, because people think we're talking about our medicine is good for you, and complementary medicines are not good for you. Of course that's ridiculous, isn't it? They may well be good for you, some of them, and the idea of plant medicines, well, a large number of the medicines we use are plant-based. So if you say the question: is it likely that out there in the jungles of South America there are things we would like to have and need to know? Well, I don't think it's just likely, I think it's certain there are things to be found out there and, as you know, a lot of people are working at finding them. The actual battleground is about evidence and I wouldn't give ground on that. I really do believe in scientific evidence about things and curiously enough – I hadn't thought of that before – curiously enough the reason why we conventional chaps are so keen on that is because our own history shows how wrong we can be with our own things. People bled for years and years and years. It was a natural, right thing to do: there are bad humours, let them out. No doubt they killed off thousands, millions of people doing that and it's the uncertainty and danger of our own things that has led us to the gold standard of proper, randomised clinical trials. I could, even in my own lifetime... many, many things we did, we now know not merely to be useless, to be harmful. And that is why I would say to the complementary medicine people: that's fine by me, but produce the goods.

[Q] Given the fact that we are such diverse creatures and that we all have a particular makeup and that some people, you know, react badly to penicillin and some people don't, or whatever it may be, but actually I'm sure there must be an... I'm not going to use the word 'alternative', I'll use the word another... way of... of research which starts much closer to the individual and I sometimes wonder whether we've got so... we're so much enthralled to randomised control in trials which are fantastically useful and very important that we've actually turned our face away from some of the ideas that actually... of looking at what's happened to an individual and, and building up a... as it were a library of the sort of people who would respond well to this rather than the numbers game, if you see what I mean. I just, I mean, if one sees it from the pathological end, we have no idea why a person develops breast cancer or such like and so, you know, in a sense we're still a long way back, aren't we? We're... and there again, it would be very useful I think... I mean, I'm working with a bio bank, the Biobank, looking at, at following through what sort of experiences people have and then thinking, oh well, gosh, here are 20 people who've, you know, lived near a flyover or, you know, under an acacia tree or whatever it is, or been to school in some, you know... perhaps we should follow through that. And I feel sometimes when, one of the things that and certainly I think the homeopathies do is very much try and focus down on the individual. I'm sure their methods are for... are not, are not yet very clear, but I'm sure we shouldn't entirely abandon that idea, which I think we have, haven't we really? I don't think science takes on board the idea of working with... I mean, it'll have to take on board the idea of the genetic structure, of course...
Yes, yes, but about the other – yeah, I... that's a very interesting line of thought and as you say that, it makes me feel you're looking at two slightly different ways. As you say, there's the biomedical basis because we don't know nearly enough, hardly anything about the different reactions to people to drugs and to illnesses. And the next phase of medicine, which will take I suppose a generation or two is the, is the detailed genetics of individuals showing: I react this way and you react that way and I think that's the future of, you might say, conventional, biological-based, scientific-based medicine. And that's one type of answer to the type of question you're talking about.
[Q] Yes. Yes. 
But on the more... the other aspect of human experience and contact, there is a sort of... there's a rise, isn't there, in narrative medicine, life history medicine. Now, I do, as you, think there's, there's got to be a lot there about the more intuitive basis of people's experience, quite apart from their need to tell their lives, which must have valuable medicine somewhere tucked in that. I'm a bit bound by my sort of scientific base and I mistrust it, but I'm sure there must be important things there. I mean there are important things there anyway in a sense of helping patients, but I'm sure you're right, there must be important things for our knowledge base as well but I don't actually know how to get at them.
[Q] Well, I suppose that the, the, the bringing together, as you rightly say, the... the genetic basis and our... our diverse nature must be what, might be one way in which complementary and... and, clinical might, might come together. 
Yes. Yes.
[Q] And that would be very, very exciting if one would be able to just show that so that you can say: well, you're the sort of person, you know, we're testing who can do very well here with this and that's a new form of certainty, isn't it, which might, which people might look for. And I suppose narrative in a sense is looking inside them, inside oneself to say: well, is there anything in my history which indicates what sort of person I am rather than actually interrogating my genes, interrogating my... my history. Perhaps indicating what sort of choices people like to make or the way in which they like to run their lives, whether they like to be really in control or whether they're the sort of people who, in a crisis, are happy to hand over to someone else and find that easier. So some of those, those sorts of... I think... I don't think narrative will necessarily solve any of the scientific questions, but they might help us through some of these difficult decisions, the ethical decisions, a little bit.

This newer interest in the sense, not older interest, but newer focusing on psychiatric and emotional factors in physical illness, which obviously has been a concern down the centuries, obviously right back to Hippocrates, but now they're getting sort of handles on it. And, again, some people who are sort of anti my kind of medicine would say: you know, you've never admitted that social-emotional things might affect whether you've got a cancer or not. On the contrary, I think it's only too likely, but again, I come back to evidence and, as you know, people have come both to good and to harm by that approach. I mean, for example, this thing about, you know, if you think the right thoughts your cancer will go away. I find that unutterably cruel and making people guilty for their own illness and death. I mean, there've been some horrible things done. They based – as we've done horrible things – on dogma and, of course, that is the great enemy, isn't it, being enthralled. That's why I think, I truly think, without being overmodest most good, good doctors are very pragmatical and you've got a... You know, the same thing is some unfortunate parents killing children off because they know the right thing to feed them on which doesn't happen to have any calories or protein or things you need to live and that kind of rejection of scientific medicine is, is terribly painful. There was a guy – I didn't look after him, but there was a case at St George's where – and the interesting thing was, I think the paediatricians handled it very tactfully. Belief is a pretty hard thing to get at. Did you notice Mr Blair said, 'I know what I believe', instead of saying, 'I believe what I know', which is what you and I would say. Isn't that disgraceful? That's what he said at the party conference. Sorry, what we were talking about?
[Q] That's why we're in the hole we're in. 
Exactly.

This child was, well, actually being killed. I don't remember exactly what the dogma was, but the parents knew how to feed the child and the child was losing weight and becoming really at grave risk. And when the child was admitted, as I recall – I wasn't involved personally – the paediatrician must have been extraordinarily good and tactful and they managed to get the child better. And I think I'm remembering rightly, they went home, it went back; they knew the answer and I find actually, I actually find that rather hard to stomach. We, we're all such pragmatic people ourselves it's not difficult for us to understand how a dogma could be wrong.
[Q] Yes. Yes. Yes. Well, I suppose ultimately one would have recourse to the Children Act which would say, you know, that the welfare of the child is paramount, and if you're not feeding your child right it's the equivalent of locking them in a... the cellar and posting coal through the door, isn't it? 
Oh, that has been done, I think, had recourse to law.
[Q] Yes, which is again a horrible thing to have to do. And one wonders where that dogma came from. It would be interesting to know why suddenly... I mean, because you need to work with the parents in some way, don't you, if you're allowed to but... 
If you're allowed to. It's really strange that, how people, people – everyone says people are irrational but, in fact, it's kind of a despairing need for some rational basis. I heard, again a rather harrowing really, thing on the radio a year or two ago where a child had the most terrible eczema, which, as you know, infantile eczema can be trivial, it can be a really awful, awful strain on parents and the child, can't it? And she was gone on herbal things and we know there is some Chinese thing which is relevant to this so it's not way out, but it's a bit out. And the child got worse and worse and worse and she finally accepted the need to go to a Great Ormond Street or some where dermatologist who explained to her that the fears about steroids were valid, but they were now unfounded because we now know how much steroid will stop a child growing, how much will not and how to use it, how intermittently to use it. I don't know exactly how you'd treat it but, you know, a dermatologist does know actually and the child got magically better. And this poor woman expressed her terrible guilt that this thing she had fixed in her head turned out not to be right and the Western medicine, in this case, was right.
[Q] Well, perhaps it's this funny either/or phenomenon that we've got, isn't it? I'm not sure that this isn't partly the blame is not partly to be laid at the door of medicine because somewhere hidden, written in invisible ink on our, on our doors is, you know: come in here and... 
We know best.
[Q] We know best and leave your funny ideas outside.  That's quite right.  I think that's hugely destructive. If one could have a mix and match, it might be much more difficult to do, but I mean... I'm part of a process of bringing French doctors over to UK, and it's fascinating of course when you meet someone else's culture you, you know, even just 20 miles across the channel, we know the French are very different from us. But, the approach of these general practitioners would be: let's follow the physical line until we proved that it, there isn't anything there, and then we'll deal with the psychological.

[Q] Now I think that the general practitioners who I teach, and I hope my colleagues would... walk on two feet so that they would be thinking about this psychological as well as the physical knowing only too well that you can't deal with one without the other. And when I was talking to the French doctors about this they said: oh well, is that how you do it here? And... and I found that very fascinating. And I'm not quite sure, I'm not crowing about English general practise or English medicine, I mean, but it just opened up to me this change that had happened in the last few years. 
Yes. Yes, I remember that well. I remember as a student thinking it was rather funny because we were told exactly that. I thought it seemed rather strange that most headaches weren't brain tumours, thank goodness, and is... I didn't know, I don't think I would have known, you know, expressed it in the way you have explicitly and clearly just now but I, I realised there was something a bit peculiar about the whole arrangement.
[Q] We're going to come back to the world to... I found my Dean chuckling, he's a very humane man, he said I've just come across the expression 'CAT scan negative headache', he said which he thought was a very, I mean, he said just, why isn't we... He'd just actually been called as a consult to a surgical ward where an African woman was being investigated for bellyache and he sat... they'd come across nothing so they called in a physician and he sat down on her bed and said: when did you get your, when did your tummy ache start? And she said: it was when my husband took my son back to Nigeria. And it was the sort of think: Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear. And you think what, what sort of education are we giving people that they can't, you know, get something else other than... 
Yes. It's partly specialisation, isn't it? I mean you're the only generalist, aren't you because it's now getting increasingly hard in hospital context to kind of get a person who'll kind of take it all in and the gastro... I'm not saying there are not, many of them are extremely good generalists, but they now come down on one aspect and it's quite hard to... actually I remember Richard Asher I mentioned, my boss at the Central Middlesex, one of his stories was about a patient coming from an ophthalmologist because he had retinitis pigmentosa, and somewhere way in the textbooks there's Laurence-Moon-Beadle syndrome, do you remember, way from the past.
[Q] Yes. Yes. 
So that the ophthalmologist wrote on the notes: this is retinitis pigmentosa, this is Laurence-Moon-Beadle syndrome, refer to a general physician for an opinion about polydactyly. And as Richard Asher said, it's surely not beyond an ophthalmologist to see whether someone's got six fingers or five fingers. It was a typical Richard Asher insight.
[Q] Yes, I, and I think the danger for us is not just specialisation as a profession but also what we do with that specialisation because I... you know, my specialist colleagues are mostly now gazing down tubes and they're not actually, you know, the patient is not very much just there, that's, they're already doing what the ophthalmologist is doing looking into an eye, looking down a tube or up a bottom or something like that. It's, or into a heart, which is wonderful, but actually there may be other things that you have do first. 
It's what they focus on, isn't it?
[Q] Yes. 
I mean, Maggie Turner Warwick once told me that... Richard's father was a famous, I think, rectal or gastro something surgeon, and a patient came who'd seen him before and he said... he didn't remember that he'd seen him before and he was looking up his backside with a scope and he said: oh yes, I remember you perfectly!

Well, I think it was partly accident because in...infectious disease, I think I mentioned, gastroenteritis could be any dashed thing... label. I always used to say to students don't say gastroenteritis, say: diarrhoea, or diarrhoea and vomiting, because then it stands you back from committing yourself to a particular line of diagnosis. I mean, a rather pompous thing to say but, I mean, I think it was useful to say it in that way. And we had a huge number of referrals, for example, fever, you know, what is it? And, you know, as you can see, I'm very interested in the analysis of difficult illness, the actual trying to follow a pathway which gets you to the right place without, without damaging the patient in the process, and I think it was that rather. I was compelled to stay as a generalist but, I mean, obviously, there were more and more things I didn't understand and would refer to somebody else.
[Q] Yes. But I suppose what comes across is also that, that you refused not to see the person sitting there? 
Yeah, I suppose that's right, yeah.
[Q] Whereas I think a lot of people already reduce a case to... I mean, having been at the other end of it, becoming... starting... walking through the door and being a person and then sitting down and suddenly becoming a case, you've already lost a lot of yourself. 
Yes.
[Q] And you're not a case, you're a person, but of course you have to be a case in order to, to link in with other cases and that, that's... 
Yes, that's right. Actually you're quite right. For that reason I don't like the word 'case'. You know, you're using it to show what it means, but I tend to jib and shudder a bit because it exactly does that: takes you away. The very process of getting into a hospital, that awful escalator, you're in on this thing. I mean, I know in my own psychology I would go to endless lengths to deny that I was getting ill in some way. Once I'd done it I would say, okay, there it is, get on with it and I'd be okay then about, you know, having an operation or, or doing... but I'd certainly try and avoid getting on the escalator if I could.

Something I'd like to mention which I feel very proud of which is that when I retired, Joan and I thought that St George's Hospital was an extremely inimicable place to human life. It's sort sensory deprivation experience: blocks, corridors leading; where could they lead but to dying and awful things? And, in fact, years before I retired one of my daughters was doing a holiday job there and, you know, she was, I suppose, probably a late teenager – Jane, you know her – and she came back and said to us, said to me, 'Dad, didn't they know there'd be ill people around that place?' which, you know, bang on the nail, isn't it really? So we created a garden, and it was quite interesting the process in relation to people. There were various squares within the hospital, and there'd been the odd tree here and there and the odd bit of grass. And we thought: herb garden, medicine, we thought – bit too academic and anyway it's Tooting, it'll be ripped up in no time by the local people. And then we thought Japanese garden – bit too sort of precious. What we wanted was water and some blowsy leaves. And we, we went into a bit of studying various designers and we got a chap who seemed to be on the right wavelength and this garden's been a huge success.
[Q] How wonderful, Harold. 
It's, you know, I really do feel, whatever about the medicine, I feel that's a great thing to have done.
[Q] Wonderful. How wonderful. 
And it's really patients go out there. One of my former housemen, a very nice girl – I shouldn't say girl these days, should I, woman – had a very bad back. I mean, bad enough to be actually laid up with it. It was after she'd, was on our firm and she, we met her somewhere with her husband and she said, 'You know, they wheeled me out in that garden. It made all the difference'. And the staff use it a lot as well. Unfortunately, often, because they can't smoke in the hospital – and Joan and I have had a huge battle about cigarette ends – it's officially no smoking like the rest of the place, but people do. I mean, the locals steal the fish and rip up the pump and stuff but it's, you know. As you know, if anything moves it gets stolen; but, no, that's a slight exaggeration actually it's on the whole okay.
[Q] But I think that being far away from those things in a hospital bed is very, is, is compounding the problem, isn't it? I, I mean, I'm sure we bring in flowers, we bring in fruit and that's an attempt to make that a personal space that's yours, but I think it's a terribly hard, terribly hard one. 
Yeah, it is, that's the trouble.
[Q] I remember, leading me to think that actually, that the old adage: first do and no harm is actually almost a definition of medicine, isn't it? That actually, you know, it just simply by identifying yourself as a patient you may be on the way to getting better, but actually that's, a, you're already having to guard against the harms that that may lead to, whether it's giving up hope or whether it's, you know, turning yourself into someone different or such like. So it's intrinsic that we have to keep going. It's not just a question that we'll do good and we'll avoid that. We can't avoid, we can't avoid doing that harm, and so it's back to your clear idea of balance. 
Yeah, I do see that.
[Q] Would the, the idea of gardening in hospitals or gardens, gardens around hospitals be something that you'd, you'd want to spread around? 
Oh, I would, I really would. Yeah. The, there's only one chief gardener and he's now gone, a very nice guy who we know well because we sometimes go and we look at it with a critical eye and discuss it with him, even now. He has... doesn't have much help, but spreading around has actually happened within St George's. Now there are many more areas which are either gardens or pleasant greeny looking places and it has spread out even on that side. And, of course, art in hospitals has become a big deal, hasn't it, big thing; people think about...
[Q] Yes. But we need to influence architects, don't we, and managers and to think that this is an essential part of it, not just an optional extra. 
As you have done in your own, at your own hospital you created.
