james.black

The late Scottish pharmacologist Sir James W Black (1924-2010) revolutionised medical treatment of hypertension and angina with his invention of propranolol, the first ever beta blocker.  This and his synthesis of cimetidine, used for the treatment of peptic ulcers, earned him the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1988.

I've been a... fan of The New York Review of Books for many years. And, I remember one review of the novel Alias Grace by Margaret Atwood, and it was being reviewed by another novelist, Hilary Mantel, and the book is about recollections. And Mantel says: 'Perhaps there's no such thing as memory, only the act of remembering. Perhaps remembering is not about recollection but about reconstruction.' And I... well, the problems of this kind of thing I'm going through now is: am I recollecting or reconstructing? And I guess I'm doing a bit of both. So let's start, I suppose, at the beginning. Everybody likes to go back to their family. My father was... well, he left school at 14 and went down the mines, and evenings he went to classes and turned himself into a mining engineer. So, by the time I was around, he was already a colliery manager. But I grew up in a mining community with this hardworking dad. He had five boys. I was number four. My dear mother was a staunch Baptist and she looked after not just our physical welfare but our spiritual welfare as well. So, Sunday was a 5 mile walk, both ways, twice, to go to services in the morning and the evening.
So I grew up, then, in a stable family and went to Local Authority schools in the village, so Auchterderran Primary School – still there. Then, when I was 10 or 11, I went to what was then called Cowdenbeath Secondary School. It became fashionable later on and changed its name to Beath High School, but in my days it was Cowdenbeath Secondary School. Cowdenbeath now has a... quite a useful football team, but essentially it was a centre of a mining community. And the thing about mining communities is they have a passion for education. They just don't want their sons to go down the pits where they were. And so these schools all had terrific teachers, and I remember, you know, many of my teachers, particularly at secondary school. One I particularly remember called Waterson... Dr Waterson... you met him, of course, in Dunfermline, I think. 
[Q] No, I wasn't there. 
Weren't you? 
[Q] I met him through Janet. 
Oh, is that right? That's right, yes, yes. He was a mathematician, and... as a school teacher he got a PhD from working out how it was that Briggs managed to calculate his logs to the base 10, to something like seven decimal places, and no one knew how he did it, but Dr Waterson figured it out. He got his PhD from that. And then he got his DSc later on for... studying Viète, who showed... he showed that Viète... in fact discovered De Moivre's theorem 100 years before De Moivre was born, but he had used algebra... I beg your pardon, geometry rather than algebra. So, that was the kind of atmosphere, and he used to let me see the Latin texts and so on that he used. Anyway, he gave me a book to work through. It was called Calculus Made Easy by Silvanus P Thompson. It had answers at the back and I worked my way through it, at my own speed, and then I got an answer different from the... I was about two thirds of the way through. It was an integral problem. And Dr Waterson sat down beside me and he got the same answer as me, and he said, without hesitation: 'The book's wrong; I can do calculus as well as Silvanus P Thompson'. And I remember thinking: how can anybody have the confidence to say: 'The book's wrong'? Anyway, that was the kind of thing, but essentially the thing I remembered him for – I suppose I have to be grateful to him – was as a youth up until now I – and still... I still do, I suppose – I'm a self confessed daydreamer, and I daydreamed my way through school, and I never thought about what I was going to be doing after school, but he persuaded me to sit the entrance examination at St Andrews. It was competitive. And I did, and then I was asked for an interview, and that was scary because this was in the Senate room at St Andrews. And it was a long table like this, with windows, so I was sitting here against... they were a lot of shapes, black, against the light, and Sir James Irvine, the Principal – a very smooth man – and I had this interview. And, anyway, I won a residential scholarship: the Patrick Hamilton Residential Scholarship. Now, I didn't know, until then, my elder three brothers had gone to university – to St Andrews, in fact – and I didn't realise that if I had wanted to go to university I wouldn't have been able to because my dad couldn't have afforded it, so it was lucky that I got the scholarship.

St Andrews was just a... a great experience. This was 1941, early in the war, and St Andrews was a small place. I think there was about 500 students, and so, almost literally, you knew everybody through the Students' Union and dances at the weekend, and so on. And it was...
[Q] So how old were you when you went to St Andrews? 
I was just 16. Yes, so... so... the highlight of St Andrews... it meant... it... I went to do medicine. Now, why did I want to do medicine? My elder brother had done medicine and I used to see his books at home, and I suppose that fired my imagination. So I opted to do medicine, and I remember Irvine asking me: was I motivated by, you know, wanting to do good? It just hadn't crossed my mind. I didn't think it was that. I... I thought it just looked like a subject which was rich in its possibilities, which it is. And so, anyway, as part of that the first two years medical school are in St Andrews, then the last three years, in those days, you went to Dundee. And, the highlight of my undergraduate period at St Andrews was meeting D'Arcy Thompson, and by this time he was in his 80s, and he used to walk through St Andrews with a big black cloak and a black hat, like Darwin, with a parrot on his shoulder. And... but he was a very exciting teacher, and, so, you know, I devoured his book Growth and Fall, and so on, which got me interested in the mathematics of living things. Anyway, medical school: I enjoyed it. I was impressed by... I had, in medicine, two teachers. One, the Professor, Adam Patrick, who was like Mr Pickwick: frizzle grey hair and pebble glasses and a be… benign look on his face. And Adam could very rarely come to a diagnosis when presented with a patient. He was always tentative, and he went to every post-mortem. And the other teacher, Dr Clarke, he never went to a post-mortem and he always came to a diagnosis. And so, right… I was imprinted with this about the... the fact that there's this inverse relationship between testing out your experience and how firm your conclusions are. Now, one thing I didn't like about my medical training was, to me… it had to be individual. It had to me treating you. And, the way we were being taught was you weren't you – you were a member of a class: liver disease, heart failure, whatnot – and so in some ways they took the personality out of medicine. I... I didn't like that. And… so, when I graduated, I... I'm appalled now at my stupidity or confidence – I don't know which it was... so as soon as I graduated I did two things. I got married, and I went round to the Professor of Physiology's door and said, 'Give me a job', which he did. So, my... soon as I graduated I went into physiology, which seemed to me a subject which was... it would give me the scope which I wanted, which was free of all these emotional problems.

I spent a year there while Hilary was finishing her degree. Indeed, she was in my class – I taught her. Also, this was 1946, and this was the time when all the young bucks were coming back from the war, married off, and children... desperate for knowledge. I have never, in all my teaching years, been sucked dry like an orange as I was in that first year, when I knew least, by these young men wanting to know. So, so that was learning how to teach, and I also got imprinted with research there. Not that I learned anything from the Professor. When I ever went to him with ideas he used to say, 'Oh, that's old stuff', and that's not the way to motivate anybody. But, anyway, he had a young PhD girl, Nancy somebody or other – I can't remember her second name – and she was working on a problem about the absorption of sugars from the gut, and there a Swiss physiologist, Verzar, was claiming that certain sugars, like glucose and fructose, which are reducing sugars, were selectively absorbed much faster than most other simple sugars. And his theory was that it was because they were phosphorylated, and so he claimed he had proof of this by using sodium iodoacetate as a poison to poison the phosphorylating enzyme. And, when treated with sodium iodoacetate, the selective absorption disappeared, and what Nancy was showing was that, in fact, the use of the substance just necrosed – killed off – the whole of the surface epithelium, and so Garry's argument was: 'Nothing to do with phosphorylation; has to do with epithelium'. But I remember asking her, but you know, 'What else is this poison doing? What's it doing to your blood pressure?' Didn't know. And, then because they couldn't measure blood pressure on these small animals at that time. So that was my first task: to learn how to measure blood pressure without a small instrument. But... so, I'm imprinted, then, right at the beginning, with something to do with the gut and something to do with the circulation, and these, as you know, are two ideas, which are two attitudes almost, that have haunted me for the rest of my life.

After a year I applied... in fact, it's the only job I've ever applied for and I didn't get it. So I... I applied to go to Makerere College, and the reason I wanted to go abroad was because my residential scholarship was for four years and so for my last year I had to borrow money. And so here I was on a pittance of a salary and big debts, and just got married, and I knew I couldn't live with this so I had to emigrate, and so I tried to go to Uganda, failed, but they offered me a job in Singapore, so that's where I went. So for three years I was in Singapore earning enough money to pay off my debts. And, incidentally, this is one reason why I'm so passionately against young people being saddled with debt, as they are today, at the start of their careers. I think it's just abominable. Anyway, a bit of politics. In Singapore I learned to teach more. It's quite interesting, you start off... it's a polyglot community; mainly Chinese, but there are Indians of various types, and there's Malays of course. And, you start off and everybody is vaguely browner than you are, and then you gradually learn to recognise the Chinese and the Tamils and the Sikhs and Malays and so on, and you're aware of the differences. And then, after about a year, you don't notice them anymore, or you notice all the ones you like and the ones you don't like, so you become sort of colour blind, which I found an interesting experience, in retrospect. And, incidentally, I was teaching these youngsters, medical students, and I was trying to teach them human physiology by making them do experiments on themselves. Now, you were talking a moment ago about passing a nasogastric tube to...so one of the experiments I did was to get the students to pass a tube on each other or on themselves so that they could sample the gastric secretion and so on, and it was fascinating. The Chinese could just... no problems. All the others – the Indians, the Malays: they gagged and choked. It was a clear difference between them. I did research and I lost my way. I became so obsessed with trying... what I was trying to do was measure, or find out, whether viscosity changes in the blood depending on whether the gut was absorbing water – fluid – or secreting, and so I thought I could detect this if I measured pressure flow relations. And so I got absorbed in all the engineering and the maths, and I completely and utterly... the whole thing was far away beyond my skill or capacity. So what I did learn there was not how to do research but how not to do it, and I learned, I think, the most important lesson of my life which is: in research it is impossible to make an experiment too simple and that, really, what you have to do is take a problem and see if you can break it down to smaller problems. And, if you get a problem, you know this... that... that's almost moronically simple, it seems hardly worth asking, the only thing you don't know is the answer, but you know it's a question which is answerable, and then you've got yourself an experiment.

I'm back in London and... after three years, and I'm walking the streets of London between medical schools, knocking on doors trying to get a job, when one day I'm in Oxford Street and a hand falls on my shoulders, and this is Professor Garry. He was the professor that I originally went to work with in Dundee. Meanwhile, he'd moved to Glasgow. And, so he took me back to his hotel and had some tea and... and anyway, he said, 'Well, you know, I could give you a job in Glasgow, but how about the Vet School?' Now, this was now 1950 and after the war, the post-war government decided to nationalise all the Vet schools. There was one, the Royal Dick, at Edinburgh which was part... in the University sector. All the others were private companies. So, Glasgow had a thing called the Glasgow Veterinary College, housed in an 1840s building in Buccleuch Street, and it was pretty well... it was a dump, to put it finely. But, the University took it over... there has... they had to by law. They were told: Take it over. And, they didn't know what to do with the Vet School, but they did a clever thing. They head-hunted the most successful veterinarian in the West of Scotland, a man called William Weipers – Bill Weipers. And, so he said, 'Why don't you come and meet Weipers?' So, I went and met him, and he was a man I learned to love. He had... he... he was like a dog with grizzled hair, he had big eyebrows, sharp face, piercing eyes, and he'd go right to the point, and he could obfuscate like nobody if he didn't want you to make a decision. He could talk and talk and talk and talk. Anyway, he offered me a job, so I got the job at a very tender age of starting a new department of physiology from scratch. There was nothing there. So I built myself a workshop and got my labs going and so on, and gradually it filtered up to the University that there was some funny young guy down in the Vet School who seemed to have equipment and be able to do experiments and things. So I suddenly found people knocking at my door, two of them I eventually worked with: two Georges – George Smith... I beg your pardon, two Smiths: George Smith and Adam Smith.

George Smith had been invalided out of the war – the navy – and gone to Baltimore to... and he was learning to be a heart surgeon. And the technique in those days of treating angina was to try and increase the blood supply, because in angina the circulation is compromised through block... blockage... was to bring in blood vessels from outside the heart. And they did this by bringing the omentum, a vascular tissue in the... through the diaphragm, and he would scarify the surface of the epicardium, stitch this thing on it and... and, well, Smith showed that, in fact, the extra blood flow which was going to the heart was really quite small. So, he thought: well, if such a small increase in blood supply is effective, maybe a small increase in the delivery of oxygen would be just as effective. So, he pioneered the technique of high pressure, or hyperbaric oxygen, and showed that the ventricular fibrillation which the cardiac... the arrhythmia which develops when a coronary artery occludes... that you could prevent that if you exposed these animals to two atmospheres pressure of oxygen. So that's where I got into the act, because I knew enough physics to know that oxygen isn't really very soluble in water and, in any case, as you know, the haemoglobin – the oxygen carrying protein – is fully saturated at a fifth of an atmosphere of oxygen, so two atmospheres of oxygen was only increasing in the amount of dissolved oxygen, and it's not very soluble, so I could figure out that the increase in oxygen that he was giving was not very much.
So then there's a whole series of things happen. My father had what turned out to be his fatal heart attack following a minor car accident, and... and he got his heart attack that night, and that made me think about stress, because it was... it was often... these heart attacks were often occurring on Friday nights and so on. An element of stress was quite commonly taught as being involved in this. And so, you know, I knew enough physiology by now to know that the stress effect on the heart is sympathetic to increased heart rate. And so, the question then was: if such a small increase in the supply of oxygen is effective, how about an equally small decrease in demand? So, the main thing which is stimulating the demand is heart rate, so why can't we just reduce the heart rate? Well, drugs called anti-adrenaline drugs had been known since the 1930s, and they were known that they would produce blood pressure, but only if you stood up, and you fainted. If you lie down it did nothing, but if you stood up, your blood pressure would fall, and it was known that when you were standing up and your blood pressure was like that, your heart rate was beating like blazes. So it was really known, but not really commented on, that apparently this heart rate effect wasn't being taken out by anti-adrenaline drugs. And so I just thought: well, that's.... I put it away out of my mind, actually. Anti-adrenaline drugs weren't going to do the trick. Then, by accident I came across a... a chapter in a book I'd bought because I thought I should learn some pharmacology, and this was Pharmacology in Medicine, it was called, and there was chapters in it by a chap called Ahlquist – Raymond Ahlquist – and he was able to write in this book the work which he had had great difficulty getting published. And this was about trying to understand the pharmacology of... not adrenaline but a compound very close to adrenaline. This was isoprenaline, and this was a drug which was made and tested and brought into medicine in 1940, and it was brought in to dilate the bronchi, and so it was known to be a bronchodilator, and it was known also that it stimulated the heart, to make it go faster. And, the prevailing ideas about how adrenaline worked on tissues were very ambiguous at that time. People didn't talk about receptors... the only people who talked about receptors were pharmacologists with a mathematical bent because if they wanted to describe the relationship between dose and response, to write down, to make it into an algebraic sort of equation to see what it looked like, they had to have the concentration of drug interacting with something else and they called them receptors, but it was a pure idea though no one knew the existence of these things. But Ahlquist took this idea of receptors and said, 'Maybe what we have with adrenaline are two kinds of receptors', and he called them alpha receptors and beta receptors, and what the heart had were beta receptors, and the bronchi were beta receptors, whereas blood vessels, which constrict when you stand up, are alpha receptors. And so he concluded that the anti-adrenaline drugs of the day were alpha receptor blockers; that's why you fainted when you stood up, and your heart rate wasn't blocked. So when I read this it seemed obvious that what I wanted was a beta receptor antagonist.

I had a friend at the time who was a... a rep for ICI [Imperial Chemical Industries] in the Western Scotland area, and he said, 'Why don't you write to ICI and see if they'll fund you to do some work on this', because he told me the ICI just moved into fantastic new labs down in Cheshire. They had moved from Trafford Park which was the old ICI Division... Dyestuffs Division. And, so I... I did; I took the advice and wrote in, and I got a site visit, and one of these was a guy called Garnet Davey who we were talking about earlier. I can't remember who the other chap was for the life of me but...
[Q] Al Spinks. 
No, no, it wasn't, no. 
[Q] Yule Bogue? 
No, no, no, it wasn't. No, I don't know who he was because, because Garnet was definitely the senior, he was the leader, and... the upshot of it was they said, 'Look here, this is quite interesting, but it's hard for you to do it here; you've got no chemistry and so on. Why don't you come and work for us?' So that was how I was invited down to this Alderley Park place. I can't tell you what an eye-opener it was. You know, from Buccleuch Street, which was a dump in a... in a very rundown area of Glasgow, here was this place out in the country and big sweeping drive with lights, with little mice, the lights. You remember? And these fantastic new buildings beside the lake and... and the labs were just... Anyway, so I... I just... a dream world for me to be invited to work there. And, it wasn't till I got there that I realised that, in fact, Garnet Davey was subordinate to Alfred Spinks who was the Section Head at that time, I think he was called, but... 
[Q] That was about 1958. 
That's right, yes. And then, Garnet gets promoted to become Research Manager for the Biological... over Alf Spinks. So... yeah, so this was my first introduction to industrial politics of which you and I have played our part. But Garnet Davey played a... an important part in my life. He gave me the opportunity to do something. And so I was given a young chemist, John Stephenson, and he was a lovely fellow. And, I remember, every morning he would come down with his notebook, structures all over the place; he got excited about what we were trying to do, and I had never really... chemistry; I'd done a little bit at school and a term at university, but chemistry really wasn't something I knew much about, and so this was a whole eye-opener. And so now we're going to make ourselves a beta blocker. Now, here is the important theme which runs out through the rest of what I'm going to be talking about, and that is that what began as an accident, a pure accident, in retrospect I saw it as a principle. Now, the principle may be wrong but that's what we're going to talk about.

The accident was that here I wanted to stop adrenaline acting on the heart and here is the drug. So adrenaline to isoprenaline is just a methyl group being replaced by an isopropyl group. And so isoprenaline selectively stimulates the heart and dilates the bronchi, and that's all we knew. So, where do you start to go looking for an antagonist? So, all we could think of starting was with isoprenaline. Now, I had read a paper somewhere that you could make an antagonist out of a molecule, par doublement la molecule – doubling it up – so that's what we set out to do: to make doubled up versions of isoprenaline. So, basically, these are dibenzyl ethylamines. So, that's... we were working away with these, and getting nowhere in finding an antagonist. And then... so, let me tell you, isoprenaline, it is derived from an amino acid and it's of the phenyl group and the side chain and amine group. Two hydroxyl groups on the ring, so it's a dihydroxy. And it was known, by this time, that the action of adrenaline was terminated by one of these hydroxyl groups becoming methylated. And so a group out in Eli Lilly, in the States, were trying to make a long acting version of isoprenaline, and so they thought: it's these hydroxyl groups that are metabolically labile... let's replace them with something. So, they replaced them with two chlorine atoms, dichloro analogue of isoprenaline. Well, they tested it. It had ceased to be a bronchodilator, so they hadn't achieved their objective. But they did notice that once a preparation had been treated with DCI, as it's called – dichlorides or DCI – that it would no longer respond to isoprenaline. Now they didn't know about Ahlquist's work and so when they published the work they didn't talk about maybe this was blocking beta receptors, but it was published, and two months later... that was published at the end of... just about... end of about '58, beginning of '59, and two months later a paper appeared from a group down in Atlanta claiming that, in fact, the stuff was acting by blocking Ray Ahlquist's beta receptors. So, was this the lead we were looking for? So, John immediately made it, and we tested it, and in the preparation we were using, it was just as though we'd given isoprenaline. So at that time my knowledge of pharmacology was pretty well non-existent, so I didn't understand it; put it on the side. And then we went ahead. Now John, when he looked at this, pointed out to me that these chlorine atoms were quite large, and so big lipophilic... he said, 'You know, if... if I joined up two phenyl groups it would be the, sort of, same shape and size, so that's going from... to analine'. But, in the meantime, I had changed my method of assessing these compounds and found that, in this new preparation, that DCI wasn't... didn't have these isoprenaline-like agonist activity. And so suddenly we got all excited about DCI. John had this idea about analine so that was the first. I remember, from idea to making it, to it working, that's my recollection. I mean, and by Jove, we got something which was as good as DCI but without any agonist activities. So, and that was the first beta blocker and we went into man with it. It came from Alderley Park, so it was Alderlin. Do you remember? Pronethalol. Pronethalol, yes. But we learned a lot from that compound. Then, subsequently a better compound was made when we... By this time ICI, you see, had woken up to the possibility that maybe there was some money here, and put a whole bunch of chemists on with... Bert Krause, I remember, was the leader of this group and so they did a great job at ordering in the changes, and they produced propranolol, and that has been the backbone of beta blocking drugs ever since.

James Raventos, who... Spanish – had come during the Spanish Civil War  to Edinburgh, and he worked with AJ Clark, one of the doyens of  quantitative pharmacology. So, James had worked with Raventos there, and  when Yule Bogue, whom you mentioned, who was the R&D Director, got  his way with ICI [Imperial Chemical Industries] to build this new place  at Alderley Park, James was invited to join the Pharmaceutical Division,  and they went on and they developed the... this new anaesthetic,  halothane, which was an improvement on ether because it was  non-inflammable, etc. But I saw with... two things about James: one, he  taught me some pharmacology; and, second, I saw what happened to you  when you become successful, and twice a week ICI brought in busloads of  anaesthetists to Alderley Park and James was wheeled out to talk to them  in the morning, then down to an alcoholic lunch, and so his whole  day... every Tuesday and Thursday were ruined by having to entertain  these visitors. And I thought: crikey, if that's the future, you know,  I'm unhappy about this.

We, first of all, took our drugs into... human beings at St George's Hospital in London, now a big Lanesborough Hotel, and the first subject that we used it on was a young doctor. And, if you infuse isoprenaline into an artery in the arm, the... the blood flow... the blood vessels in this whole arm would dilate, and you could measure the big increase in blood flow which isoprenaline would produce, so you measure it and then you infuse the drug, just locally, and then you put the isoprenaline in again and be completely blocked in. And then we, almost without pausing for breath, then went to another young doctor and he is now given isoprenaline intravenously, so the whole body gets it, and on the control you... not only does his heart rate go whipping up and he gets a fall in blood pressure and an increase in blood flow to... to his arms, but he... he's restless. And afterwards I... I... you know, 'What's the problem?' He says, 'I feel I'm going to die'. And, so then we treated him with pronethalol and now – isoprenaline was given again – all is peace. Heart rate doesn't change, blood pressure doesn't fall, blood vessels don't dilate, and he's lying at peace. So, this... so, this was where, you know, one got the idea that one's heart is sending information into the brain all the time and relating, if you like, the appropriateness of what it's doing to what the whole body's doing, so if, in this case, the guy is lying on the bed and you stimulate the heart fast enough, as though he was running from a lion, but there's no lion, all hell goes loose upstairs, something's gone wrong here, and so they get this fear. And, this has always been one of the things which have in... been involved with beta blockers... is this business about using them to control fear for examinations, billiard players, musicians. I have a friend who's a concert pianist and when he... in the old days you would come on for the first part and you'd feel passionate, and then go off at the interval, your shirt was soaked, change it, shower, and you've come back on for the second half, and now you're washed out and you're passionless. And what beta blockers did was allow them to be much more intellectual, so the first half they could play but didn't get too worked up about it, and then... so they got a more uniform performance. Whether that was good or bad he wasn't sure, but that's what they did. So, that was the first thing. Then we... we moved to University College to a chap called Brian Prichard – a young clinical pharmacologist – and he found that when he took his patients and gave them pronethalol that the pulse rate would fall, but he found that only a few of the patients with the initial dose he... would the blood pressure... would the pulse rate fall. But he found if increased the dose more and then... so he was able to show that eventually, if you give a big enough dose, he could get the pulse rate down to 60 at rest in everybody.
 

When he ran, then, the trial, not on equal doses, but on equal effects, then 16 out of the 17 patients with angina he looked at, were able to do much more exercise than beforehand. 
[Q] That seemed quite an important principle that came out of Prichard's work. 
Absolutely. 
[Q] Titrating to an effect. 
Absolutely, and we're still not doing it and we can't afford to go on the way we're doing it. Anyway, that's... we can maybe talk about that later. So, then we came with propranolol. By this time, of course, Brian had learned what he had to do so, again, he titrated his patients and... but on that first trial he found that, during the titration, when he was getting them all... the pulse rate at 60, that... and... and during the study, the... the blood pressure had come slowly down. So, when we started with propranolol he went straightaway to look at patients with high blood pressure, because up till then the only way to treat high blood pressure was to interfere with the sympathetic nervous system to blood vessels which gave you postural hypotension; that is, your blood pressure fell when you stood up, but not when you were lying flat. So he found that – again, titrated 17 out of 18 patients, I think it was, with hypertension – the blood pressure came slowly down over six weeks, and... the problem was you would've thought... and...and this was now not dependent on posture, and I have a slide somewhere showing how you can take... I think it was bethanechol... I can't remember... bethanidine, which was a sympathetic neuron blocking drug, posture dependent, and then gradually as you replace the bethanidine with propranolol, you got the fall in blood pressure whether you were standing or falling. And this was the major discovery about beta blockers which was surprising. It had not really been predicted by anybody.
Now, here's the thing: this was 1964. Brian published that when he'd finished, and two things: the medical profession didn't believe it because the dose range between the smallest dose and the highest dose was about tenfold, and so he... it was thought to be almost like toxicology, and this wasn't serious medicine. And so he was met with scepticism; that was the first thing. The second thing is: that's 1964, so we're now talking about 40-odd years, and it's well established that when you put onto beta blocker, any beta blocker, whatever other properties it has, the blood pressure comes down quickly on the first 24-36 hours, and then over months it gradually, slowly, slowly, slowly falls. And there is no agreement among pharmacologists or physicians what's happening. All we know is that when you stop the blood pressure doesn't immediately go back. Also, the biggest clinical trial ever done in this country was done with propranolol. This was something like 18,000 patients were recruited through... through general practitioners, and they were treated with either propranolol or a diuretic or a placebo for 5 years. And these were people with mild high blood pressure, and the drill was that if, during this 5 years, their blood pressure deteriorated, then they would be taken out of the trial and treated properly. And so what they had at the end of five years was that something like one in five of the placebo group had to be withdrawn because the blood pressure had gone out of range, whereas hardly any of the treated group did that happen. So, you're not only... you were preventing deterioration. Now, the conclusion of the trial was that you might stop 1 in 850 people getting a stroke, and so it's probably not worthwhile treating patients with mild hypertension, whereas the conclusion which they should have taken, I think, was the earlier you detect high blood pressure the better, treat it vigorously, and who knows; you might get a cure. But this is a policy which is still not in practice. So, not only is there no agreement about the basis of this chronic effect, but there's no agreement about the policy to use in treating. Right. So, that's beta blockers.

I mentioned the other Smith – Adam Smith – at the Vet School, and he had had a sabbatical year at the National Institute of Medical Research in London working with Feldberg, and Feldberg was studying... well, it had been described during the war as serotonin, something... a vasoconstrictor substance which appears in blood plasma when... when the blood was shed, and so it was called serotonin, the stuff... and then it was shown, pretty quickly, that serotonin was an amino acid derivative called 5-hydroxytryptamine. So, Adam Smith was working with Fellberg on 5-HT, as it's called, and they were measuring the concentrations of the 5-hydroxytryptamine in all the tissues in the body they could find, and the place with the highest concentration was in the stomach. And so when Adam came back to Glasgow he had this idea: maybe 5-HT was stimulating the secretion of acid. So, we set out to look at this, and 5-HT did not stimulate acid secretion, but what we did find out: if we stimulated acid...
[Q] This was this done when you were at Glasgow, in the Vet School? 
That's right, in the Vet... in the Vet School, yes. If you stimulated acid that with histamine, maximally, the maximum output of histamine stimulated secretion, and now you put in the 5-HT, we could shut the secretion right down and bags of mucus were produced.

Back now, we're down... 1964, and I'm... got itchy feet, restless legs syndrome, and I realise that when I'd been in the Vet School that I learned that another class of drugs called antihistamines, which had been introduced at about the same time and from the same school in Paris as the anti-adrenalines – these were the antihistamines – and it had been shown by 1940 that antihistamines would not block histamine stimulated secretion of acid. So I knew that from the Vet School days. And, now I began to think: why, maybe histamine, like adrenaline, had its beta receptors and maybe acid secretion which had a different time course to the normal effect of histamine, which is to constrict blood vessels... I mean, dilate them... maybe it had its beta receptor. So that was the point where there was a series of events. The Head of Pathology, George Edward Paget, had been a... working with...
[Q] This was at ICI now? 
Well that's at ICI [Imperial Chemical Industries], yes, sorry. And... and George... George Paget... Edward Paget is Head of Toxicology. So, I had worked pretty closely with him during the development of these drugs. He, meanwhile, had been doing some work on some committee or other at which he met Bill Bain who...
[Q] The Hennessey Committee.
Eh? 
[Q] The Hennessey Committee.
Was that what it was?
[Q] Yeah. 
So, anyway, he... and, Bill Bain was running a research outfit which was being funded by Smith Kline & French, but it was a separate unit, and they decided they wanted a research director for the... the company bit, and so George Edward Paget was head-hunted to go to Smith Kline & French as R&D Director. I remember him asking me one day, did I know any pharmacologists who were looking, and I said, 'What's wrong with me?' And so that's how it was that I... I went down there, and... and that's when I put the knuckle on you. I said, 'Come on Bill, here's an opportunity'. And, I can remember driving down together, do you remember? And you hiding so as not to be seen on our way to Welwyn Garden City where Smith Kline was. Anyway, upshot of it all is that you and I depart to Welwyn Garden City, not immediately because I had a 6 month contract with ICI and they enforced it, so I was made to come into work, or into the building, every day, but I wasn't allowed to contaminate anybody, so I worked... Do you remember that surgery? So, I was despatched to the surgery. I was excommunicated. I wasn't allowed to see any paperwork, and so I struggled to learn how to play the guitar for six months. Anyway, we both then go off to Smith Kline.

Here's the point I mentioned earlier, the accident: that we got to beta blockers from adrenaline taking the natural compound and manipulating it. And I did that because I couldn't think of anything else to do. Now, we go to Smith Kline and we're in the same position. I want to block the effects of histamine and I know the structure of antihistamines, but they don't do the job I want. So where to start? So, that's when – more self-consciously – we started making analogues of histamine, and... and that's where you were involved and so on. Anyway, they... the analogy here is that one of the earliest compounds we made was the guanidine analogue of histamine of the terminal. And it was tested and found to be just like histamine, and so it was ignored. And we went on, I think, four years, Bill, and tested and tested and tested them, and just got nowhere. And now this is the kind of place where... is it recollection or reconstruction? I fear it's reconstruction but my reconstruction is that I remember... so this is my... my reconstruction, sitting with Mike Parsons, who was the pharmacologist who was doing the work, and going through all these structures. And, again, we had now changed the method of assay and I remember fingering this compound and saying, 'Why don't...?' And we found that it was to histamine like DCI was to adrenaline; that is, in certain circumstances it would be a powerful stimulant. But, anyway, that... we then... we got to beta blockers from adrenaline by attacking the hydroxyl groups on the ring, replacing them the analine. Histamine is imidazolethylamine, and so I was expecting that we would have to do something to the imidazole ring. And a lot of our chemistry, you know, very difficult chemistry because of the solubility of these things... they didn't come out of solution easily, was making benzimidazole and all kinds of things. You remember. And so now this was... changed not on the ring but on the side chain. And so, anyway, once Ganellin and his chaps got the idea there was no holding him back then, and we went from that eventually to cimetidine, and into man.

I think I mentioned that the chemists were making analogues and derivatives of histamine, mainly concentrating on the imidazole ring, and one of the first things they did, the chemists, was to put methyl groups in every position, on the side chain, on the nitrogen. So methyl groups on the nitrogen just gave potent agonists which were longer lasting. Methyl groups on the ring either did nothing or in the 4 position of the ring, 4-methylhistamine, it became selective just for acid secretion. So it was like it was two histamines, if you like, what isoprenaline was to the beta receptors. And really that was the thin gruel which kept us going for 4 years – was 4-methylhistamine – and then 2-methylhistamine was selective the other way round.
Anyway, so the whole point of the story... I'll go back now and compare beta blocking story with the histamine story. As far as ICI [Imperial Chemical Industries] was concerned I... my recollection is that I promised them nothing other than if I was successful they had... would have a tool to answer a question, and I didn't know what way the conical question would fall out. It so happened that it fell out in their favour. And so, when we come to the histamine story, that's a different story altogether. This goes back now to 1905 when a substance, which claimed to be a substance, when gastrin was described as a substance you could extract from the mucous membrane of the gastric antrum and that... which stimulates acid secretion. Now, that discovery, if that's what it was, was shadow... overshadowed very quickly because the discovery of histamine would do the same kind of things which gastrin was claimed to do – lowering blood pressure, stimulating acid – and so there was confusion for many years about the relationship between gastrin and histamine. But by the time we got involved in this work, six... in the 60s, gastrin as a chemical entity was established. We knew it was peptide and we knew it was different. So there was histamine, there was gastrin, and also there was people like, Code arguing that gastrin acted by releasing histamine locally, and other people thought: rubbish. And so, again, the story that we put to Smith Kline – Bill – was, well, I don't know whether this is going to work because if histamine is not physiologically involved, there was this paper, Gastric Secretion: No Room for Histamine, and so... so it was just a pharmacological by-product. And so I couldn't be certain that if gastrin, which was the main stimulant... physiological stimulant of that secretion, wasn't acting through histamine, then a... an H2 antagonist wouldn't block it, but that was the thing we ought to be able to get an answer. And so we couldn't really be sure that it was going to work, but of course it did. So that was illuminating to the gastrin rhesus histamine story, which is pretty well known; standard dogma in acid secretion.

This was... one of the early compounds we found which would inhibit acid secretion was histidine. Now histidine is the amino acid and it seemed a very unlikely candidate for an inhibitor. But, anyway, I remember our Research Director got very excited about this... this... and it was alpha-methylhistidine, wasn't it. I think it was. He got very excited about this and maybe... and he wanted to do more, but I said, 'Look, it's not an histamine antagonist, and I'm trying to find a histamine antagonist, not an inhibitor of acid secretion'. And so we had quite a spat on that. But, anyway, we then found out that a... a salt that's often used to extract amino acids is a thing called dichlorobenzene sulfonate and we showed that, in fact, this salt on its own would do the business. So, then he wanted to go for dichlorobenzene sulfonate and... that was one of the minor battles which we won.

I got interviewed for the Chair in Pharmacology at University College and, of course, that's very flattering – to be head-hunted – and... but it wasn't just the flattery, I think, I pride... I kid myself, that I liked the idea that maybe in academia I could continue this kind of work without having to think commerce; that we would be able to go and look for tools that would interfere with physiological processes. And so that was in my mind when I went to University College, and I did a... a lot of interesting things there. I learned to teach pharmacology, which I didn't do very well but I did my best. I learned that I... my... my staff, my faculty... there was about 12 of them; none of them had ever done medicine and all loved to give lectures talking about medical subjects, and I thought this was preposterous, and so I wanted to change the course and I wanted to teach pharmacology as properties of molecules and nothing to do with medicine because... but I... and that was one of the battles I lost and they loved to talk about all these diseases about which they knew nothing and cared less. But we did some interesting pharmacology and we got... did... one of the things we worked on was... I developed a... an interest in mathematical modelling of pharmacology which had started with James Raventos whom I mentioned, and so we were able to model all kinds of things like why DCI [dichloride] and the guanidino analogue of histamine... why they would stimulate on certain preparations and not on others, and this is because they're partial agonists, and partial agonists are dependent on density of receptors. If the density is very high you see agonist activity; if the receptor density is low, then you just see the blocking activity. And then we showed how... that if you... blocked, indirectly, so gastrin releasing histamine, and you block histamine... now, I'm going to amplify this story. I have a beautiful data set which was generated by Mike Parsons, and this shows histamine dose response curves in... alone, and in the presence of two increasing doses of cimetidine – a metiamide it was, the precursor. So you've got parallel shifts of the dose response curves which is what theory predicted you'd get. When we went to gastrin... well, we didn't use gastrin, we used the commercially available ICI-produced terminal pentapeptide – pentagastrin – and when we did pentagastrin dose response curves they weren't displayed. First of all, the shape of them was different. Whereas the histamine curves were steep, the pentagastrin curves flat and they developed that uninhibitory axis at the top, and when you put increasing doses in this thing collapsed. So, two things: one was we were able mathematically to show that that was precisely what you expect if it's an indirectly acting antagonist; but the other thing was, I remember... and I have the slide I produced, and we did an experiment like... showing that if you took maximum histamine secretion and then put gastrin in on top, there was an inhibitory component in gastrin. And so I remember making this little model that gastrin stimulates like histamine, but also recruits at slightly higher doses an inhibitory action, and what you see is the resultant, hence the shape, and... and I modelled this reduction in as dose response curves, moving in parallel across this inhibitory function. And I really forgot about that until recently, and I'll come back to that, if you can just hold that in the memory, because of some work I'm going to tell you about.
Back to University College. My passion to get chemistry, medicinal chemistry, going in a university... failed. I managed to get them to start an undergraduate degree in medicinal chemistry which was not a very good course, because by this time the University was running the units system, and all you could do was cobble together units and it... it was just a... not a very good course, but it was popular. People liked it because it seemed to be more directly utility orientated than just pure chemistry. But what I wanted was to build a floor on the top of the chemistry department which would... I wanted to get the money for that where I get half and the University would get half, but I'd have my dedicated chemist. Well, 4 years I failed. I never got the money, never got the chemistry, and so my dream of medicinal chemistry in academia, not driven by commerce, failed.

Before I left, while I was still at Smith Kline, I can't remember now how I met John Vane, but I remember going down once a week to the Royal College of Surgeons where he worked as a Professor of Pharmacology there, and we did some experiments together. And then he was head-hunted to become the Research Director of the Wellcome Foundation, and so he'd gone to Wellcome, and he recruited me as a consultant. So I used to go down to Langley Park at Beckenham, which was the headquarters of the Wellcome Foundation, and I got to know the place. And I loved the idea of it. So let me recap what that was. Henry Wellcome was a Canadian and another young American, Burroughs, did pharmacy together at University of Wisconsin and then they moved to Philadelphia and they set up a little manufacturing business and they moved to the UK and we have Burroughs Wellcome Limited which pro... produced a lot of things – digitalis, this kind of thing – but also they introduced antibodies. And... and so they were producing antibodies for... help me... horses... it'll come... my nominal amnesia. Anyway, the point was that Wellcome, Henry Wellcome, had moved south of London into Herne Hill area, to a big estate so that he could have horses that would generate the proteins, the vaccines which the company used. And then that became too small so then he moved into this much bigger site in, near Beckenham, Langley Park. By the time we got there the horses had gone. That was done elsewhere. But it had become a conventional pharmaceutical company, and, with dedicated buildings and so on, but the idea was... what happened was in 1936 Wellcome died and in his will he directed that the company should be handed over to trustees, and it was set up as the Wellcome Foundation, and the Trustees had the fiducial duty to manage that business with the idea that profits from it would go back into medical research. And that was the condition where we were, and I liked that idea, frankly. Everybody did. We all liked it. So when I got frustrated at University College and John, I suppose, detected this; he then head-hunted me to go down and join him. Well, that was a mixed blessing, and John and I, really, temperamental-wise just didn't fit, and the way I wanted to do things he didn't want, and so... on the positive side I think I helped to bring to the market three products which might not have happened otherwise, lamotrigine, the anticonvulsant, and the short acting neuromuscular blocker which falls apart, and the 5-HT agonist.

So, there I was running my R&D department, running into management problems with John, then he became... I remember vividly. What happened was he was being lined up for the chop, as you might say in industrial terms. I remember hearing the news, 1986 October, that John Vane had got a Nobel Prize, and I remember thinking that's it, and of course sure enough that was it. He then called the shots, and so we ended up having a... a head to head, and so he offered me a number of options of which the only one that appealed to me was to leave, but to leave with a dowry. And so I ended up negotiating with the Chairman of the company about my dowry, so I got funds for 5 years and I got agreement that I could take all my equipment with me, and any of the staff who wanted to come with me could come.
Well, if we take these one by one. First of all the equipment: I had the Chairman's word that I could take everything so we got a pantechnicon which came in one evening when everybody had gone and my youngsters worked through the night and we put everything, and I mean everything, into that van. So in the morning there was absolutely empty labs, no tables, not... just the whole caboodle had gone. And apparently when they came in, in the morning, you know, their jaws dropped. Anyway, I had had the Chairman's word, but that was that. Then... the other thing was all my young... youngsters who were working with me said, 'Oh yes', they would come, and then one by one they came and said, 'Sorry', they couldn't come. And then one day one of the young girls who had said she would come, then she said she wouldn't come, then she came back and said: 'I wonder if I could change my mind'. She said that there had been pressure put on them all not to come, and she thought it wasn't honourable, so could she change her mind. And so she did, and she came and she got a lovely PhD with me when we came up here to King's College, which I'm now coming to. So I have 5 years money, I've got equipment and now I need a home, and I started off with University College, and they showed me a garret up on the top of the building from which they wanted some huge rent, and really it wasn't appealing to me. Then I... I can't remember whether I did it deliberately or, but anyway, I got in touch with... oh, my goodness me... he was now Professor of Pharmacology at King's College. His name will come in a moment; I'll remember. But he, I remember, arranged for me to meet the Principal, who at that time was a retired air force officer, military gentleman – Scottish – and I had a lovely interview with him. And he arranged for me, the next day, to see the Dean of the Medical School down at King's College, and that day he showed me an empty lab in the Rayne Institute over there, and said... you know. So we shook hands on the deal, I had the lab; then I found a terrace house just outside, just round the corner from the labs, and I rented the terrace house and I had my people in there, so four people came with me who were all housed in there. We had the labs and we were working away.

Then I was approached by someone... I can't recall the company... something director, what are they called? J&J? Oh, never mind. A senior director of the company invited me to lunch at The Connaught and I think he was trying to head-hunt me. At that time they had the man who is the... had been the most fecund inventor of new drugs ever; he worked in Belgium and he had set up this company, and J&J had taken over, and I think they were saying, 'Well, look here, we have him; why can't we have you?' And I explained that wild horses wouldn't take me back into big industry, that I'd had that, and in any case my wife was dying and I wasn't going to do anything. So, a year later – by this time my wife had died – they came back and took me to lunch again at The Connaught, again, dangling this thing. So, I said, 'No, I'm sorry, I've... I'm dealing with grief by working my butt off, and I'm going to set up my own little business and do it my way', and all the rest. So, as a result of that I had a phone call from the person who'd been mentioned at both meetings: a Mr Wilson, a mysterious Mr Wilson. So this Mr... It wasn't Mr Wilson, it was the Director again who came round and said he'd spoken to Mr Wilson who said if I wanted to set up my own business I'd need capital, and he had capital; could he come and talk. And so, earlier in January '87, I met Mr Wilson at the hotel in London and went up to his room – a great big fellow, woolly pullover, shaggy – and we sat down and talked all day. He had a pad and made notes, and I sketched out all my dreams. And, so he... said, 'Now write something'. So that was how it was left. And... a few days later I had a phone call from him saying, 'Look, they've been kicking around the office and they... could they come back', so they came back almost a week later. This was Mr Wilson with someone who turned out to be a lawyer. Dellenbaugh. Mr Dellenbaugh. And, anyway, so we talked and we shook hands on a deal, in principle, that we would set up our own thing. Now, that was... that was all right but we... once we got lawyers involved... the heads of agreement came fairly quickly, but before we actually got... it took 6 months, lawyers, before we eventually got a contract. Meanwhile I needed a home for this thing I wanted to do, and the Dean had... introduced me to this place here. Now, this building was built by King's College and it was meant to be biological sciences in the country. So, this building, in fact, is incomplete. The end of it, just along there, was meant to have another building this size added on. This bit was to be botany and then the other bit was going to be zoology, but as always in universities they never see things through, so the botany was... it just stayed here. Then the Kings College took over Queen Elizabeth College that had its own botany department, and so they decided they would amalgamate the two, and so all the botanists from here were made to go and work up at Queen Elizabeth College. You can almost hear the groans, but... but... anyway, so this building was empty and so, again, I shook hands on a deal with King's and in 1988 we opened it. Do you remember? Princess Margaret who was...
[Q] Anne. 
Anne, Anne, who was the Chancellor of the University of London came and opened it, and fun and games were had by all, and we've been working here ever since.

We knew, by a... way back in the 70s, we knew that if you took cimetidine and gave... treated patients with duodenal or peptic ulcers, that in four to six weeks we could stop acid immediately; we'd stop the acid; the ulcers would heal. And then we knew that within the next year about a third of them would relapse. And it was assumed that this was... whatever gave you an ulcer in the first place brought it back again. However, then we learned three things. One was the discovery, in the States, about how to measure gastrin levels in blood with radioimmunoassay; second, we have the discovery that the cells that gastrin acts on in the stomach, that synthesize histamine and store it are called enterochromaffin-like cells [ECL cells]. This was done by Rolf Håkanson in Lund. And so we have... now we were able to measure gastrin in blood. We could identify these ECL cells which secrete histamine when stimulated by gastrin. The ECL cells are lying just next to the histamine, the acid secreting cells, in... in the lining of the stomach. And then we found that when you give the histamine antagonist inhibit acid... that was the third bit that was brought into play... had been shown by Woodward in the States that acid in the antrum of the stomach would inhibit the secretion of gastrin. So you put it all together and we get what you might call the central dogma of acid secretion. That is: you eat, the chemistry of the food acts on cells in the antrum of the stomach to tell the cells that make gastrin, the G-cells, to secrete gastrin into the blood which circulates, comes to the ECL cell receptors, which have got the gastrin receptors, to stimulate the release of histamine, out comes the acid. The acid then interacts with the food which started this process, and it neutralises it there. So initially you... acid is coming out, but this acidity... the pH doesn't fall, but as digestion proceeds and the contents move away, the buffering capacity gets less and so the pH begins to fall, and it's low pH which acts on the G-cells – it actually acts on somatostatin secreting cells, the D-cells – to say... tell the G-cells to stop secreting. So this is the classic negative feedback loop that you get throughout physiology. The point is food stimulates: gastrin stimulates acid; acid ultimately stops the gastrin. So if you stop the acid there's nothing to switch the gastrin off, and so that was the big discovery we made in the early 80s: that when you inhibit acid secretion, the gastrin levels in response to food go shooting up.
That's the first thing. The next thing Håkanson showed was that gastrin is a growth factor to the ECL cells, so when you get higher levels of gastrin these ECL cells get bigger, they divide, get more of them, so you get ECL cell hyperplasia in the stomach. And then when you stop, that which made the gastrin go up, stop your histamine antagonist, then gastrin levels fall, but you're left with these ECL cells which are all up-regulated, and so you get rebound hypersecretion. And so the idea was developing that it was rebound hypersecretion which might be contributing to the relapse.
Then in the 80s the so-called proton pump inhibitors were introduced. Now, when they were studied first of all, it was an accidental observation, made in Sweden, that these compounds would inhibit the acid secretion at the level of the acid secreting mechanism, the proton pump as it's called, so they're called proton pump inhibitors. Now, when they did the toxicology they found that after two years of exposure to this drug rats who were the animals being used for the toxicology studies, developed cancers of the stomach – cancers of these ECL cells. So this held up the introduction of these drugs into medicine for a good number of years, but eventually the regulatory authorities, particularly the Food and Drug Administration in the States, were persuaded that this was a rat phenomenon, and that it was entirely benign to give it in man. And so now, one... as you know, one of the world's biggest drug sellers have been the use of proton pump inhibitors, and it's been a big seller, not because of ulcers – duodenal – because we had pretty well taken care of them by another discovery, and that was the relationship between helicobacter infection and ulcers. And so if we took patients with ulcers and treated it with antibiotics to remove the helicobacter then these ulcers would heal. So the incidence, the problem of duodenal and peptic ulcer was getting less. But another disease had appeared which I don't remember being taught as a medical student during the war. This is reflux disease; this is reflux of acid into the lower end of the oesophagus. Now... the big use of these drugs has been treating patients with reflux disease which, for many patients, is severe pain not long after eating food. Gradually, of course, the drugs are being used now for any type of indigestion and so they're almost given out. In fact, you can buy them across the counter now, as you know.

When I did my medicine during the war, cancer of the oesophagus was not common but recognised, and it was cancer of the upper part of the oesophagus. And the oesophagus is lined by what's called stratified squamous epithelium – multi-layers of cells on the base membrane, like skin – and so cancers of that are... are called squamous cell cancers. So squamous cell cancers of the oesophagus were recognised, not awfully common; then there has been now... epidemiologically it's quite hard to date when it started, but there is no doubt, everybody is agreed, that the incidence of a new type of oesophageal cancer – adenocarcinoma of the lower end of the oesophagus – is going up and up and up and up. It's the fastest growing incidence of tumours in the West. Everybody's agreed about that. What no one's agreed about is why. But it does look as though the only known predisposing fact...
[Q] This is independent of gender or racial origin? 
Mainly more in men than women. It... it's well recognised in the West, but we now know the Chinese suffer badly from it as well; the Japanese not so much. So there are... there are differences, as there all... are in all disease incidences, and I... I daresay it's got a lot to do with our eating habits as well but, anyway, we'll come to that. The point is that something else had been discovered as increasing, and this is associated with reflux. Where the oesophagus joins the stomach, the acid from the stomach refluxes into the oesophagus and gradually, in some patients, the... changes in the epithelium occur. So, instead of being stratified squamous it becomes simple columna with mucus secreting cells, and this is called Barrett's oesophagus, and it begins off just as a... what's called a dysplasia. I beg your pardon, a metaplasia: changes in the cell type. But, as time goes on, this becomes dysplastic and looks more and more cancer-like, and there are those people who believe that, in fact, it is the precursor for the undoubted increase in adenocarcinoma. So, it's an adenocarcinoma coming from this Barrett's oesophagus. Now, it's amazing how it's hard to pin things down. There has been, since about 1980, a huge increase in the incidence of adenocarcinoma. There has been an increase in incidents of Barrett's, or has there? There has been an increase in proceed... of... or the diagnoses by endoscopy so we know there has been a huge increase in the number endoscopies, there has been an increase in the recognition of Barrett's oesophagus, there has been an undoubted increase in cancer. The question is: are they related? Now, people at the Mayo, for example, argue that the increased incidence of endoscopy just means that you're recognising something which... whose frequency hadn't changed because they're doing more of them. And then the people like me say, 'But wait a minute, why were they being endoscoped other than they had a complaint?' So... because the technology had... was known before the 1980s. So, I argue that the increase in incidence is real. The increase in endoscopies is because there's been more demand for it because more symptoms are coming from reflux disease. So, this is the situation today: that reflux disease is the main grounds for prescribing proton pump inhibitors. Proton pump inhibitors produce huge increases in the level of gastrin in blood when you eat. Gastrin is a growth factor to ECL cells, but it... it's also a growth factor to any cells that express gastrin receptors. Now, there's some evidence that when the epithelium changes associated with chronic reflux from stratified squamous to columna, that the columna cells now express gastrin receptors, and so some people believed that Barrett's is being driven by the hypergastrinaemia, induced by the drug which is giving relief. And again, it's quite hard to tack down, but there's no universal agreement about whether or not when you take someone who's refluxing who's got Barrett's, if you stop the acid, you stop the symptoms, there's no longer any pain, the patients feel fine, does the Barrett's heal? Now there are those of us who believe that it doesn't; that the surface of the lesion epithelialises over and looks a bit more normal, but the underlying lesion stays there. So, that was the situation in 1988. So, having had this long love affair with histamine and gastrin, that's the first project we took on here, and now I'm self-conscious about it; I want to make a gastrin antagonist by starting with gastrin.

All the action in gastrin is in the tetra, the terminal... four amino acids – Trp-Met-Asp-Phe – and it's amidated. And, so when we started here in '88, that's what we knew, and the question was: how can we go with that knowledge to make an antagonist? Well, we... in our initial hiring of people here, a lot of it was done through Imperial College and Barrett Collingen who had replaced me came as part of that, but we also took on a modeller who was exceptionally bright. And, anyway, he found in the literature that the infrared structure... pattern, for tetragastrin could only happen if the two aromatic rings of the indol of the Trp and the phenyl were about 4-5Å apart. Now, what Biola did was to show that they could only be in that position if that little peptide was wound into a tight helix, a 310-helix, it was called. And so, the chemist started off then to say, 'Can we get two aromatics held together', and we knew that it had dipolar structure in a dipole, and again, a bit like the first histamine story, we went on... we got leads right from the beginning in peptides. We could make peptide analogues, but all of them had partial agonist activity which, this appears on all of these programmes, so that wasn't what we were looking for. And it took us, really, a long time – about five years – before... and what happened, I mentioned Barrett Collingen who was our Head of Chemistry during this time, and he suddenly remembered a... an experiment he had done as an undergraduate at University College.

He remembered this experiment and it's called the Diels-Alder reaction, in which you take naphthalene – no, anthracene – and you interact it with a cyclised form of maleic acid. And what comes out of it is an extraordinary ring system called bicyclo-octanes, and this has got two ring system and two aromatics and you could functionalise the bridge between the two. And that was our lead, when we took these bicyclo-octanes very quickly we got into a... and in the standard way which we do the old fashioned chemistry: you make the compound, you test it, you learn from it, you make another one, and you iterate through it, and we iterated through it and we got better and better and better compounds. Now, one of the compounds we came to – a beauty, one of the best compounds I've ever worked with – it only had one problem and that was the liver couldn't distinguish it from a... a bile salt, and it was eliminated in the bile with the speed of light. And we could show that, in fact, it was absorbed extremely well, up the portal vein, but the liver was cleaning it out so that we'd get hardly any blood level, so the drug wouldn't act orally, but we could give it intravenously. Well, there wasn't much you could do with a drug you could only give intravenously. And then we read a paper by... that if you take nude mice – these are mice which have a suppressed immune system – so if you put a foreign protein in they don't react to them, so you can take cancer cell lines and embed them in these and... and they'll grow. Well, this particular cancer cell line was pancreatic cancer cells and so this group in Philadelphia showed that when these tumours were growing, if you gave them gastrin, they would go like mad. Anyway, so she tested our compound and showed that we could block that effect of gastrin and, indeed, we reduced the rate of growth of the tumour itself as though the mouse's own gastrin was stimulating the growth of it.

						So this now led us into pancreatic cancer, apparently. In the foetal stage pancreatic tissue expresses gastrin receptors, then in the mature animal it doesn’t. But when the cancer phenotype develops it goes back to the more primitive stage and makes gastrin receptors, and so every time you eat, you’re stimulating this tumour with your elevated gastrin levels. And so, I remember we had a meeting in this room here with- At Kings College, we had one of the best liver units in the country, and a very common presentation to that liver unit are people with jaundice, they had no other symptoms, they just started to go yellow, and when they investigate them they find that they have a tumour in the head of the pancreas which presses on the bile duct and inhibits the release and so they get jaundiced. So, this is a subgroup of patients with pancreatic cancer who present with jaundice. Now, these tumours are all in the head of the pancreas, and usually that’s the first sign, so they haven’t lost their appetite or anything, so they’re, it’s fairly early in the lifecycle. Now, pancreatic cancer is called the dismal disease. Your life expectancy from diagnosis, for whatever reason, to death was a median survival of about 100 days, about three months. Now that meant that we got this, these characters down there from the liver unit and they said, well, you know, these tumours will double in size in about four weeks; we had four weeks’ toxicology. So, we set up a study and it was a study set up under something which no longer exists called the DDX Scheme, the Doctors and Dentists Exemption Scheme, which allowed a doctor to prescribe anything he wished for his patients, so we, he could do this study on his own recognisance. And, so we did that for four weeks, and after five patients it was plain that these tumours were not doubling in size in four weeks, but some of these patients had felt better. Their appetite had, one of the earliest signs is they lose appetite, and they put on weight in that, even in that four-week period. So, he, clinically, decided just to keep them on. So the net result is we had a group of patients who had a line in this subclavian vein and a pump round their waist and who were coming into Kings College twice a week to have the syringes changed, and they formed a little support group, chatting to each other. And, there were two research nurses that befriended them and looked after their ingrown toenail and every thing, so tremendous tender, loving care going on in this environment.
					
So after we'd done 10 patients it became clear, statistically, when we compared the outcome of these 10 with the previous year's 18 untreated – consecutive 18 against our 10 – a highly significant difference in survival, and I didn't believe it. I was sure it was a placebo effect from the tender loving care, and so I wanted to get a placebo controlled study. Now that took me a while. I was told I'd never get it, but eventually we found a surgeon over at University College and we argued with ethics committee people that this was ethical because there was no recognised treatment for this terrible disease, and secondly, these patients were going to get something which the National Health Service can't provide, which is massive tender loving care. And so, on that basis, we got a placebo controlled study done at University College, and the recruitment was terribly slow because oncologists don't like referring patients for placebos. And then gemcitabine was improved, or was made approvable by the regulatory people here and when that happened recruitment stopped. So, we ended up with this placebo controlled trial having nine patients in each arm, and when analysed, this was, this was double... this was double blind placebo controlled; a well designed study, but only 18; highly significant difference between the two. Now, again, this was a subset of patients. These were patients that oncologists thought – 'cause of research – were operable, so these were early patients who were thought, you know, not to have a disseminated tumours. So jaundice at King's...
Meanwhile, before I got that placebo controlled... incidentally, the DDX scheme is gone. We'd never be able to do that study again. We would never now be allowed to do a placebo controlled study in any cancer where there's an approvable drug, so that study would never be repeatable. Then, thirdly, I heard that David Cunningham, Gastroenterological Consultant at the cancer place here in London... his passion was for treating patients with 5-fluorouracil [5-FU], and it was normally given by periods of intravenous injections, but he had pioneered the use of a pump and line to deliver it continuously, and claimed that this was doing very much better. So here were a group of patients who were... got pump and line against my patients with pump and line, and so he agreed he would do a head to head. And, well, that trial eventually ran out of steam. It was quite well designed, but recruitment was a problem and eventually, when we had about 100 patients, or something like that – 98 I think it was – it was agreed to call a halt. And it was plain; overall, there was no difference between pump-driven 5-FU and our gastrin antagonist. So, either... neither of them were active or they were as active, so our drug would be as active as 5-fluorouracil. Now, I did a subgroup analysis on that study. Indeed, I... I went through, back through all the data and wherever any patients had evidence of metastases I removed them. So, if you take out all the patients with proven metastases, the effects of the drug were highly significant in all studies, including David Cunningham's one, where... what we were doing was going from 100 days median survival to over 300 days, in each of these studies. So it looked as though if you could get them quickly you may be able to do something, but that head to head study, I would not be allowed to do today. So, none of the three studies would I be allowed to do, and I... I find it worrying that... anyway, we made this discovery; our backers, Johnson & Johnson weren't interested; and so it was never developed. But we kept going and we got orally active ones, but Johnson & Johnson never got very excited about the project, and eventually it sort of died.

In the early days of beta blockers clinicians found that if you had a patient in heart failure and you gave them a beta blocker... well, undoubtedly, some... one or two patients died, but it was bad news, as though you needed your beta receptors in the heart to protect you against heart failure. And so physicians taught for years: never give a beta blocker to patients with heart failure. Then a... a physician in Gothenburg in Sweden – I don't know why Sweden keeps coming up but there it is, it's a very exciting place scientifically – had patients with what's called dilated cardiomyopathies in which one of the problems is high heart rates, and he felt, 'If only I could reduce the heart rate, I feel they'd be more comfortable', and the only way he knew to do that was with a beta blocker. So, he started experimenting giving a little dose and for the first 24 hours it didn't look good, but then he had the courage to keep going, and after a couple of days they began to get a little bit better, and so he kept going and then he would increase the dose, get worse, then get better, and grad... and he titrated them, and he was bringing patients out of heart failure with a beta blocker. So that was '75 that was published.
By 2000, 15 years later, we had now got four huge studies done. By huge I mean about 5000 patients in each, with four different marketed beta blockers. One was metoprolol – AstraZeneca/ICI compound – which is classified... oh, I have to... I'm missing out a big piece. When I was at ICI we had alpha receptors and we had beta receptors. In the meantime we found there was many types of alpha receptors and many types of beta receptors. In fact, three are recognised, and they're called beta-1, beta-2, and beta-3. And, back in the early days, after I had left ICI, they went on to make selective beta 1 receptor antagonist, still marketed as atenolol. And so, there was a number of selective beta-1 antagonists but just, of which metoprolol – which they acquired by taking over a Swedish company – was one. So, AstraZeneca metoprolol. Then there was another compound called bisoprolol which was classified as a beta-1 antagonist. Then another company in the States had been marketing carvedilol as a non-selective and it blocked both beta-1 and beta-2, but it did some other things, but beta-1 and beta-2; carvedilol. And then the fourth one was bucindolol classified as non-selective. So two selective for beta-1 and two non-selective. In each case a pattern was found of titration. You start with small dose and gradually build them up; first 24 hours they get worse and then they get better, and you can... so now Finn Waagstein who was the man who started all this in 1975 – Gothenburg – he says, 'What we have in common in these four drugs are beta 1 receptor block, so it's the beta 1 receptor blockade which is doing the business'. Now, pharmacologists, clinical pharmacologists I'm afraid, and clinicians, talk about beta-1 selectivity as though it was a quality, when in fact it's a quantity. And in the case of metoprolol the quantity is surprising small. Now, when we are comparing... potencies, you take a dose response curve and one system, and a dose response in the other, and you compare the... the 50% points; you compare it horizontally. But therapeutically what you do is you titrate up towards the top of those response curves, and when you get up there the difference between the two tops narrows, so down at the 50% point metoprolol is four full selective. Up at the top it's not selective at all. And so I showed them data that all of these drugs are producing significant beta-2 receptor blockade.
Now, why am I excited by that? Because... when I started I was interested in heart rate, and it so happened, as we now know, that the pacemaker of the heart has only got beta-1 receptors, whereas the ventricles have got beta-1 and beta-2. Now, whenever a beta receptor ag... agonist acts on the beta receptor it switches on the production of what are called G-proteins, and specifically beta-1 generates what's called GS-proteins – S for stimulation – and the GS-proteins switch on phosphorylating enzymes, and one of these phosphorylating enzymes phosphorylates the receptor and inactivates it. So you stimulate it; chain goes; inactivation; then it's recycled. The beta-2 is the same. It couples to GS. But once it has been phosphorylated and inactivated for GS coupling, it now couples to another G-protein called GI. So, here we now have the production of GI-proteins once the receptor is phosphorylated. Now, GI-proteins – I is for inhibition – does just that, inhibits the contractions but we also know it does an awful lot of other things downstream to what are called tyrosine kinase enzymes.

Now, let me tell you more about heart failure patients. Normally, there's more beta-1 than beta-2. But in heart failure, the beta-1 concentration is halved, or even less. The beta-2 aren't; indeed, may increase a bit. Second, the levels of adrenaline in the blood go up and it's usually argued by clinicians that this is a compensatory mechanism to, if you like, give the heart stimulation to keep it going. But the fact is that adrenaline, in so far as it's acting on the heart, encourages the phosphorylation of... I've missed out the GI. I've got to go back to that, haven't I? 
[Q] Well, I thought that's where you were going.
Well, let me go back to that, then, Bill. So, when I started in the atrium we had – I didn't know that... have only got beta-1 receptors; the ventricles have got beta-1 and beta-2. These beta receptors, beta-1 and beta-2, couple to different G-proteins. Beta-1 couples to GS – stimulation – switches on the phosphorylating enzymes. GI also couples to GS but when it's phosphorylated, whereas beta-1 is inactivated, beta-2 now switches on GI, so the phosphorylated beta-2 receptor is producing GI-proteins which inhibit the force of contraction and do a whole of series of switching on of various kinases which are involved in programmed cell death, in stimulation of fibrosis; all the, kind of, nasty things which go on in the failing of a heart, are switched on by GI-proteins. So my model then is that it would take patients with heart failure, beta-1 are reduced, beta-2 aren't, adrenaline's up, you are increasing the amount of phosphorylated beta-2, and so there's a lot of GI production in the failing heart and there is evidence for that. And my theory is that these beta blockers are acting, not because they take out beta-1, indeed that's why I think the patients do badly on day one, but because they take out beta-2 and all these GI, and again it takes time for the reduction in GI to occur for these changes in the heart and restructuring and reshaping. So that's then... what I felt we needed was a selective beta-2 antagonist. Well, I told you, ICI's had one since the '70s. Indeed, many drug companies produced them, but these drugs are now way out of patent, and so I was unable to persuade AstraZeneca to renew the toxicology on that compound to bring it up to date so that we could use it clinically. So I have decided I'll make my own and I got a grant from a... a charity, a Jewish charity, offshore charity, called The Dorset Foundation, and they funded me to have two PhD students – one in chemistry and one in pharmacology – and we... the... the pharmacology chap, he has got all his assays going now after a year. The chemistry one we had difficulty recruiting, so eventually we... we recruited a post-doc, and so we've... taking our three year funding down to two years for him, and he'll get his own grant.

The third bit of that wee story is a chap called Andy Vinton, whom I knew at Smith Kline, then recruited him at Wellcome, and he's a theoretical... a physical chemist interested in theory. But one of the problems in pharmacology is that you can have different substances, all quite different chemical structures, which all can do the same thing, and so you find that stimulating a receptor; many different structures can do it, and that's one of the unspoken problems of pharmacology: how does it happen? Well, what Andy... when I say Andy and I have been working on it, he does the work and I shout encouragement from the sidelines, or... or after I came here, give him financial help. But he has been developing the idea which both of you will remember from school science experiments, when you took a bar magnet and put a piece of paper over it and then sprinkled iron filings and then the iron filings all sorted themselves out into this field. So what we now know is that every small organic molecule produces an electrostatic field around itself, and that it gives it a bipolar structure. And what Andy's been working on is how to calculate that fields and how to represent it visually because it's very complicated. It's not simple shapes like the bow magnet, and so now he's developed the technology, set up a little business near Cambridge, and they... he's developed the software that allows him to take any small molecule, calculate all the likely confirmations of that molecule, calculate the fields for each of these con... confirmations, represent these fields three dimensionally in space as field points, as balls, and then he can now screen databases for field structures rather than for actual structures. So, when I got the grant, I then managed to get another small grant to pay Andy to work on this project with us, and... so, because we had many structures already patented we had a... a lot of information about what active structures were, he then calculated the fields of all these, established a pattern of field structures which looked as though it was common to beta-2 block, then he screened a 2 million collection of compounds on... for which he has calculated all their fields. So he's got field points for all the confirmers of 2 million compounds, and he's able to screen through that. And, on the first... he picked 40 compounds; of the first 10 we looked at we found three – no, one – and then in 40 we found three, so we've now found three active structures which are outside the patents, as far as we know; there's a lot of patents and I'm not certain but it looks likely that they are already outside the patent, and so we... if we can develop these properly we may get industrial encouragement and enthusiasm, and so on. There's also a fascinating genetic story behind all this, because... I mentioned bucindolol as one of the non-selective compounds which had been tested and that was the only trial which failed, but the authors showed that they had recruited... one third of their 4500 patients were American blacks, and if you took out the American blacks then the 2000 remaining, whatever it was, were indistinguishable in terms of their improvement compared to carbadolol. So, there is a problem running through this about the... the type of receptors you have and... and blacks look as though they're a different category.

When we were doing the gastrin work here, a paper was published as an abstract from Hammersmith Medicines Research, and that’s a Phase I study operation over at the Central Middlesex Hospital, and they reported this gastrin antagonist, which we knew from the literature – from the laboratory work – was the most potent of all the beta blockers which had ever been synthesised.
[Q] Gastrin antagonist?
Pardon? Gastrin... I beg your pardon, gastrin antagonist. And so they reported the testing of it in man, and the way it was tested was these volunteers swallowed a pH electrode and they were measuring the affect of the gastrin antagonist on the pH inside the stomach. Now, if you take a proton pump inhibitor then, and you do that experiment, the pH goes right up to nearly 7, and physicians teach... teach all the time that to be effective a gastrin antagonist has to have the pH above 4, on average, in the 24 hour period. And so there then comes this gastrin antagonist. On day one it was as good as a proton pump inhibitor, but by day seven: no change. The pH stayed right down low at about 2. They repeated it after 14 days, and again, the same result: lost activity. And so, this compound was made originally by money, made in Southampton by a little group funded by Ferring, a small Danish company – privately owned – and they found this compound... I don’t know why they were doing the work because they were mainly interested in women’s products, but anyway, they found it. And, they got a big pharma to help them which turned out to be Yamanouchi, and... big Japanese company. So Yamanouchi Ferring... and their number is YF476, Yamanouchi Ferring. And we knew about it; the most active compound, here it was failing the test, and I didn’t believe it. No antagonist loses its activity, it's impossible, so it had to be another story. So I managed to persuade Mr Wilson, whom you remember, to get J&J to take a license out on this compound. And so we had this compound to ourselves for the year and we showed that if, instead of measuring pH, you measure, you know, the total amount of acid secretion being produced, and stimulate the acid secretion with histamine, then if you give the... not with histamine, with... with gastrin. If you stimulate with gastrin and then give this compound it blocks that acid on day one, on day seven, on day 14, on day 21, and then you stop, pardon me, and it comes back after a few days. So, as I expected, it doesn’t lose blocking potency, and this was then repeated again with Johnson & Johnson money at Hammersmith and, again, we showed there that we’d got... but here was the interesting thing. You withdraw juice from the stomach and you measured its acidity with a glass electrode, and you measured its volume. Now, the pH affect was as he’d originally described, present on day one, it wasn’t present on day seven, but the volume of secretion, which was down on day one, was down on day... so the total amount of acid being produced was greatly inhibited. Now you may remember, going back to the metiamide days, that we found that: that the effect on the volume of acid being produced was much more dramatic in terms of the acidity.

So this compound is not losing its potency, and the problem is: why, if it's still blocking gastrin receptors, why does the pH not... well, I have a theory for that, and that is that when gastrin stimulates the ECL cells we know that it stimulates the release of histamine and also switches on the synthesis of a number of peptides, many of them related to a peptide, a big thing called chromogranin A which breaks down into an poly... pancreatic polypeptide and a number of other things. Now... so on day one, if you block the action of gastrin, you block the release of histamine, but you don't block this synthesis of... because that takes time to come on. Now, my model is that these peptides inhibit... I beg your pardon, stimulate the secretion of bicarbonate. Now, there's one man who spent his life working on bicarbonate secretion and we know that it's a regulated process. So your stomach secretes mucus, but mucus is not a good buffer, but it secretes bicarbonate, and the more acid the more bicarbonate you secrete. So if you come back, then, to day one with a proton pump inhibitor, you switch off the acid, but the bicarbonate secretion is still going on, and by day seven you should start... bicarbonate is still going on, so the bicarbonate is there to raise the pH. But if you take a gastrin antagonist it blocks on day one, but we haven't yet inhibited the bicarbonate secretion so the pH rises, but by 24 hours later, though no one's mentioned it, the bicarbonate secretion will be inhibited and then the pH won't go up, but the volume will be down. So I... I... we now know from the gastrin levels that these drugs – this drug – will be a better inhibitor of acid secretion than the H2 antagonist, I think. So that is now my passion to sell this message.

Well, now I've been trying draw out a model for you of accidentally to deliberately, starting from a native messenger molecule, modifying its chemistry and making compounds which would interfere with the message. I believe that's the general principle. And the way to do it is you start off, and you systematically modify the messenger molecule, and you work your way through. Now, this is slow and tedious. It takes years. So, as much as anything, what you require in this drug research is... is a matter of character. Have you got the bacon, or whatever it is, to keep going? So you... as you know, in these projects we've... in the case of H2, for example, we kept going for years not getting anywhere, and so you have to have this belief that it's doable to keep you going. But when you get there... this is now my belief; my reading of the literature is that molecules which are made as derived from a natural one have got more selectivity than ones which... so what has happened in... since I left big pharma is there have been a number of massive technological revolutions; this was the genome... genomic one, and then the second one was the ability to make combinatorial chemistry, to make molecules at high speed, and then the technology of being able to make a molecule interact in an in vitro system, such that you could screen... well, nowadays they screen 1000's of molecules a day. Now, just to put that in perspective, industry is screening, any one company, 1000 molecules a day. In... since 1988 my group here have made about under 4000 molecules, and of the 4000, we've taken three drugs into man. It so happens none of them have made the grade but, nevertheless, this was... that's what we got out of 4000 compounds. The industry now is doing more than that molecules in a week and yet their productivity in terms of output is dropping, and everybody's worried about it. So this is the question whether the method which is now being discredited because it was too slow – the iterative feedback measurement that the industry used to use – had something going for it which high throughput screenings through just molecules which are in databases – very lumpy databases I have to admit. So I... I think there's something to be learned from it, and I personally think the industry should... it has become obsessed with technology, and we originally were, as I've told my stories, obsessed with physiology. We were trying to deal with heart beta acid secretion and whatnot, and not just us; everybody was doing it for blood pressure, all kinds of things.

The industry has espoused genomics, then transcriptomics, this RNA world, and then proteomics and then something else, and now they're into what's called systems biology. And, this is attempting, all at the subcellular level, to make sense of all these interactions which are occurring inside cells. Now, disease rarely begins inside cells. Cancer, for example, is seen as a disease of the genome – an abnormal division – but many people now regard it as a process which is driven from outside. Many cancers, for example, derive out of an inflammatory state or a viral infection, or over-production of a hormone that the... the actual initiation of the cancer may well come from outside the cell, but it's regarded by everybody in the business that it's an intracellular phenomenon. So my obsession is physiology; how cells talk to each other. We have 1000's of messenger molecules which have never been explored, really, from the point of view of controlling how the system talks to each other, so I want to go back to physiology, to messenger molecules, taking the cell as a given, and the... the system I want to analyse is the physiological system by making analogues of natural occurring molecules which we can use as tools to explore physiology.
