james.watson

American molecular biologist James Dewey Watson is probably best known for discovering the structure of DNA for which he was jointly awarded the 1962 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine along with Francis Crick and Maurice Wilkins.  His long career has seen him teaching at Harvard and Caltech, and taking over the directorship of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York.  From 1988 to 1992, James Watson was head of the Human Genome Project at the National Institutes of Health.  His current research focuses on the study of cancer.

I was born in Chicago in 1928. My father, then as he did all through his life until he retired, had a job with a correspondence school. These were schools which sent you lessons and then you prepared material and then sent it away to Chicago and you could get various business degrees or law degree. It was a business school and my father was, I think, called Collection Manager, he collected from the students, many of whom, I think, probably had difficulty paying for their schooling because it was during the half of the depression.
I was born in '28 which is in April, I forget whether the crash was, I think, the big crash was '29. And so my parents, after their marriage in 1925 lived in Hyde Park, a neighborhood nearest to Chicago. And then, I think, after my two-year younger sister was born in 1930, my mother's mother was running out of money, so in 1933 they bought a tiny bungalow with two bedrooms and my grandmother moved in and occupied the second bedroom where my sister and I – she was then three and I was five – we had, sort of, bunk beds carved into the attic, so someone came in and a staircase was... well, I'm sure there was a staircase to the attic, but for then not much money, you know, and sometimes I think back and, you know, was the whole thing just leaded with asbestos? It could very well have been because, you know, we were trying to insulate it and so on, but we it seems that both of us survived without our lungs.
[Q] But your father was an important influence on you, clearly.
My father was an influence in that he read books, so my first book, which was given to me at the age, I think, six – but it could have been eight – was a book called Travelling with Birds, by the curator of birds at the Field Museum in Chicago. And I must have already expressed an interest in birds but my father had become an obsessive bird-watcher during high school and continued to do that when, in his one year at college, an Overland's college. And then he had scarlet fever, I don't think we ever heard the truth, I think he was slightly expelled and his mother put him... oh, you know, his grades weren't good, he was sent to work.
And then he was probably saved by the First World War which he enlisted rapidly and went to France and then he would have come back in 1919 when he was 22 and soon after that the job at La Salle Extension University, and must have done well. I don't know when his politics changed. I think, already, at the university he was becoming skeptical of God. When he was in, sort of, high school, he got a certificate for church attendance and, you know, the Episcopal Church in LaGrange. My father's mother had some money which made her independent of her husband who was a stockbroker, and we know they had terrible arguments over money and he was, his brother worked he was called a plunger.
[Q] What's that?
That is... he... he just, you know, bet on stocks, he would bet all his money and the stock would go up or down, you know, and so, I think, he was wiped out several times and his wife never gave him any money after a while. And, but at the end of the First World War they left LaGrange and, you know, went... at that time it was probably a big house, so today it would probably be called a small house. But my father never referred to servants living in the house; possibly they didn't. They moved into an apartment in Hyde Park so my father's younger brother Bill, who was two years younger, could go to the University of Chicago and live at home. It was probably saving money. And so... and I forget where my father he could easily have lived, you know, we had an apartment big enough for... there were two younger brothers, Tom and Stanley, and I remember my grandmother being obesely fat, you know, probably over 300 pounds and my father's brother Tom was very fat and his daughters were fat, so I somehow had the idea there was obesity in the Watsons.

After the war, when he... he went bird-watching in Jackson Park in 1919, and then in Jackson Park, met a young student at the University of Chicago, who was a younger student at Chicago, Nathan Leopold, who came from a wealthy German-Jewish family, they could have been originally involved in shipping. The first German Jews came as... almost trappers... fur merchants... and then moved into shipping along the lakes and so, I think, that's where the Leopold's made their money and they lived in Hyde Park, sort of, a neighborhood almost southward, called Kenwood. And so my father bird-watched with him, certainly until 23:00 or something, and he and met Nathan's close friend Bobby Low whose father was number two in Sears Roebuck and had a vast mansion in Charlotte Way, north of Michigan. And soon after they met they published a small pamphlet, you know, Spring Migration routes in Chicago, so with a friend of my father from high school days, George Porter Lewis. And then there was a fourth person, Sidney Stein, and he probably was a University of Chicago student, though I've forgotten. He became an Investment Banker in Chicago. So birds dominated my... really, father's life, so they played golf and they had a Jackson motorcar and, you know, there're pictures of the car and I remember being in it only once in 1933 when we drove to the South Bank to take the money out before the crash. I mean, there was a run on the banks just as Roosevelt was becoming President.
And sometime round about that time, my father's salary was cut in half, and so money was always in short supply, and my parents would sometimes have big arguments over money. You know, whether my father was spending money on used books, or my mother spending more on clothes than my father thought was necessary, but their arguing was never a major factor in our lives. I just remember their arguments were chiefly about money. And my mother was a very social woman, she could be friends with anyone and my father really was at ease only with people who read books. So by enduring, see, the grips of the depression, because they knew they were round there, there was a communist magazine called The New Masses, and I remember it, there, you know, I don't think old copies of that have floated around the house. My father... he was more or less, you would say... his views were social issues, everything shouldn't be all about the State but probably the steel mills, which should be. And... but he was probably the only democrat in, you know, among the managerial people in the company he worked with.
And my mother soon arranged, you know, that in our precinct the elections were held in the basement of our tiny bungalow and she was a precinct captain and canvassed the roles and that. So she might have got, you know, 20 or 30, somewhere between 25 and 50 dollars a year from the, from the... seem like such tiny sums, but I know my father's income was $3,000 a year. And... but I never remember being deprived, that is in the sense that, you know, the winter clothes wasn't warm enough, you know, that, and I never felt embarrassed by, you know, that we didn't have more money. But my father had to go to work every morning in a streetcar and I don't... I think he only had to change once and then his firm was on 41st in Michigan, which was long ways from The Loop.
But then, by the time I was a boy, I was totally surrounded by a Negro ghetto and so it was slightly unsafe. Then sometime, probably during the war, they moved into The Loop, that is. The Loop was the centre of Chicago and the elevated railroads made a circle in The Loop. That was most of the hotels or... and certainly the big the border train, they were always in The Loop and there were six train stations, going off in different directions, which there was an alternative way of getting to The Loop, which was take a streetcar to the east and then pick up a, sort of, suburban line branch to the Illinois Central. And that would take 20 minutes or 30 minutes off the trip down there. If we wanted to go to The Loop, it would take about an hour. But my father read books, you know, both ways.

My interest was defined by the term 'current affairs'. So, I was probably a premature reader, and that my vocabulary was probably several years in advance, so... my reading vocabulary.
[Q] Were you reading newspapers? What?
Yes, then we had a morning newspaper, The Chicago Tribune, and then there was an afternoon paper, The Daily News, and during then The Tribune was run by the very wealthy Robert McCormick, and the McCormick's, I think, were engrained... I forget, they were one of Chicago's wealthiest families, and he was this most noted isolationist. After World War I, he did not want to American lives sent for a funeral.

[Q] What age were you when you were reading newspapers?
Probably... well, certainly, you know, the war broke out in '39 and I was then 11. I was reading... I know I was reading actively then. I was certainly aware of the Spanish Civil War, which was ended in '38, so by ten, and I think we got... I don't know how we got Time magazine, but that was certainly in the house. And Life magazine came in, so certainly Life was when we went into the war, that wasn't until '41, that's the time of Pearl Harbor, then I would have been a very active reader.
[Q] Right. So what about school?
School was at a local, it was called Horace Mann Grammar School. We lived in a neighborhood, probably where in '33 some of the houses might have been pre-World War I, but there were still vacant lots about, so there were still some building sites and, I think, the grammar school I went to was thought to be a good one. You know, no one had felt... it was the Irish, there were no Italians in the neighborhood, it was Irish, Jewish, German. So the Irish kids went to Our Lady of Peace Parochial School, and maybe 10% of my class was Jewish, the Press twins, Charlie Frankel, who was a good friend of mine, he afterwards became a journalist in Honolulu. And I was conscious of them being Jewish, only because of the Jewish holidays, when we would have school but no real work. So there'd be no exams, so during the Jewish holidays, school was, sort of, fun.
[Q] But was school of interest to you? Was this something you enjoyed?
I liked it. I think I went off, I couldn't sing, in the gymnasium I was very weak, that is I couldn't do push-ups, I couldn't do pull-ups, maybe finally I did. I was probably, compared to the average boy, one or two years retarded in, you know, when I started to grow, so I was shorter than my sister whose final height was 5.2. So...
[Q] Were you picked on?
No, not much. Someone said that was to be an advantage. I was in a co-educational school. If I had been in a boys only it would have been harder, so... and I might have been picked on more because I was small. I was always slightly frightened by the boys who went to the nearby Parochial school, which if you'd meet them on the street, you know, I would have thought they would have gone after me because when I was 8 or 9, I was taken on Sunday to church because my mother was a Roman Catholic. I was given religious instruction for First Communion, and which I think was 10, and then I began, you know, going and saying prayers and going to confession.
[Q] Were you a believer then?
I don't think so. Well, hard to say. I know by 11 I stopped going to church. Maybe it was 12, but on Sunday mornings I'd go bird-watching with my father and it was aided by the fact that his dislike for the Church, so Fr Coughlin's magazine, weekly magazine, was on sale right outside the church on Sundays and my father detested Fr Coughlin.
[Q] He didn't go to church, I take it.
Oh no, my father would have described himself, I think, as an agnostic, you know. He didn't... couldn't know there was no God, but didn't see any reason for believing it and had a particular dislike for the Catholic Church because he was very pro-England and, of course, the Catholic Church where everyone, in where I was, was Irish. And, you know, the Irish problem was something I was... no one ever talked about it, but, you know, my father was big friends for the United States for France and England. And so, when Fr Pacelli became Pope Pius, I know my father disliked him because, I think, you know, he'd been in Germany before and my father liked Jews. My mother was essentially reasonable, she never saw any, and I don't think ever had any Jewish friends but my father did, probably starting with Leopold and Loeb.

My father talked to me about it because he didn't want to throw away his bird pamphlets with Leopold's name on it and he was asked by Leopold's father to testify as a character witness but then everyone said, 'You can't do that' or 'You'll be ruined for life, you'll have to change your name'...
[Q] So how old was your dad when...
He was... the murder was in, likely, April or early May of 1924 and so my father would have been 26, and Leopold five or six years younger. I think Leopold was only 19 when, and that was part of the reason why they weren't hung, because the judge felt they were too young to make moral decisions, even though, you know, Leopold was said to have an IQ over 200 and the thing was that if you were six and could do the work of a 14-year-old, you were... you know, his IQ was over 200. That was part of the...
[Q] Did you discuss this murder and its implications?
He told me no, in a moral sense... well, it was so awful, you could hardly...
[Q] There was nothing that you could say.
No, there was no attempt to, I know Leopold, when he went to prison, asked my father to correspond with him and my father did not. So... and about nine months before the murder, maybe it was six, only six, Leopold's father got in touch with my father and said he was very worried about his son's morbid preoccupation with Loeb and that's when they began stealing things from committing minor crimes on the way to the perfect crime and... but my father said he really never... Leopold had passed out of his life, though there was undoubtedly a calculated bird walk four days before the murder, where George Porter Lewis and Sidney Stein went into those woods where they were going to dispose of the body there, to give Leopold an alibi in case someone saw him out there. That must have been calculated and my father was not on that bird walk.
But it was a place where he... and that's what I say, when I was 11 or 12, I think 1940, you know, 15 years after the crime and my father's main birding spot was where the body was buried and uncovered, so he wasn't avoiding the site because birds were much more important than, you know, a sort of phony morality, I can't go near the place because of that. So, I think most of the discussions of morality centered either, you know, about the callousness of... they were Republicans and not wanting to worry about serving people. That was the first, and then Hitler. So it was... there was something, you know, finer and higher about the Democrats who, you know, believed in social security and... as opposed to the Republican Party which said, 'If you fall, unless you get up yourself, you're going to die'.

During the... some time pretty soon after the war started, she took a full-time job in the Loop working for the Red Cross, and that certainly helped us financially. And then my grandmother was living with us and so when we... she was always home, so I, you know... I don't think there was ever a babysitter in our house, it was my grandmother.
[Q] So she helped look after you kids and...
And she, my mother, had had while in high school rheumatic fever. I think that it was a staph or a strep infection, and left her with severely damaged heart valves and so she could never go on long walks and just walking up stairs tired her. And she used that and it was probably about, I think... is that she didn't have the energy to walk to church, so she didn't go to church on Sunday, except maybe on Christmas Eve and Easter, but my grandmother would always go to church.
[Q] So most of your childhood your mother was disabled in this way?
Yes, so she did, you know, have a job and afterwards, after the war got out, after I had left the University of Chicago, she got a job in the Admissions Office and used to interview prospective students. My mother had gone for two years to the University of Chicago after finishing high school, and the money must have come from her mother, though she, I'm sure, would have worked. And my grandmother had some, I remember, Argentine bonds, which went belly-up during the Depression and, you know, at some time I learnt that my grandmother had come to Chicago from the town of Michigan City where there was the... her parents had a farm about six miles out, the Gleason's. And basically, she was the kept woman of Michigan City's wealthiest family, where she had started probably as a 10-year-old servant working for Mrs Barker and then Mr Barker moved with her to Chicago. So, I think, when he died, he must have left her some money, and then she married a Lauchlin Mitchell, a Scottish tailor, who didn't know of my grandmother's past, but at some stage discovered it and probably discovered that she had lied about her age. So my mother, grandmother was... had, you know... there was only one child and there was my mother, my grandmother, I think, was born in '61 and my mother was born in '99.
We... and I don't know what year my grandparents married. It was some time there was... we had a pastel painting of my grandfather which was exhibited at the Columbians World Fair which was in 1993, it was one year late, after the 400th anniversary... no, 300th it would have been 18 and 40, 400th anniversary of Columbus's first visit to the Americas. So there was a pastel, which I was told the artist got a suit and my grandfather had a painting of him. So, he was a successful tailor, until ready-made suits came in... in the early 20th century, then his business went down. And he died on... it was either Christmas Eve or New Year's Eve in the Palmer House Hotel, supposedly by a runaway horse. So... which later in my life led me to wonder whether... you know, whether it was my grandfather or the horse who was drunk? In those days, people really drank, you know, it was a tough life. I think, we don't realize how tough it was around 1900.

I would think, except for worries particularly, you know, that Hitler would win, our... my childhood and that of my sister could have been described as really happy, that is neither of us was neurotic, it would... no one worried about our mental health or worried about, you know, that we didn't do our schoolwork, you know. Nor do I remember, you know, who half the class of the boys having attention deficit, there're all these things which, you know, now seem to. I find it hard to believe it because none of my...
[Q] Friends had it.
Friends had it and they all, sort of, you know... one of my friends, you know, became a good lawyer in Indiana, and another friend became a commercial artist. I had the impression most of, you know, the people, once they were middle-class and they had middle-class aspirations. And they all, within limits, succeeded.
[Q] But now, when you were in school, were you exceptionally bright, compared to your colleagues? Did you think of yourself as special?
No, I had no... you know, I would took, I think, two intelligence tests and I know I was... the teachers never told me what the result was and I once, you know, went up to the desk and found out and I was disappointed that I wasn't brighter. They were about 120 when, you know, I was told to be successful, you probably have to be 150 or something, but we also took tests in reading speed and comprehension and I was the best. So I seemingly could read faster and comprehend it. So... and I always was someone who would get up and try and answer the teacher's questions, rather than... so, yeah, I was the show-off but the teachers liked me and I, you know, in grammar school we had assemblies and somehow students spoke and I think I wanted to speak, so in that sense I wasn't shy.
[Q] You did speak at the assemblies?
Yes.
[Q] You did.
Yes, so, you know, maybe it was because the majority of, you know... I certainly remember the elections of '36 with Landon and Willkie... was 1940. The majority of children... we all used to wear pins, and Roosevelt pins were in the minority. The Jewish kids would have had Roosevelt pins and a few others... you could say, it was just solidly Republicans. You know, four blocks away everyone was Polish and they would have voted Democratic.
[Q] Now the school went up to what age?
Grammar school went to... through 8; there were no middle schools. And then high school was the age 9 through 12.
[Q] So what about that school?
And then I went to Grades 9 and 10 in South Shore High School, which was only one year old when I went to it, so, there was Calumet High School to the south and there was Hyde Park High School to the north and there was Hirsh High School to the west. And then they built South Shore for this neighborhood, which was really built in the '20s and '30s. The key thing there was a public library, we lived at 79th on 73rd Street, it was eight blocks to a mile. So it was, sort of, two-thirds of a mile down and then we had to go over it, so a little over a mile. And certainly, when I was in my first two years of high school, my father would take me every Friday night to the library and then I would get out a couple of books and I think I was trying to read a couple of books a week at that stage.
[Q] What kind of books?
Oh, novels, Fenimore Cooper, you know, sort of adventure things. By the time I was in high school I certainly read Microbe Hunters when... before I went to university.

I don't know whether we got it by then, but The Chicago Sun, which was started by Marshall Field, to give you an alternative to The Chicago Tribune, that is a pro-England daily newspaper. They had a book review, you know, section probably on Sundays, which would tell you the new books, and Arrowsmith and Sinclair Lewis... he was a well-known writer. I think it was in high school, I probably read at least parts of the long trilogy that was called The USA by John Dos Passos. And then so we had that in a bookcase in our house and we had Studs Lonigan, the great novel of Irish–American life in Chicago in the '20s and '30s, and I would have read the Grapes of Wrath. So these were about things that I read when I was 13 or 14 or 15. When I went off to the University of Chicago, with, you know, a small group of 15-year-olds, then I probably had so many books to read for the university, that there was no point in going to our local library, there were university libraries.

Microbe Hunters certainly had a big impact on me of, it made the life of a scientist very exciting. There are still people read that book and get excited, because there has never been an equivalent. If I were younger, I would do, you know, Cancer Gene Finders or, you know, there're some great stories and they've never really been written up in a way that 15-year-olds could read them, or 14-year-olds. Well, now, you know, probably the exceptional 11-year-old would read it with...
[Q] And Arrowsmith also influential?
Yes, except, you know, he didn't... he failed. You know, he didn't... the epidemic they didn't cure in the Caribbean or wherever he went, you know. So I... you know, I didn't want to be like Arrowsmith, but you did want to be like Pasteur.

The President of the University of Chicago was... it had become Robert Hutchins, had become Dean of the Law School at 28 or something. He was an extraordinary speaker, my father knew him at Oberlin. I think Hutchins was one year older and so he was already a dominant person when he was in college and at some stage, you know, he wanted to reform American education, so I think it was Elliott at Harvard who, you know, let you major in everything. Before it was a classical education or you came and you could learn psychology and all that and different majors and Hutchins saw this as that you weren't really educated as to what the world was about, and so people would... you know, would just go on in life and make money and they were ignorant. And he was influenced by the program at Columbia.
Columbia College had a, sort of, general education where you got the best of the past and there was some emphasis on the books. And when Chicago... Hutchins went to Chicago in 1933, that was his real aim, was to make Chicago like Columbia. The Chicago Faculty wasn't enthusiastic at their department, they thought they were maybe the best university then in the country, they were not enamored of Hutchins. Hutchins had been chosen by the trustees, so Hutchins essentially treated the college where people were hired as teachers, not as research people. They were not part of the department and they were there to teach social sciences, humanities, sciences and thought the American high school was a joke and since he himself was precocious, ought to just get to college when you're 15 and I think I remember the remarkable President Notre Dame, Hesburgh, who was given an honorary degree by the University of Chicago in '61. And he said the Catholic Church should just focus on high schools, that is, since they gave up the grammar schools it wouldn't make much difference. It was the high schools that was the time you really, that people were formed. That if you wanted to become religious, you got get them in high school or if you wanted to get... and I think it's probably true, that this period between 15 and 20 is a... people are receptive to a lot of things, they... it's early enough before jobs, so you're not thinking of, you know, how it would help me earn a living.
And so at the University of Chicago, I got extraordinary American history course. Chicago wasn't memorizing dates, you know, the year of the Constitution was, sort of, irrelevant in general but, you know, what was... why did they... what was the reason you had the very articles for the Constitution, you know, what was the function of the Federalist Papers? What did the Puritans believe before? So, I got intellectual history, you know, more or less why things happened, you know, the fights between the planters and the others. So, I was just fascinated by American history, you know, in the same way that you could, you know, English history if you were living there. Why did things happen? Not just which king killed which other king.

So we did read the great books, but we also read a book called a textbook, it was the only textbook I remember from Chicago, called, Main Currents in American Thought by Vernon Parrington who was a professor in Seattle, the University of Washington. It was a leftist book on the whole, you know, it was very much an economic interpretation of American History. But Charles Beard at Columbia had written a book called the Economic Interpretation of the Constitution. So, you know, it was... economics played a role and so I was very pleased that, you know, if we just read Lincoln's addresses and all that, an intellectual text, which was concerned with why things happened as opposed to what happened. It was a very good counter-balance to...
[Q] The history of ideas.
History of ideas. And then the striking thing about Chicago was that the... you only had one exam a year, at the end of the course. You had practice exams, so you were taking exams at, sort of, know where you were but it didn't count, it would never go on your transcript. And half the questions they were all multiple-choice, so they could be graded by... there was already some automatic thing, so where they would give you a question and there were five possible answers and at least two of them seemed plausible. So, I think, in many cases it was arbitrary which one you chose, but they all involved trying to interpret facts, so you would be given a paragraph on history and then these questions, so you would have to interpret it. So it was all toward reasoning – the whole point of the Chicago education was to reason from... draw a conclusion from a paragraph. And that's how you were judged.
[Q] So now did your habit of not taking notes during lectures and so on come from that era?
Possibly, because there was no point.
[Q] There was no point.
In the college, you wouldn't take a note, they were there for fun. Then, when I started taking some science courses, I remember everyone was writing down what they said, and I didn't. And the embryologist, Paul Weiss, developed an extreme dislike of me because I was someone who was not writing down what he was saying, and he afterwards sort of told me that he was very annoyed when I got an A in the exam. You know, that I would look at other people's notes or something and there was a textbook, and you know, it was pretty... it was basically zoology or it was taxonomy.
[Q] So how did the science? How did you get interested in science? Was it at the University of Chicago or had you already had it before you went there?
No, I think, it was because of birds. And birds... there was the beginning of the study of animal behavior– Lorenz and Tinbergen. So they were probably going on roughly the same time I was being educated and the... so, it was, you know, totally about instinct pretty early on and, you know, and instinct probably had to go back to genes. So the concept that behavior was controlled, or could be controlled by genes, I would have just taken for granted by 1946. You know, the belief I've had ever since that and then of course you were told that humans were different, you know, that we had evolved so... but of course, in those days it was just behavior. You never thought of how you would behave in... whether you were related or whether you had too much dopamine or serotonin or norepinephrine, so those were much later things. So, you know, it was just behavior.

I would have probably... if I'd gone to Cornell and which wouldn't have probably been the right place when I got there and wanted to study some form of behavior. You know, I've been searching for a David Lack or something like... the center of animal behavior... then, you know, if it wasn't Germany, it was Oxford. And that interested me and I certainly was... my advisor to the University of Chicago, Herluf Strandskov, who was a Scandinavian. He studied twins. He was a human geneticist. So the idea that the nature/nurture dilemma would be resolved from twin studies and, you know, how birds can migrate and end up on oceanic islands, just seemed so... that there was an answer out there and, you know, the answer was never God. It was somehow the brain had been programmed.
[Q] But the gene... how did you get to genes from...? So, do you think you entered the University of Chicago knowing that you interest would be genetics or did something happen?
Yes, I'm sure in high school I'd heard the word in biology 'Mendel'. And Mendel's Laws and then at the University of Chicago, in one of the biology survey course, they taught Mendel. But it was purely as the... and it wasn't until my junior year that I took... I didn't take the course, because I wasn't a graduate student, but I went to the lectures of Sewall Wright on physiological genetics, and I'm sure I heard of Beadle and Tatum because that was '46 and Sewall Wright was very interested in gene action, and I'm sure I heard of Avery and the transformed principle, while a junior at Chicago. And I'd read Schrödinger's book in my junior year, What is Life?
[Q] Now, this was in a course or were you on your own reading this?
That was my own. There was a... in a Chicago Sun Book Review Schrödinger's book was reviewed, and I went to the library. So no teacher told me to read it, and at that stage I was in my third year, I was only taking ecology courses, but I had become friends with the teaching assistants in these zoology courses. They were graduate students, and at least one of them was a graduate student of Sewall Wright. So... and Sewall Wright was regarded as one of Chicago's great professors and he was a population geneticist but he was also interested in gene action and studied coat color in guinea pigs. He had been doing that in the '20s, and so he was... so I became aware that, you know, the real problem was... at the chemical level. And certainly, I'd heard of Linus Pauling when I was an undergraduate, I don't know why. In those... you know, it would have been the potential article, you know, in Time magazine or maybe even in Life magazine. Life magazine was very important in growing up, you know, just the pictures and what Henry Luce said and his people thought important. And, you know, compared to today's journalism, it was pretty good.
[Q] So what I... I'm still having trouble the fact that you were able to latch onto the gene as a young...
Oh, it was very much the need to replace God.
[Q] Okay.
You know, if I had been religious, there would have been no reason.

I think, you had to have, you know, something which gave the instructions for life, so when you didn't have God, you know, if you had God you could just – you didn't have to be curious, it solved everything. If you didn't have God, you know, something had to make the pea plants different and Mendel had shown, you know, there was the gene. So it seemed to be the only causation. I don't remember, you know, having any discussions about religion once I got to the university. I think it was just taken for granted that He didn't exist, so it wasn't worth discussing. Or, you know, I wouldn't have had friends who were that way, and so, yes, you couldn't, you know, Darwin didn't replace God, so Darwin was just generally... it happened, but I don't remember, Darwin then being treated with the reverence he is today. Yes, evolution, you know, well, prefer a whole day in writing all the books, he was just a historical figure, and he got it right and no one questioned it. So, I was never, as a boy, very interested, you know, in the past very much – it was always the future, you know, what we mean to be, because you know, scientists were people who did new things. Just writing about the past wouldn't be as exciting as discovering the future.
[Q] But when did you decide you were going to be a scientist?
I think by the time I was 17; I think my chief uncertainty was my low IQ.
[Q] Because the number you saw?
Yeah, the number was too low to be equated with great success, and that you didn't have to be a mathematical whiz to be a naturalist, whereas in those days there was a real hierarchy of brains. Maybe mathematics at the top, then physics, but physics has become so important that mathematics was, sort of, put off to the side. The heroes in those days were the physicists, and then below them were the chemists, and the biologists were, you know, microbe hunters or something, and that seemed sufficiently exciting that was I was, you know... that Pasteur didn't use mathematics and made a success. So I... at Chicago I did take one, a physics course, and I actually got an A, and I was really surprised with that. Maybe, you know, if I had... had the right teachers and started in the right way, you know, I would have felt at ease, but I never really did.
[Q] Did you have as much curiosity about the physical world as you did about biology?
No. I mean, biology just seemed, well, it was... human behavior was more... it was easy to be curious about, and... but birds, when you know, initially it was just spotting rare birds, and as I say, but most guys, most bird watchers… not seeing the beauty of a bird, but seeing one that's unusual for the day. So, there was a beak... you know, just lists that, but then I, you know, really did enjoy, particularly since we didn't have enough money... to leave this outside. The vision of living, you know, of being in national parks or... and mountains or beautiful beaches, that was romantic for me, you know, whereas there was absolutely no beauty in the south side of Chicago – absolutely none, you could go down to the... see some of the initial Chicago skyscrapers, the Chicago Tribune building, or a regular tower, there's something about, I don't remember, my ever, you know, seeing, thinking of myself as ever dominated by aesthetics. I think it would've been very bad when you had no money to... people paid too much attention to how things looked.
[Q] So the lake was not a part of your life?
No, though the University of Chicago with its sort of imitation of Oxford buildings, you know, the collegiate gothic in the American campus, was something we all sort of aspired to, I don't really know the words, and you know, and never... can say, did I ever, in Chicago or looked at a church and said, 'Oh, it looks good', or something like that. You know, I saw them more as teaching the irrelevant, or appreciating the irrelevant, so I couldn't dissociate, you know, religion from what was happening. You know, my father very much saw religion as the enemy of progress and of superstition, and used by the rich people who give purpose to poor people's lives.

Well, I got to Indiana because my adviser proposed that as a second alternative to Caltech, because Caltech had Morgan, who'd gone there from Columbia, and the main emphasis at... over the biology division at Caltech was genetics, whereas in most schools, genetics was just one of seven or eight other disciplines, whereas it was at least half of what you would see at Caltech. Instead of having only one geneticist, there were a number. And then there was Pauling, who certainly popularized the notion that the mysteries of life would come from understanding the unique biological molecules, like the proteins. All the talk was on proteins, there was really nothing said about nucleic acids at that time. And somehow my adviser knew that, well, of course, that Muller had gone there, that he knew of Luria, he knew of Tracy Sonneborn.
[Q] You didn't meet any of these people?
I didn't know when I went there, no, it was just... it was convenient, you know, it was four hours away by train and so I could get there, and then in my senior year as I was applying for graduate school, Hermann Muller got the Nobel Prize, so that made it more... easier to apply, that Morgan had died at, you know. In those days, you know, I... we thought that, you know, old famous people were people you'd want to know.
[Q] Before they died?
Yeah, well, you know, that they were still interesting, whereas I'm sure if I had met Morgan, he would have bored me. You know, whereas Muller wasn't boring, Muller was,,, his course was, you know, the history of his life, so we really learned what the fly room was like, and what Morgan was like, and sort of... how Muller didn't always get the credit for the ideas that he had, that he was basically picked on, probably, because he was short and... and Jewish, though, I've read that he was only half-Jewish. He was certainly short, that is the... there was no doubt about that, and we sort of thought, well, he had the shape of a drosophila, you know, like a dumpy fly. But he used Waddington's texts for his course, which was something like modern genetics written before the war, but with all the references to... You know, Waddington was interested in embryology, so you really... he was trying to... it was a good book. It was a terrible disappointment to meet Waddington after really respecting him from his book, and then... but at the same time, I took Mower's course, I took Luria's course, and from the very start of it, they, you know... he... the only text was one text on plant viruses, so we had plant viruses as the text book, and of course that talked about T and B and RNA and so I learned the words in Bawden's book.
Bawden was another disappointment, when he made a... he wasn't a chemist, you know, he was just a plant pathologist. But... and Luria's course was fun, and soon, you know, I learned there was a connection between Luria and Delbrück and Delbrück was the really hero of Schrödinger's book, and so in going to... I possibly knew that Delbrück was at Caltech, which might have been, but I think it was Pauling really was the attraction to get there.
[Q] You would have gone to Caltech if they had taken you?
If they'd accepted me.
[Q] Right, why didn't they take you, do you think?
Probably my grades in mathematics, among others, you know. I was... the recommendations were... all talked about me being a very keen naturalist, and in Indiana, the dean... no... yeah, it was the dean of the graduate school, who was... Fernandus Payne who'd done his PhD at Columbia before HW Muller and Muller arrived there, so very early drosophila under Morgan. He wrote me if I wanted to pursue a career, continue to pursue an interest in birds, I shouldn't come to Indiana. So, you know, they were being honest, it's... it's not what we want students to be interested in, but I had in fact changed before then, I didn't wish to pursue an interest, and... because, you know, studying birds wasn't going to replace God, in a... in a sense of providing a... an explanation for why things happen.

I took courses the whole time I was there, but the first year was... yeah, I think my first time was Luria, Mower, a course in developmental biology or embryology, and advanced calculus, and then the second term, I think I took differential equations, advanced calculus two. I might have had a term of research, because I began to work in Luria's lab. I took ecology one, even though it was, you know, I liked the field trips. I didn't take Sonneborn's course, which was really protozoan genetics, I took my second year, and I probably took my chemistry in my second year.
But then they, you know, realized I had never learned anything at all about metabolism, so in my third year they made me try, and then they... in my third year, they thought I should learn some organic synthesis, so you know, I had some faith thing to try and be broad, but I think that was a good thing. I think students focus too much on their PhD thesis to the exclusion of staying interested in other things, but the theses are harder and more complicated now, and you can see why, you know, it was sort of taken for granted, you know, you'd get through. If you didn't get through in three and a half years, you'd get through it in four.
[Q] When did you pick Luria, was that in your first year?
I picked him at the end of the first term. Sonneborn had... it was running a sort of evening one, on Friday evenings, his students would go to his house and they'd talk science, and he asked me to come because I hadn't yet chosen what I did, and I continued to go to Sonneborn's things, I think, the whole time I was in Indiana. I found it... I liked him, I found it interesting.
The nice thing about Indiana was I never worried about whether I was any good, whereas in Chicago, that dominated me. One, because in the college, the people who are the best were those who could do philosophy, so the number one intellectual discipline in Chicago was... in the college, was philosophy. And I never could quite understand it, you know, what was the meaning of the words, so much was word meaning, and that was slightly arbitrary, who taught it to you so, you know, so it was hard to win. And everyone who would get to... you know, we had to determine philosophy. I never understood what I was reading. You know, they'd have you read Aquinas, but it... all these terms and then there would be these two students, one of whom ended up very well, and one badly. You know, the A students in philosophy... it was... loved this sort of truth through words. And afterwards I just thought this was crap, and it's not a real truth, and who is the famous, oh, head of the MRC, oh, Harold Himsworth. After he retired he wrote a little book on three types of truth: religious truth, philosophical truth and scientific truth. And I'd never seen them laid out in this way, to realize that all these people thought that philosophical truth was worth pursuing. And I just thought it's... it's not real, it's... it's a game, and who wins is arbitrary, depending on the whim of the instructor, you could be a B student or you could be an A student, merely because you didn't seem to catch on to one of their ideas.

I was the only, you know... of the five or six students that came in that year, I was the only one who'd been educated to think, so I already thought like a scientist, and you know, didn't believe you could survive by memorization or you know, and my roommate had gone through Oklahoma Baptist University – well, he's just one of us, he became a professor in Illinois afterwards. He was a bright guy, but you know, he, it took him a long while to get away from, I don't know if he ever gave up college, and so that the... I mean, as the faculty, soon after I arrived, the faculty in Indiana treated me like faculty, you know, they'd ask me questions, what do you think, because I was the only one who...
[Q] You were significantly younger than them.
Yeah, I was younger by a couple of years. There were others who hadn't been in the war, so I wasn't the only person who hadn't been in the war, but it was... what I always found fun is afterwards, having the University of Chicago come in on these fake listings of American colleges which, you know, which is the most fun college to be at. And, you know, it's always someplace in the South, and they measure it by the percentage of students who get into the fraternities, the sororities, so some, you know, the number of weekends... and Chicago was the third on most unpleasant, and fifth was John Hopkins, fourth was Rensselaer Polytechnic, number one was either Westpoint or Annapolis and then there was Chicago.
And I realized that Chicago was officers' training school for intellectuals. Its aim was to teach you to be an officer, and you know, Hutchinson never quite said it, he'd said in a speech when we entered, that the function of Chicago was to prepare you for greatness. Then he said, 'You are to know the past and then you could know what remained to be done'. And no other place had that, except when we, you know, John McCain, military family, grandfather an Admiral... that there was... your destiny was out there to win and to lead. So, Chicago, you know, just... Hutchinson regarded our country as sort of a mixture of being infantile and insipid, with a few bright people like Jefferson, and so on, in the past. But not, Europe was always held out as being deeper in thought. And Chicago never looked up to New York City, except for Columbia is looking up to the great books.
[Q] So, this was instrumental for you, this experience you had...
At Chicago?
[Q] Coming young and great books.
Yeah, and you see, in my senior year at Chicago, I got... I think all my grades were As, you know, partly because I... you know, one of the rules from my book, take courses where you'll get good grades, it gives you self-confidence. But you probably don't get good grades so much you would like the subject, though there are some, you know, of the high IQ people, who could just ace any subject and ace it and get an A. It doesn't mean they're going to be a success in life, but they, you know, have that ability to seemingly learn anything.
There were a couple around Chicago, I was very jealous of them, and then afterwards you discovered that there wasn't much there, because there wasn't, they were just mastering the past, they weren't really ever putting themselves up against the future, which was the... the finals thing. But it was the need to... you know, a lack of respect for people who don't think. You just get them out of your sight. So, in that sense, Chicago was a very arrogant place, it was also a very honest place... I mean... but it did have that... but this was all the Hutchins world, you know, this completely unsocial sort. Not the ordinary Chicago faculty, many of them were conventional, but it was this thought that... because Chicago really, at college, believed you could get through thinking, as opposed to you know, the need to go out and observe.

He was very important, and the term then was genetics and micro-organisms. It was, you know, multiply fast you could get answers in a day instead of maybe a year, you know, you could grind them up and the active molecules were just there sitting for you to study. Then I was his only student, was very important that I became his student before the first child was born. He married a... Zella Hurwitz, whose brother, Jerry Hurwitz, became quite a good biochemist and he... competing against Arthur Kornberg and never quite being... getting the respect.
I remember Jerry because he couldn't get into medical school because he was Jewish, and so became a... so many good Jewish biochemists are there because of discrimination, careful. This was, you know, the period just after the war, and some of them must have gone to Indiana, Jews from Brooklyn College or something, you know, New York Jews, because of Skinner... was in the psychology department in Indiana. So, Indiana had made a real effort in the late '20s, late '30s, to change itself from being a Southern provincial college to actually trying to be a major school, all because of two men, the dean and the president Hermie Wells. And so yeah, in the end it was really a good school. I don't think it is today, but then, you know, there is a... I mean, I don't want to say something bad about any of them, but you know, it sort of went up, and then you know, isn't in the same league as Illinois now or Michigan or Wisconsin. But they've had a series of uninspiring presidents. You can't really survive, you know, ten presidents in a row who don't live by ideas. Sets the tone.
[Q] And now, you were treated as a colleague and an independent scientist right from the start?
Yes, and that was partly, you know, because of Delbrück and theoretical physics. You came into it very early. You didn't work for someone else, you might work with someone in solving a problem, but you certainly didn't work for... underneath someone. So, the spirit of the phage forum was Delbrück wanted to be like Copenhagen in 1930. So that I really benefited from, you know, when Delbrück and Gamow were trying to sit in the front row when they were 22.

[Q] How would you summarize your PhD period? I mean, you get embedded in the phage group, which was the key?
Yeah, I got embedded in it. Bright people, for the most part, doing experiments was for... and not very important, and with a false distain for chemistry, some of it was the pecking order, there was... chemists weren't bright, except for the quantum chemists, but you know, the ordinary chemists who did the analytical chemistry or something, was not an intellectual. And so... they wanted the... somehow, the answer to fall out of the theory, instead of, you know, a genetic cross would tell you the essence of the gene, not X-ray structure methods. Luria, for some reason, disliked chemists, liked physicists. Luria had been in Fermi's lab in Rome, either in the late... around Christmas '36, or Christmas of '37, and hero-worshipped those people. So, and then trying to determine the size of the gene through target theory, that is, if every X-ray in activation killed, then you knew the size of the genetic components, or if any... but it was just the size of the phage, they never said protein and nucleic acid, so it was all pretty... they weren't thinking in terms of the molecules, they were just thinking of the physicist's cube or a sphere or a cylindrical body.
[Q] There's Delbrück as well, is there?
Yes, and Delbrück only later in life began to appreciate, in the '70s, you know, RNA preliminaries transcription, so that was a very late... and Gunther Stent who'd been trained as a physical chemist, you know, if there wasn't an equation involved with it, it was unimportant. You know, you could be dumb and do the work, whereas everyone wanted to think they were right by doing things which required you to be bright.
[Q] So, where did you get to chemistry during this period, that nucleic acid in chemistry, as...
I took... among the good people recruited to Indiana was Felix Horowitz, who was a protein chemist who'd been at Charles University, and then... who had fled and was a professor in Turkey during the war, and had worried whether antibodies were univalent or bivalent. Yeah, Pauling was right, and for some reason Horowitz was wrong. But his major interest was hemoglobin, and he was actually related to Max Perutz, I think, I don't think to Max's wife, and so I'm sure he was the one, I remember him talking about Sanger and n group methods, so he was very up-to-date on you know, so I took this course in the Fall, probably of '48, from Felix. And I remember I had to write a term paper and my term paper was on lysozyme and one other protein. It was small, you know, it was... Francis was trying to crystallize it, so, about that time, in Cambridge, then afterwards.
So, I'm sure he talked about Ashbury, he, you know, talked about Bernal, he talked about Ashbury, so I... that was my introduction to it. And it fitted into sort of, you know, my... liking real things. And my grades in chemistry... I got A's at Chicago or so, it wasn't that I didn't like chemistry, it was just chemistry was, you know, didn't seem to bear any connection at all, to what really interested me.
[Q] But when you were doing the irradiation experiments, were you thinking nucleic acids all the time?
No.
[Q] You were not?
No. All I know is that in my senior year, I mean, my last year at Chicago, I wanted to go on and study DNA. Yeah, because... what I mean, Kosloff at Chicago, you know, we were labeling phage with p32 and trying to see if the p32 ended up in the progeny. So, I remember hearing that experiment. They very importantly... at Indiana, was Leo Szilard having got a little money from the Rockefeller Foundation to hold Mid-Western phage meetings, and there would have been a lot of them, but you know, probably ended up with just one in the Fall and one in the Spring, and we met in St Louis once. We met in... it's that I didn't know Szilard and... were then, in an abandoned synagogue just south of the University of Chicago, that's where their lab was.
And it was all Szilard wanting to meet the people who'd done the experiments and talk to them. So it was all arranged for Leo. And I had a, sort of, a hero-worship of him from when I read the Smythe's Report, when they, in '45, when the bomb... he was a Princeton professor who had been commissioned to write the history of the bomb project when it was on. And so, of course, Leo was, and Fermi were, and that he had come into biology really made it much more important, because he was a great man. Whereas Delbrück would say, well, you know, he wasn't a very good physicist. He was edging to telling the truth, actually. Delbrück had a thing about... Bohr wouldn't have liked Delbrück if he hadn't been pretty bright, I think, as a physicist, and there was Delbrück's... there was a couple things, you know, his name actually got attached to something. And he had spent a year with... oh, all the famous English physicists. He became the Cavendish professor... He went to Bristol. Max was in Bristol for a year as a post-doc, actually. So, yeah, we would be the new, you know, in this sense, Cold Spring Harbor or Caltech were, really, the new Copenhagen and Gottingens.

I think I took the Avery experiment... it was probably right, in the same sense, you could say... well, there was all... a lot of reasons why it wasn't right in the same sense, you know. I've taken, like... probably killed Luria, yeah, it's probably a fact, okay? That is not 100% proven, but sometimes you have to act, you have to make a choice, even though it's not 100% truth all right? So, if you looked at it, Avery's experiment was probably right.
[Q] But the phage group did not have this view?
No, don't ask me, maybe because, you know, Max never took 'What is Life?' seriously, as I did. Probably because he knew Schrödinger and... or had met him, and Schrödinger wasn't mystical the way he was in my eyes.
[Q] So, how did you get to Copenhagen?
Because Herman Kalckar was in the United States, I don't know why, and he was at a phage group meeting in St Louis in the Fall of 1950, and I talked to him, and he had got a hold of a little radioactive adenine or something, and he wanted to... I was talking about what Kornberg did, you know, trying to find a cell free system to make DNA. Yeah, so, I went to Copenhagen sort of thinking this is what Kalckar would put me to doing, but discovered, when I got there, his lab was working on nucleosides, this is how you link the sugar versus the base. I realized, you know, I could do that for two years, but it would be no closer to what the gene was. And so soon after getting there, I think we were... I think I hadn't met him before, the Danish microbiologist Ole Maaløe had visited Caltech and wanted to switch to working with bacterial viruses. And he had been... he'd been doing some form of... I think... he... you know, curing bacterial infections.
But then wanted to do it, and so he welcomed Gunther Stent and I, who both saw Herman's lab as a total loser, and particularly when within weeks after her arrival, which was simultaneous with mine, of the post-doc, Barbara Wright, Herman announced to everyone that he and Barbara... or Barbara was his heart's desire, and he had left his wife. And I had... I described the camping trip at great length in Avoid Boring People, that was a woman I just wanted to be as far away from as possible.
So, you know, Herman's lab just lost, but I think even if Barbara hadn't been there, nucleosides was just too boring. And in... at the Cold Spring Harbor phage meeting, Seymour Cohen had... there was, say, 50% of the DNA of the parental phage got into the progeny, and somehow, there was quite a question... Well, could there be two sorts of DNA, genetic DNA and non-genetic DNA, and only the genetic DNA were passive? Seymour Cohen said, 'Well, if you do two generations of the genetic DNA and the second generation you'd get 100% transfer'. So actually, from the moment I heard that, I wanted to do that experiment because... and so I did it in Copenhagen in Maaløe's lab and got 50% of the second generation, and we knew it was... we did at the start.
And so it was after the failure of that result that I went off to Naples, and with Kalckar and Barbara, and in the middle of May there was the small meeting on macromolecules where Maurice Wilkins showed up instead of Randall and showed the crystal DNA photo. And, you know, the moment I saw that I... you know, it was like seeing, you know, the perfect girl, anything you... any other girl was uninteresting once you saw that. So, a whole series of just lucky events. But you know, with the general rule that if you sit at home it's a bad idea, and so when you're young you should just travel around as much, meet as many people around that, go to a lot of meetings, you don't know what you're going to... who you're going to meet. You know, you can sort of stay at home at 80, but it doesn't pay when you're 20.

I got to Cambridge because I must have got back to Copenhagen and written Luria that I'd seen this X-ray photo of DNA and it was a three-dimensional structure, and I wanted to change what I was doing. And then soon after Luria got my letter, he went to a small meeting at the University of Michigan, probably organized by Gordon Sutherland, who was an English spectroscopist, but interested in proteins, and he met John Kendrew and, you know, he learned that John was trying to work on three dimensional structure. He mentioned he had a former student who wanted to learn X-ray methods, and then Luria wrote me that Kendrew needed someone and I should... but Kendrew was now in the States, and I don't... I knew when I went to Cambridge in the middle of September of '51, that Kendrew wouldn't be there but Perutz would be there, and I'd have to... I don't quite... who told me that, but Perutz met me, knew I was coming, and after having Bragg talk to me, and I guess Kendrew had indicated that, you know, Luria had said I was very good, and therefore... And I think they liked the idea of someone coming to the lab whose interest had been phage. You know, it was the other sort of molecular biology.
[Q] But they knew you were coming to look at DNA?
No, Luria probably said... yeah, I was interested in DNA but I wanted to learn crystographic methods, because I must written, you know, I don't know any... anything, and you know, I don't know why I never... you know, I never wrote a letter to Wilkins saying I wanted to be with you, but I think it was just in... you know, I tried to talk to Wilkins, and... but he wasn't really interested in talking to me.
[Q] Had he been would you likely have gone to King's?
Yes, sure. Yeah, it'd have been a different history. I would have probably brought Maurice and Rosalind together, despite what the...
[Q] Where they could have ripped you to pieces between them.
Yeah, so you know, it could have been the three of our names, you know, if I had gone there.
[Q] So, what... what's interesting to me is: you weren't really a post-doc in Copenhagen or in Cambridge. What were you? Was that just a different time?
No, it was a different time, there weren't post-docs, there were people who were finishing their PhD, who would go to some place, but they were treated as...
[Q] So you were independent?
Independent, except you could say that, you know, various people went, quote, as post-docs, and worked with John Kendrew, and certainly were crucial to his finding the myoglobin structure, and several of them went back, so they went and took on someone else's problem, whereas I didn't take on someone else's problem, but worked on my own. I would have taken on someone, say, if it had been what interested me, but there wasn't, but the concept of... the post-doc was... originally you went... you wanted to change your field, so you went to a new lab, and you were an apprentice because you were new to the subject, and then, yeah... now, you know, in a few places, and we started and we were... we, Cold Spring Harbor fellows, they're very bright people and finished their PhD, and when we... they come to Cold Stream Harbor to work on their own thing. You know, maybe in someone's lab, but it has to be their name on the papers, not the people providing space for them. And I think that is certainly the best way. We brought Carol Greider to Cold Spring Harbor; she had discovered telomerase in Elizabeth Blackburn's lab. And then, you know, she did a famous experiment on telomerase decreasing, you know, the size of the telomeristic... so I think some places are trying to reinvent it, that bright students are better when you call them independent. You get more of them.
[Q] So, Luria didn't put his name on your papers?
No.
[Q] So... and you then went on to do that, so that was clearly a role model thing.
Yes, yes.
[Q] How does he make... how did he get grants if he didn't put his name on people's papers?
Oh, you just listed, when I was at Harvard, Wally and I would list the PhD, the other papers that came out of the lab, and it was so clearly... and the papers would all thank me for, you know...
[Q] So Luria did this with many of his students and post-docs afterwards?
Probably, I don't know, his... he had two good students after me, Bob DeMars went to Wisconsin, never became famous, but was always better than his reputation. And George Streisinger who sort of invented the zebra fish, who had a... had first decided he wanted to go into plant viruses, and that didn't work. I forget what George's PhD was like, they had to go... they came to Indiana but then went with Luria to, and finished at Illinois. I forget, but surely at that stage, there was the tradition that post-docs would be treated as equals, and not... you know, everyone was better off if they just thanked someone for giving them space and research-free agents and reading their paper and... but science seemed to move faster in those days. You just wrote your paper and showed it to someone, and all papers were published in those days, there was no problem with getting published. You didn't have to go through the agony of, you know, three revisions for a cell, or something like this.
And you know, people still ask me, you know, who refereed your DNA paper? I said, no, if Bragg gave something to the editor of Nature, it would be published. That was sufficient. You wouldn't send it to someone else. Who was going to second guess Bragg? And we could move a little faster if we adopted that, but then people would say it's favoritism, but favoritism works if you... you know, I think the standard was... is high, on the whole in 1953, as it is today.

When I saw Perutz, he must have described his round, and would have described Francis, but I remember very much John Kendrew who just, you know, sensing that Francis and I might enjoy each other, so you know, it was... and then... and that happened with, you know... I can't imagine, within ten minutes, we didn't know exactly that I had seen the X-ray photograph. Francis knew Maurice, you know, that we should learn more from Maurice right away that you couldn't meet Francis for two minutes without learning the horrors of Pauling having beaten them to the... helix, and that they... the peptide bond, that... kept... and that Bragg was just a... felt deeply humiliated that they had published the wrong structure for polypeptide chains. And that why not use this approach for DNA?
So, it was so simple that... I'm sure at the end of the lunch the only thing that mattered to me when are we going to see Maurice, learn more details, so start building a model. So, it wasn't... I mean, it was... we met Maurice and then he... I... we learned that Rosalind had already been scheduled to give a seminar. I went to the seminar, and then met Francis who, for some reason, had arranged to go to Oxford. I think it was because he'd done the theory for the helical diffraction pattern, and wanted the pleasure of telling Dorothy Hodgkin what the theory was. So he was just going over to brag. And we'd met, somewhere we must have met in Paddington station, I think by then I had learned about the Society for Visiting Scientists, which was on Osld Burlington Street, and whether Bernal has started it. I'm sure he's started with it, and... for 10/6 or something like that, you got a bed and cornflakes for breakfast. No eggs or ham sandwich, but you got cornflakes.
So, I'm sure I spent the night in the Society for Visiting Scientists, which I think I became a member of. Met Francis, and then he started telling me how the helical theory would do it. So, he was already keen and because I had... I essentially told him DNA had no water, because there was four residues for each symmetric unit, and he thought for the whole unit cell, so it was... we didn't have to worry about water, it was just... what was the cations. And... which led me to try and meet a couple of people to see if we could measure some DNA to find out whether it was possibly magnesium or was it just sodium thymonucleate as everyone had said it was, and there was no...
So, you know, whereas Linus just... somehow I assumed the hydrogen atoms were there and you would form the hydrogen bond between... using the hydrogen, hydrogens attach to phosphate. So we built two different, superficially the same sort of structure, but... and we must have discussed the density, and surely we discussed things like density before Rosalind's seminar, you know. So that I was probably told by Francis what to try and find out. There was only... there was one standard text book called Chemical Crystallography by a Palmer chemist whose last name was Bunn, B U double N, which I had begun to try and read it soon after I got to Cambridge, but we seemed to be totally indifferent to proteins in a nucleic acid, so any problems you might get involved.
And for the first weeks in Cambridge, John Kendrew wanted to join me, and his dilemma that he had been given crystals by the cytochrome chemists... it's in my book, they don't come, the name doesn't come back to me, was in the Molteno Institute, his daughter had somehow crystallized horse myoglobin and John had taken some pictures, and he was never able to repeat it. So, we... there was a... we went out to the Cambridge slaughterhouse just to the east, I forget the... Mill Road or something, where there was a small... and where they had shot a horse that day, they were ex-race, from Newmarket, and we got the heart out and purified it and no crystals. And so that happened within the first... so there were no questions, you know, there was nothing, really nothing to do to help John. Yeah, I could have spent a year, you know, trying to crystallize... crystallize but that...
[Q] But now, had you got crystals that could have changed your direction?
You could have, and probably not, because...
[Q] It would have slowed you, perhaps, very much.
It was a case, you know, I would have had something to do, as it was I had nothing to do. And Max Perutz, I remember once... probably I never seemed unhappy because I had... I wasn't doing anything, whereas he felt in a sort of compulsive way that every minute should be spent with some accomplishment.

Because when I got there, Max Perutz took me round to see if I could find a room where I could then live in when I came back two weeks later. And found something on Parkers Piece. No, not Parker's Piece, it was Park Parade. It was on a green. And the woman had a ground floor room, and she gave kippers for breakfast, and I got into a big argument. She said I can't come in after 10 o'clock at night, I woke up her husband. And I had been to some occasion at Francis' house and where I came in late. And she... we got into an argument, you know, she wanted me to say I'd never do it again, and so I went. And John Kendrew said that they had a spare room and it has a little servant's flat on Tennis Court Road that, at the Peter household. And so I moved in there.
So I lived with John and Elizabeth the whole year, so I wasn't lonely. And John... the rooms in college were infinitely more comfortable than his house. And I didn't know the marriage was really never satisfactory, and I gave Elizabeth someone to talk to. John was, you know, had his main records so whatever it had been then, his music in his rooms in college. And everything was catalogued and he could sit there and... so I would have Sunday meals with him. And then John and I would go, and sometimes Elizabeth, for Sunday walks. So most Americans who came to Cambridge were terribly lonely because the English don't believe in that anyone needs help, you know, you...
[Q] Suffering is good.
What?
[Q] Suffering is good.
That after you've been in Cambridge maybe a year you will be considered, you know. Well, one, they don't hold parties; second, they don't invite people to dinner. And so I ate the evening meals in the English-Speaking Union, Trinity Street, almost opposite the entrance to Trinity, which was on the second floor, probably established in the war. It probably had some connection with American servicemen during the war. And you could get a meal there, and there would be a few people from abroad. So Hugh Huxley and I would sometimes eat at the English-Speaking Union, and then sometimes the Kendrew's would invite me. So I did, I don't remember having many evening meals when I was alone.
Now, I had become a member of Clare College, but research students really weren't part of the college life, so the students would just eat in the hall in about 10 minutes and then repair to the various friends' rooms for coffee afterwards. So if you go to hall, there was no-one around it. Now, it made me a Fellow but you know, the way Cambridge moves, and probably moves still today, you had to be there about two years before you'd be into the system, and if you weren't obnoxious and didn't try and press yourself on them they would ask you to be part of it. So having a combination of either Francis or Odile, the Kendrew's taking care of me was awful... Sunday breakfast. There was no place to get breakfast on Sunday morning. And there were several awful Greek, or probably Cypriot restaurants, which would be a mixture of breakfast and lunch. And then there were a couple of indescribably awful Indian places where you could eat. And then there was a... but you'd be paying more money than anyone else would be, there was the... you could eat an evening meal at the Arts Cinema, which I think Keynes had started. And then there was the Bath Hotel where the Catholic Chaplain to the rich students, he had his meals. The Oxford Jesuit was Father Darcy or something, and I don't know the name of the equally polished custodian of the aristocracy in Cambridge who was... you know, dined like a Cardinal by himself with wine, you know, a good life. And so that was the first year when I was with the Kendrew's.

And the second year... well, Odile had the idea that all I wanted to do was to meet women, and there was no way to break in the two women's colleges, Girton and Newnham. That was just how would you ever meet anyone? And they said, well, I know Americans, and they weren't good-looking to start with. So it... it was a... the idea was that I... there was this woman, Camille Prior, who ran a boarding house for... for French students, you know, French girls. And that was very near the centre. And I got into that and began going there during my second year. And I think the way I got into it is she gave me French lessons, because I realized that if you didn't speak French you... you couldn't go to the continent. And so I was really taking the lessons only so there was a way into dining with the French girls.
And then it turned out that the French girls really were hopeless, but there was a beautiful French boy there who was there to learn... better his English, Bertrand Foucard. But I never talked to him until... it was just the last three months when my sister came to Cambridge because her... she wanted to go to Europe and so when I went... was in Copenhagen and she came to Copenhagen and got a job with a military assistance group at the US Embassy and lived by herself for a year-and-a-half in Copenhagen. And I think had a good time.
And then an ex-boyfriend showed up and asked her to marry him. And she hadn't seen him for close to four years. He'd gone off and joined... became CIA. And so she came to Cambridge, I kept wondering whether she was going to say yes. And I arranged for her to live in the boarding house for French girls. And she became a friend of Bertrand. And Bertrand was out of... but he soon let us know he was one of the deux cents familles, the 200 and not rich families. Now, I guess some of them were aristocratic, but he wasn't, he wasn't aristocratic. And he was homosexual. I don't know when that became obvious, but he said that he was homosexual. But not only he... but both his brothers were. And one was a famous art dealer, and another was a famous interior decorator. And Bertrand was sort of the unaccomplished one. And he ended up by working for Newsweek. And... but his... he had become friends of the... Geoffrey Bawa who was then in Cambridge to study law. He came from Ceylon and his parents were tea planters, and he had a Rolls Royce in Cambridge. And Geoffrey and Bertrand were friends. Both were homosexuals.
And then, you see... then my second year in Cambridge became less... more fun, because Peter Pauling had arrived. And John had put him into Peterhouse. So Peter lived in the Peterhouse, not the main room but across the Trumpington Street. And so Peter sometimes came down to Camille Prior's and became... met Bertrand. So... and Bertrand, Odile said she couldn't take her, Odile Crick, her eyes off Bertrand. Bertrand was so unbelievably beautiful. When I last saw him he had gone bald, totally bald, it was really... his looks faded quite fast. And... but he had a certain style, and my sister became the only girl that Bertrand could be seen with, because I had bought her two French dresses, so she was that time... looked like she was the only well dressed girl in Cambridge.
My Fellowship was worth so much money on European terms that I sent her money to buy two Jacques Fath dresses and... Copenhagen. And so she could walk down the street with Jeffrey and Bertrand and they would look like they were... and Geoffrey was then interested, he went to Cambridge, he became the most distinguished architect in Ceylon. Books have been written about him. He just died. I think he was partly... he might have been half-English or something, but he switched then. He took my sister once over to a big house in Bedford, the head of the Architectural Association. And, you know, Pevsner was then in Cambridge so it was sort of the first time I was aware, you know, grand English architecture. And I played that spring, somehow Bertrand had got the rights to play on the King's College tennis courts, so I played with him. He was not a bad player, but the courts were only, you know, asphalt or something, dreadful on your feet.
[Q] How about an aside on tennis. When did your love for tennis start?
At the University of Chicago. And then I tried to play with Elizabeth Kendrew, but I never played with anyone who was ever good.
[Q] Until?
I was fired from the head of the Genome Project.
[Q] Oh my...
And then I hired pros at Piping Rock and I never played tennis, with one or two exceptions, with anyone in my life other than a pro. And, you know, it solves... it's not a wish, but you get three times as much exercise, or maybe ten, because they don't make mistakes and it just works.

I arrived, you know, in Cambridge with no feeling of what manners were. To the extent, you know, there were rich people, and they had manners, but I just thought manners went along with vulgar rich people. And yes, which was... it... it was a decisive thing my lack of manners which let us win. Francis wouldn't go up to London without writing a letter to Maurice Wilkins saying he was going to be in London, would Maurice be around? Then people never showed up in someone else's office without permission. So, you know, it was a way to keep you... to avoid being embarrassed. You didn't have to meet someone who would discover you weren't working, or it was a way of treating everyone as equal because you didn't see anyone. Yeah, it was a very carefully mannered society.

As an American I could walk into someone's office without being asked. And so the famous meeting where I saw the B photo of DNA I had the Pauling manuscript... I don't think we called up Wilkins, I just said, 'I'll take it up there'. Or maybe, you know, there was a phone call. I got there, Maurice wasn't there. I walked into Rosalind's office because I wanted to find her. I gave him... I just opened the door and walked in. And so she caught me in her office. So, you know, this was something that only a thief would... the only one who would be in your office was there, someone trying to steal your data, which she probably would have thought, yes, they want my data. So Maurice was confined this way, and... and Francis. And some people didn't quite... you know, Rosalind Franklin had this famous meeting which I didn't know about until after I wrote the Double Helix, which I'd learned from... maybe it was Alex Rich via Jack Dunitz who was there.
Jack is a crystallographer; he was at Caltech after the war to be in Pauling's lab for... in that group for two years. And then he'd gone back to Oxford, he was originally from Glasgow, and was with Dorothy. And Rosalind went there. I think it was in the fall of 1951 when the space group had been determined, and I think this space group, in fact, had been determined by Maurice. And from... reflections or not Rosalind had concluded there were four possible arrangements and went up and met with, with Dorothy, and Jack Dunitz may have been there, and... because the group wasn't big. And Rosalind started saying there were five possible space groups for DNA, and almost instantly Dorothy realized that two of them were a mirror symmetry. And she said, 'They can't be because there's no mirror symmetry in biology, it's either left-handed or right-handed'. And knowing Rosalind she probably said, 'Well, how can you be sure or something, you know? Why? How do you know that?' And so Dorothy said, 'You should go in the next room and learn about space groups from Jack Dunitz'. And after a while Rosalind just went back home, never again talked to anyone about the space group.
Now, the space group, C1, was by accident the same one that Francis worked on the hemoglobin, that in his hemoglobin groups that he was studying a particular space was C1. So he knew all the axis symmetry and realized that there were two chains running in opposite directions. He knew that the moment he learned this space group, he immediately wanted me to believe it, but I didn't understand the space groups, so I wasn't sure this was a hard fact I had to put in. And it wasn't until I found the base pairs that then Francis put it in the whole thing was solid.
[Q] When did Francis learn of this space group?
When a friend... the MRC report, the famous MRC report that was sent to Max Perutz, which described the space group, to which it had never been written confidential. And Max just showed it to us. And that was about two weeks before we got the answer. Now, if Rosalind had gone back to Oxford and tried to follow up, she would have really... someone would have said it's too... But I suspected Rosalind couldn't go back up because, you know, no-one invited her back. No-one wanted to invite her back because it had been a sort of awkward conversation. But that's what England was like, you were tied up in the... if you came from an educated class, there were these rules for what you did and what you didn't do. And Rosalind would occasionally get into... I'm sure would say something when she... so she was, I think, probably... she knew she was... socially wasn't a big success when she was with people she had known. I think she just took people before she got to know them as the enemy, which led me to believe that she had Asperger's-like syndrome, she just couldn't sense what other people's faces looked like. And so the whole thing was just she tried to get away from people as fast as she could. It was... but there was still.
And then there are two facts which, again, I don't know the statistics of. One is that women are supposedly bad at three dimensions. So did Rosalind not build models because she never really liked to think in three dimensions? Then there's the fact that the one aspect of the Jewish brain, which is not first class, is that Jews are said to be bad at thinking in three dimensions. Now you can say that doesn't explain Einstein, it doesn't explain, but in a sense it is true!
[Q] It explains me.
Yeah, okay. So one of the... funny things is that some people like maths, some people don't like maths, some people... Rosalind was very at ease with equations, but not at all at ease with trying to put it out. So she may have two strikes to her. She was a woman, she was Jewish and that really tests the... I'm not going to go near that.

It mattered a lot to Bragg. He, you know, the... that Pauling had bested him on some structures of silicates, in either '27 or '28. And Bragg never got over that. And people say he went into a sort of deep depression, if not a nervous breakdown after the Pauling affair on silicates. So... and Francis was never as competitive as I was, I don't know why. Competition sort of goes with sports. Francis never really liked sports. Then why? Maybe he just didn't... I think it has to be, it certainly must have been, you know, helpful when humans were hunter gatherers, you know? You get to prey before some other group. Their survival depended on being first.
I think, you know, when I was a boy, I... if you didn't get good grades you wouldn't be allowed to move ahead. So in that sense that you couldn't be indifferent to the fact that other people might be trying to achieve the... the same objective. And if they got there first you were often left with nothing. And that just... yeah, moving on in academia demanded that you win. And certainly people talked about it, but I don't remember... but, you know, I just took it for granted and never thought it was bad. I mean, in the sense that I was a bad person because I didn't want to... other people took, you know, to win simultaneously with someone else and wanted to win. That... and whether you could say that you just want to win or you want to win the consequence of winning. I think I want to win the consequence, you know, that beating someone else doesn't give me pleasure, which I... I'm sure in some cases, yes, you've knocked someone down it gives you... pleasure through...
Oh, I haven't told you this extraordinary fact. There's a paper and the proceedings of the Royal Society B you probably never look at it, you know? It's all behavior. Okay, this is a paper out of Canada, which is a correlation between the width of your face and your tendency to violence, okay? And so they prove it by... or they test the hypothesis by taking pictures of faces of hockey players and correlating the shape of the face with the number of minutes in the penalty box. So you've got two absolutely objective measurements so you can't go wrong, and it works. The wider your face the more likely you're in the penalty box. And they correlate that with the amount of testosterone that you have. So... there's a book called Born Fighting, the history of the Scots Irish on the borders and then in Northern Ireland, and then in Appalachia in the United States and then forming our military aristocracy Scotch-Irish. So the book is written by Senator Jim Webb, the one who won in Virginia and beat Allen. He's got the broadest face I've ever seen on any man.

I'm competitive, but I don't think I'm violent. If this correlation between width of face and, you know, I never, to my knowledge, have ever hit anyone. You know, it's not... well, with... it was only because I was a small one. And if you hit someone when you're small, you know, you lose. So never do anything where you're... so violence was not a way for a weak person to win. He would rather win in some other way. But, you know, when you say, English don't want to win, I just took it, well, you know, in the... particularly in the '70s and '80s when you were so... the financing was so poor that how were we going to compete, you know? You didn't have the resources and so a sort of fatalism came in that winning doesn't matter, because if it mattered you'd be so frustrated. Whereas if doesn't matter it's a... you know, it doesn't matter.
So I think now you'll find as there's more money around, has been more money around, that winning is suddenly a much more important thing. It does matter whether you get your article in Cell magazine. And, you know, judging over the last couple of years I think English microbiology is much more prominent than it was 10 years ago, in terms of just... obviously important new results that the people in England aren't necessarily behind the people elsewhere in the world. Whereas 20 years ago, I still remember when you and Av and I were together and I was saying UCL should build a new building for nucleic acids and call it Francis Crick. And Av looked at me and said I was an enemy of socialism. I just... it was the irrelevance of what he said, but, you know, the... to me, I was sort of saying it was important that UCL really be in the centre of the recombinant DNA world. You know, by... because you had that idiot who was head of a department of biotechnology... You know, it was their attempt not to give you any money, but to start up... it was a sort of random... thing, it was just a... someone who was on the fringes, whereas I said they should have a proper DNA, Sanger type stuff at UCL.
And there's the... and then you had... I know who I went and told that. I mean, when I... oh, it was the great mathematician who died swimming.
[Q] Lighthill.
What?
[Q] Lighthill.
Lighthill, yes. I... I went in, Av probably arranged, or you did, that I spoke to Lighthill about what UCL should do. And Lighthill was such an impressive person. Obviously, I learnt that he failed to get around Sark or something. It was down on the Scilly Isles, I think he was just... but it was probably a good way for him to go. I mean, he went when he was still probably turning out very good math.

The consequence of, you know, winning is you get a better job. If I hadn't found the DNA structure I wouldn't have got a job at Harvard. And if I hadn't got to Harvard I wouldn't have had all those good graduate students. So the chance that I would really have had a... more than successful career has depended at each stage on winning.
[Q] Could I ask what I have, to me the central question? When you and Francis found the structure, how quickly did you see all the consequences? 
You know, what that meant for you personally, what it meant for biology, for science. Oh, 60 seconds, instant. Because it was the answer we had, without having it we talked about complementarity, it was complementarity. So it was replication. Yeah, I mean it was... you don't have to be bright at all to know that you'll have an answer so much better. But you know we would say, what if it was a dull as collagen? You know, three-stranded was pretty, you know, unless you had base-pairing rules between the three strands or something like, which could have lead to something.
[Q] But what about for you personally? Seeing...
Oh, sure. But I would get a girlfriend and, you know, get a Nobel Prize. Maybe I should get the Nobel Prize first, but eventually... No, that was just instantaneous. But... so, the first... in fact, the second emotion was fear. What if it's not right? Because suddenly there was everything out there to get, and what if I... even though it was the perfect structure, it wasn't right? And I think I would sometimes needlessly tell Francis, 'Maybe it's not right'. Because, you know, I didn't want to jinx myself in a sense. Whereas Francis just saw it, of course, as perfect and he should... You know, and while we... what didn't matter if it was right or wrong, it was so perfect. You know, it should be right. So... it would take you a half hour probably you were dumb.
[Q] How long did the fear last?
A month. Yeah, we wrote it up and it was out, you know. We weren't really... certainly the first one was after, you know, we saw Rosalind's beautiful manuscript with the Bessel functions and her data agreed so well with it. That was... that was, I think, the first. There was a fear, you know, for the first week the base-pairing work which you couldn't get the... all the atoms to fit together with good contacts. But I... I don't think we ever, you know, gave that more than a couple per cent chance. It just looked like you could do it.

You know, if Pauling and Delbruck hadn't written a paper the replication would be best involved complementarity. And that paper was in '39. So the, so the idea had been there. So the moment you say, yeah, this has separated two strands...
[Q] What about complementarity of RNA to DNA? When did that? Because you had already written DNA RNA the protein.
No, no, I... so I think I tried to take an x-ray... I know I did, RNA x-ray photographs that spring. So I was thinking that way because, you know, protein synthesis occurred in the cytoplasm DNA in the nucleus otherwise you... something had to take it out there. So, you know, it was the simplest idea. I wouldn't have felt... there would be so many ways you could get around it, maybe there was another form of DNA, you know, you could... but it seemed to me... it made sense to always try and follow the consequences of the most obvious idea rather than to say, well, there can be 100 different possibilities. If one is... if there is no DNA in the... But, of course, there is DNA in the cytoplasm in the mitochondria but we did... but then there were little cells so the exception would prove, you know, yeah.
[Q] Can you think of another instance in history where someone would see their place in the universe instantaneously in such a dramatic way?
No. Probably the Kekule, you know, the Benzene structure. Well, you know, some... somehow you, somebody... but I, you know, when... Bohr in the simple electron orbits and so on, and then agreements with spectroscopy. I don't know the field well enough to know of... how instantaneous, but the answer had been proposed. And then we... we have complementarity, and so it wasn't novel.
[Q] No, but the knowing how important you are now going to be in history to count so quickly and so...
And also I didn't know how, but...
[Q] When did you know?
Well, that moment, sure. But what... because just solving the structure of DNA if nothing else happened afterwards, and seeing how genetic information is stored in a linear fashion, that was a colossal step forward. And you know, the... we could sequence DNA and go on to personal genomes. You know, we'd found the... the structure of the DNA and how it was copied we didn't know how it functioned, and that was, you know... then we had that by '61, in principle, we had transfer in messenger RNA, ribosomes.
I wrote a paper in '64 on the two side model of protein synthesis. Again, it was a simple... that turned out, you know, to be right except there are three sides to a... that didn't really change anything. You know, I just saw it, we were just very lucky that the structure hadn't been solved by Wilkins and Franklin or by Pauling. That is... it was... turned out it was only a three horse race and the first two stumbled. They shouldn't have, neither should have stumbled, but they stumbled. And... and part of the reason they stumbled is that only I really thought that the problem was important, you know? So it was... I wanted to win more than they did because I... I somehow thought it was a bigger prize. Rosalind had virtually never heard of DNA until Randall had told her that she should work on it. Maurice was trained in physics and was always more interested in preventing nuclear war and working for peace than on DNA and feeling there was a bigger problem. And it is.
So, yeah, Francis intellectually knew it was important, but mostly wasn't driven to it until he saw the answer. Because, you know, he saw getting the three-dimensional structure of protein as sufficient intellectual achievement, the main part of that is staying with that was fine. So I was the only person in the world who valued the problem correctly. And you could say, well, why did I? I think it was just... flowed from, you know, the sort of reasoning from facts, you know, and Robert Hutchin's exams. It started with his saying, what is the logical, most likely conclusion? If you start with it you arrive at DNA. The others you can always argue your way out of it, but it's always harder to argue out of it than to say it's yes.

Well, I’d been spending about a week doodling with base pairs on paper, and was trying to make a structure where it was like attracts like, A attracts A. And then worried about the problem that the purines and pyrimidines aren’t the same size. But, you know, it was an attraction scheme where like for like by still going along with chemistry. And I showed that to Jerry Donahue who was a chemist trained at Caltech. He’d been with Pauling, came for a year’s sabbatical at Cambridge. And he was a quantum chemist, and he looked at my base pairs and said I had the hydrogen atoms wrong for thymine and guanine, that the structure, for reasons I forget, but it had something to do with iketopepperosine, that their structure was more like it would be keto than enol. And, so I didn’t know the chemistry... didn’t know whether he was right or wrong, but about 24 hours after being told that I was wasting my time I changed the location of the hydrogen atoms on the paper, cardboard base pairs that I’d made, and did that on the last day of February of 1953, it was a Saturday morning. And had put together the right base pairs by 10 or 10.30 when Francis, it was his customary hour to come in to the office. And so he saw them, and they were the same size. And then he immediately realized if you flip flop them over they could... any base could be on either chain, and you could [unclear] the chains going, and the structure meant the chains went in opposite directions, which the space group had predicted. So all... that all probably occurred within 10 minutes. That was it. That, he really knew the, the strength of the space group argument which said you had two chains running in opposite directions. And they had to run in opposite directions if you used the base pairs. So, whether it was 10 minutes or a half hour, it certainly wasn’t two hours, because, you know, we were, at lunch at the ordinary time. So we were...
[Q] That was the moment.
That was the moment.

						And then, you know, when did I tell? I know that the next day was a Sunday, so normally a day went. Now, my sister was still in Cambridge so I probably had Saturday night supper with her, but I don’t remember. I remember the Well, friends tell me that on Sunday night I went and told an Argentine couple who I’d become, who were friends with Francis, Luis Rinaldini, whose son now lives near us on Long Island. He said their parents had told him when he was young that I came and told them that Francis and I had made a big discovery and we’d found the secret to life the day before. So, you know, it was something I had to talk about. You know, it was, and you go first to your friends. And at the end it was Monday morning, we had to start building this, the thing. And then Francis got a plumb line and then it was out to calculate the co-ordinates. So Francis did most of the work and I may have written down, and we had a ruler and so on. Pretty sloppy by today’s standards. And then in a couple of days we had co-ordinates. And then I went to Paris a week later and told the people at the Institute Pasteur. And then I, when I got back Francis had built the model for the A form and not the B form where the bases are tilted about 30 degrees to give you the diffraction pattern. And the- we knew the fracture when it went from A to B the fibre length increased. So that this would explain it. So Francis had explained the x-ray, the A form and the B form and then at this stage John Kendrew. We knew we had to tell Maurice Wilkins and, but were too embarrassed, you know? We didn’t want to call and say we’ve solved your problem. And so John Kendrew decided the best way would be to call Maurice up and say he should come up to Cambridge because Jim and Francis have found something that, a two chain structure that might be right. And Maurice came up the next day and looked at it and told us that it was right. And before, I’m sure before he came up I had been arguing with Francis that we should put Maurice’s name on the paper. Francis didn’t object and we asked Maurice would he put his name on the paper? I forgot that, my, it’s not in “The Double Helix”, but it’s in Maurice’s biography which came out just the year before he died, that we’d asked him to put the name on. But then he went back to London and must have talked with Rosalind Franklin and he called back saying they wanted separated papers, he and Willy Seeds would write one paper and then Maurice, Rosalind and Raymond Gosling, so there’d be two papers from King’s, and our shorter paper describing the structure. And I think- Then in his autobiography Maurice wrote it was the biggest mistake of his life.Not putting his name on the paper?Yes. You know, this paper has got the Nobel Prize you could say, and, you know, if he hadn’t shown me the B form we wouldn’t have done it. And- You know, it’s, you could have done it I think he knew. The main reason he didn’t do it is he didn’t find it, so he would have felt bad the rest of his life for getting credit for something he hadn’t done. But on the other hand, particularly he’d been a, a good friend of Francis Crick and we, our aim had never been to, to beat him. It would have just sounded nicer. And of course no-one really knew how the structure was found, the outside people, until I wrote the Double Helix.But did you think you were in competition with, with Maurice? I mean-No.That always seemed like a collaboration more than a competition.Yes, and that’s why putting the name on, you know, we weren’t, we weren’t, we were trying to get the structure.
					
						But Rosalind didn’t fit into it. And we didn’t even know she was working on the B form, and she didn’t start working on the B form until sometime, in it’s in her notebooks, after the middle of February when she was leaving King’s and having spent almost all her time on the A form looked at the B form. And she may have actually only correctly interpreted the B form after we’d actually found the base pairs. So when, we never felt she had anything to do with our finding of the structure. But of course we’d used her picture, but the picture had been taken 8 months before and I think it actually was taken by Gosling. It didn’t matter. And she had given it to Wilkins in preparation of her giving up DNA. She had no, really thought that she was going to solve the structure, she was just going to write up the data as it existed. So, it’s, I almost, you know, cannot give a, a lecture where there are more than 50 people when someone doesn’t, usually a woman, raise the Rosalind Franklin issue. Now this turns out to be the, the 50th anniversary of her death this year and so Columbia University and all good American generosity has this, is it the Horwitz Prize? Yeah, Gross Horwitz Prize, a rather prestigious one. They’re giving it to two people, and a special prize to honor the 50th anniversary of Rosalind Franklin’s death. So they’re feeling that she should get a prize. Now there’s a medical school, second, third class university medical school in Chicago called the Rosalind Franklin Medical School. And so sometimes I’m honest when people say, you know, was Rosalind a good scientist? And I usually abate it by quoting Francis saying she wasn’t. She was a competent scientist but not an inspired one, and you generally don’t honor people for failing. So, now if we hadn’t existed and Pauling had published his wrong structure, and Rosalind, you know, by then had looked at the B form she might have solved it.Then what would you have said about her being a good scientist?Well, winning always - yes, one of the ways you call someone good is whether they win, they, they see the answer. But, you know she persisted in doing these Pattersons on the A form for a year and neglecting, she clearly wasn’t interested in theory very much in the sense that, you know, there was the Cochrane-Crick-Vand paper and she had the B form which was the perfect helical thing and she didn’t- so one way of defining it is, she wasn’t a good scientist because she didn’t talk enough to other scientists. If she’d talked enough to other scientists, she had the brain to have understood what was up. So she was too much in isolation and that was her social situation. She, afterwards she seemed to show no latent hostility to either of us, I think realizing that she had botched it. And when she, was quite fond of Odile and Francis, and after the second operation when she was dying she went and stayed with the Cricks, not her family. That’s a very strong fact! That, you know, you couldn’t have just - these people stole the DNA structure from me! No, she knew they didn’t, you know, there was just, she had just, so- Now, both Francis and I when we say, are someone a good scientist we’re sort of arguing at a pretty high level, that is, you know how to handle the frontier, and she was not a person to be at the frontier. She didn’t take big leaps, she wanted to be cautious and sure of everything.
					
						Almost from the, you know, our finding the DNA structure, I knew there was a story to be written up. Francis and I didn’t talk about it but I really realized there was a story when, three summers afterwards, I was in Switzerland with a Swiss friend and, we were going up a path to sort of quite a hard mountain, which of course I would never go for, but we were going up and then we see some climbers coming down. One of them, it’s an English party, and one of them was, well we see it’s Maurice Wilkins’ co-worker, who was on the Wilkins’ paper, the one that comes out with ours. And he sees me and he said, how’s Honest Jim? And walked by. It’s all he said. And you don’t call someone ‘Honest Jim’ if you think he’s honest and so, to me, there was always the question, had Crick and I behaved correctly in thinking about someone else’s data, which was shown to us, not for us to use to solve the structure but, you know, we could show to be saying it’s a helix, yes. So, I had thought, “New Yorker” at that time, we used to have stories about crimes, sort of the annals of crime, and I thought of writing it up for the “New Yorker”, call it Annals of Scientific Crime?, you know, and we stole them from Rosalind Franklin, then Maurice Wilkins, what was his role? And, so I only then, but that was it took 8 years after the discovery, it was in ‘61, that I wrote the first chapter and that was because, several months before, Francis and I were to get a prize, the Research Corporation prize, $5000 each, then a big sum of money, for finding the double helix. And Francis was had been scheduled simultaneously to be giving three lectures at the University of Washington, so he never came, leaving me, you see, to speak for both of us, and I was on the dais with the New York intellectual, Jacques Barzun and I thought, it would be more fun just to actually sale it off how the discovery was actually made. So I did it in I got a lot of praise afterwards and people laughed and a few of the people were most surprise and liked being told that it was not a straightforward story at all, far from clear that Crick or I were ever going to get near the answer. So, after getting a very positive reception to a half hour telling of the story, I thought I’ll try and write it up as a small terse book, and wrote the first chapter in the early days of September and really didn’t know what I was going to, how I was going to say, and then suddenly in my head came an opening sentence for the, you know, for the first paragraph: ’I’ve never seen Francis’, that was Francis Crick, ‘in a modest mood’. And, after writing that sentence, it was fairly easy to go forth and complete the first chapter.
					
						A day later I’d written, you know the chapters were, you know, a couple of thousand words long, not very long chapters. And the first chapter was really on Francis Crick and then, you know, I introduced myself, but the first one was really just I started the story with Francis because I thought that by any, anyway you look at it, Francis was the major player. I could never be next to Francis and seem equally important, you know, not only was he was older, he was taller, his, he had better diction and he didn’t mumble so, you know, I’m sort of Boswell with Samuel Johnson. So that’s the way I took it on. When the manuscript was completed, one of the first persons who saw it was Francis, who immediately said, you can’t publish it, you know, it’s not your story, it’s both our stories. We should, you know, produce something more satisfactory for the general public. But I had written it and I thought it was a good read and I didn’t want to produce a consensus version which would almost, by definition, not catch the essence of Francis, or Wilkins, or anyone else. So early on people said, well you can’t publish it. So I sent it to a number of people. One fairly early on was John Maddox, the editor of “Nature”, and his only thing is, you lose a lot of friends when it comes out, and I thought, well if I lose them this way, I should lose them. So it didn’t matter and what mattered for a while was whether the book would be stopped by lawyers or by publishers afraid that they would be sued. And Harvard Press, they originally liked the book. They said they didn’t want to publish a book that was too controversial. They didn’t want Crick objecting to the book when they published it, or at least the President of the university the head of the Press was deeply disappointed, but I think we all understood maybe it’s not for Harvard Press, and we got a commercial publisher and I hired the best libel lawyer in the United States and he said there’s not a word of libel in it. In England it was more tricky, and the editor was getting very nervous until we gave the manuscript to someone who knew Francis very well, who said, oh, the book is totally correct. Francis is exactly this way, if anything it understates him. So I think they figured, you know, it wasn’t, the book wasn’t an attempt to get back at Francis or to in any way disparage him. It was just to say what he was like, and I think most people said I, you know, caught the essence of him pretty well. His friend Jacques Monod said it he had seen Francis once in an unmodest mood when Francis used his Nobel Prize money to buy half of a sailing yacht in the Mediterranean. So Jacques saw Francis on the boat and Francis couldn’t sail it and Francis was quite modest. And but I think, you know, outside of being on a boat, Francis knew where to step where he could be himself. And afterwards Francis, the minute he got invited to parties, he wouldn’t defend the book, made him seem more interesting. No-one thought the worst of Francis for having read the book but, I can understand that, but I really you know, I like Francis for not being modest. If you’re not modest you convey information faster, you don’t qualify things, you sort of, and Francis was, you know, constantly seeing the need to educate me as an American as, you know, how to act when I was in Cambridge, what was acceptable behavior, what you did, what you didn’t do, and Francis was always right on. He knew what to do.
					
						After I wrote “The Double Helix”, the question came up almost immediately: could you make a movie out of it? And it was finally only done by the BBC in sort of stealth. They never let me know, or Francis, that it was being made. They obtained the assistance of Aaron Klug from Cambridge so they could have a sort of DNA model, and they I forget who did the script. It wasn’t very good, I didn’t think. I was played by Jeff Goldblum, the American actor, who’s played sort of someone who’s always orthogonal to everyone else, sort of highly intelligent but sort of morose. And they were inspired for Rosalind Franklin, they chose Juliet Stevenson who did a good job, and for Francis they chose the actor Tim Pigott-Smith, who’d been in “Jewel in the Crown” as Sergeant Merrick. So when you saw Francis in the movie, you thought of Sergeant Merrick, and he doesn’t have a great booming voice. You know, you needed a Peter O’Toole type to do Francis correctly, and so I heard Jeff Goldblum came across as the dominant person and Francis as rather a minor sidekick. And so, and then they made this story that the, it was just a pursuit of the Nobel Prize, so which made me sort of uncomfortable watching it because they were putting words into our mouths which weren’t correct. We were, you know, in pursuit of doing good science. If you did good science, you might get a Nobel Prize but, you know, people don’t get Nobel Prizes by trying to get Nobel Prizes, they get them by doing good science. And in my book, you know, at the very end, I mention, oh well, we’ve seen Peter’s father for a Noble Prize. But that’s the way the Pauling family talk, so it was just between Peter and I. But we weren’t thinking of the Nobel Prize, we were more or less thinking, you know, what can we do to prevent Linus Pauling from getting it first? And Linus really didn’t enter into the film. There was a version shown in England, a shorter version in the United States. I afterwards I dreamed that the movie should have been made as a parody of “Chariots of Fire” in which we were instead of racing for God, we were racing against God, but as Francis and I are a major motivation was to show that you have life without a God to direct it, that is, if you got to the essence of genes which we thought was resided in the essence of the molecule DNA, you could begin to understand how life exists. And well, you know, the answer we got was much better and spectacular than we ever imagined, but when I first saw the movie I intensely disliked it, but now when I see it, I don’t mind it at all because it’s so far back, and I got used to Jeff Goldblum. I’d imagined myself played by John McEnroe. I’d have been much more, you know, a sort of Irish hothead rather than a cerebral Jewish intellectual, and we regarded God right because I want to start the movie, “Chariots of Fire” starts in a movie and I wanted to start this movie in a church, so that, is in Westminster Abbey, by telling Francis I was going to take him to show him where we were going to be buried, because “Chariots of Fire” starts with the, with the death of one of these Olympic runners and so I thought that we should do a church. And, of course, in one sense the only appropriate place for Francis and I, our ashes to reside, is in the floor of Westminster Abbey next to Darwin, because that’s sort of we were the next step beyond Darwin.
					
						You know, I wanted the movie to sort of be the equivalent I’ve never seen Francis in a modest mood, and I thought the best way would be for to show Francis and I, you know, my taking him to where we’d be buried next to Darwin. Now, this is not very modest and of course, Francis’s only objection would be not to, you know, we don’t belong there, but that we don’t believe in God. But, of course, by the time Darwin was buried, he was, had given up God. You know, God is very hard if you think in terms of what evolution implies. So someday, you know, they’ve done “Brideshead” again, I guess they can do “Life Story” again and maybe catch the essence of Francis and I more, you know, it isn’t the pursuit of Nobel Prizes. It’s really trying to understand an important scientific problem and what you do if there’s competition and how to behave your stock and how do you give proper credit and how do you make it an uplifting story which you would like.
					
						I wrote it wanting it to be a classic. I like words, you know, I was and for a while I would sort of kid myself I could be a presidential speech writer, you know, sort of trying to actually say something while not being too heavy. So with “Double Helix” I really did try and say important things, such as, most scientists are dull. Now that sounds a catty remark but it’s true. You know, it’s not as if you’re you go into a room where there’s scientists and exciting. You know, they’re very cautious people and so, you know, calling them dull is just putting, it’s sort of trying to catch the mood of trying to do science at the frontier where you don’t quite know what to do next, and so you’re bound to make mistakes and maybe even offend people and have a self-confidence that you shouldn’t convey, but it was the only way you could survive. You know, you can’t be filled with doubts when you might be eaten by a crocodile the next day. You’ve got to believe you know where you’re going. And, so I wanted to write a classic. I never thought, you know, it would be listed among the great books of the 20th century, but then, when I see the others, I think it belongs there, you know, but because, unlike many stories which essentially get dated, this story was you know, 300 years from now people will want to know the story. And so I tried to, Cambridge was just the, it was an extraordinary place in the ‘50s. You know, Francis was the only one like Francis but, in their own way, there were just some extraordinary talented people there going about doing very important science. And there’s no place in the world it’s beautiful, is Cambridge and the colleges are remarkable, and the set of manners within the college is so, yeah, I’d say they’re much more gracious than stuffy.Did they come to like the book, Cambridge folks, in the end?I think so. The only Cambridge has always had a big objection to me which was that I was famous before I was dead. And-Before you were 30.The English don’t know really how to, you know, at the 40th anniversary of the DNA structure, Prince Philip came and they put a plaque up on the wall and that was, there was a lot of sort of solemn-faced Cambridge people there saying it shouldn’t be done, that you never honored the living. You might make a mistake and just, much safer to honor Newton or Darwin, and putting Crick and Watson up there was just, I think it made some of them mad, and so I don’t like to go back to Cambridge any more because the only way they can think of me is dead. You know, they’ve put a plaque outside the Eagle and Cambridge, in its own way, everyone is strictly equal and, you know, double helix isn’t like any other discovery. They know it, I know it and I understand them and so I’m much more at ease in Oxford which doesn’t identify me, doesn’t have to honor me and, trouble is, Oxford’s not quite as beautiful.
					
						I went to the Cambridge, I was in the second year of a fellowship from the National Research Council of the United States, and in I moved to Cambridge before I got permission which was not the right thing to do and so, when they found out about it, they penalized me by 4 months salary so I needed another source of money and Max Delbrück at Caltech was close to the Polio Foundation and had arranged for them to give me a second two-year fellowship. The second year was to be spent in Caltech, really looking after, though I didn’t realize it, Max Delbrück’s research students and their PhD theses on bacterial viruses. So I was to go to Caltech in September of ‘53 independent of, you know, whether I had done, had success with the DNA structure. So I went off then and, once there, they gave me a Caltech slightly better paying Caltech fellowship to let me stay on another year. And by then I wanted to go back to Cambridge, England which I arranged to do just after I had got an academic job that I could go to upon my return from Cambridge. So I became an Assistant Professor of Biology at Harvard in July of 1955 but, in fact, the first year I was on leave at Cambridge hopefully solving the structure, three-dimensional structure of RNA. But that work went nowhere. At Caltech I’d been trying to get it. I think I thought if I’m close to Francis we might again have some clever idea which would make sense of RNA. No clever idea, we wrote minor but correct papers on virus structure, the spherical viruses and that was my only contribution from that year. In fact, the three years you could say after the double helix, I went nowhere with my career, and it was because I had decided that the next big problem was how DNA provides the information to order the amino acids during protein synthesis, and I thought that the actual template was going to be an RNA molecule which had been made, copied off a DNA molecule in the way the DNA changed or copied off other DNA chains. That idea was right and I thought the only way to proceed forward was to see the structure of RNA in three dimensions and then you might see cavities that switch amino acids [unclear]. That was very wrong, and Francis Crick actually wrote a good paper saying why the idea probably wasn’t right. And so, after my third year was going nowhere, I decided to change what I was doing and study particles. The major form of RNA and cells were they were united with protein [unclear] particles we now call ribosomes. Proteins are made on ribosomes and I thought, well we’ll just study ribosomes as the RNA seems a mess but then initially, you know, we were dissipated. All ribosomes seem the same, so if they’re all the same, how can they be templates for different proteins? So we were sort of intellectually lost until experiments were done in 1960 which showed in fact there was another form of RNA which was a true template. It’s called messenger RNA, present in much smaller amounts than the model of RNA and the ribosomes. And, so we only sort of had the big picture in ‘61 which would have been 8 years after the DNA structure. So Francis had a very clever idea about attaching amino acids to small RNA molecules, we now call transferring RNA molecules, and so that was a big insight. And then the second big insight which was sort of done independently by my lab and Sydney Brenner with Matt Meselson was the discovery of messenger RNA.
					
						You know Sydney described one or I forget, Sydney had the nonsense code answer for chain termination and Mario Capecchi, you know, guessed that in my lab, you know, we worked out nonsense suppression of them, so we were also competing with Fritz Lipmann lab at the Rockefeller, you know, trying to understand protein synthesis, about equal.And the Tie Club? Was that tying everybody together?Oh, that was much earlier.That was dead by then.That was the early period where the secret of life might lie in the structure of RNA and we would tell us all amino acids are lined up in proteins and it didn’t at all. So the Tie Club was just a diversion from boredom when science isn’t moving forward at all. It was my idea and then encouraged by Leslie Orgel, but then, when George Gamow saw it, it was he who made had the ties made, it was he who had the stationery, it was he who chose the members. So the Tie Club was, you know, a sort of one second idea of mine, you know, that you need clubs or occasions when people are forced to come together. I think that was the idea, that we were that you bring two people together who have sort of stopped thinking about what they should do next because they don’t know what to do next and, if you start talking about what to do next, then it makes you think. So I think that’s why I find you know, I never think if I’m by myself. I might think if I’m, you know, reading a newspaper then a fact will come into your head, so something has to challenge you. If you’re just left without anything new entering it, it’s so easy to get into a rut, and so very easy to get into a rut, and it’s something that’s very hard to explain that even the brightest people for the most point are doing nothing, you know. One idea a year is really great if you think about it, you know, an idea which leads to an experiment, which changes the way you think about something. You’re very lucky. Most years you do experiments but your fundamental ideas don’t change.
					
						I think Sydney and I were competing. Sydney was regarded as my successor as the geneticist in the LMB which was largely physicists and chemists, and I left at the end of the summer of ’56, in the fall of ’56, in January of ’57 Sydney arrived, and Sydney did extraordinarily well in Cambridge and was much cleverer than I ever was in Cambridge and worked with Francis for 20 years, you know, in the same room, facing each other, and I did it for 3 years, and I think that was probably all either of us could take, though Francis was probably never challenged by me but I think I was challenged that he was so clearly a deeper mind than I was and, well, more serious and when, you know, at a time of after the DNA structure, Francis did all the talking. I think most people probably thought Francis deserved all the credit. You know, it was Francis, so how was I to go out in the world? Bragg wrote me a letter, nice letter, saying he thought Crick had got too much credit and I should write up my side of the story. Now, I’d just finished “The Double Helix” and or almost finished it, so I [unclear] with Bragg and sort of that led to me asking Bragg to write the foreword to it. When he read it he saw my opening descriptions were not at all what he want, how he saw himself and, but his wife prevailed and he wrote a very, very good foreword for my book. But, so Bragg, you know, did see that it was very Crick wouldn’t have found it without me and of course I knew I didn’t, but I still had to be someplace where Francis wasn’t and try and do major science. I guess that was it. My lab certainly did major science. Looking back at it, it only happened because I sort of followed the rule of always trying to get, surround myself by people that I find much brighter than myself and can do things quicker than I, or I can’t even do them. So I was lucky at Harvard after messenger RNA was discovered, to be joined by the young physicist, theoretical physicist, Wally Gilbert, and we ran a joint lab effectively from 1961 to ’76, so 15 years.
					
						Initially, the, Wally didn’t have a position in physics so everyone was associated with me and then finally we got him a faculty position. It was first an associate it was a tenure Professor, we called it was called Biophysics, and then there was the question of getting space for him. And then we got space for him. So by about 1965 it took about 4 years of quiet lobbying because everyone said, well, you know, why do you need, Wally should go off and be independent some other place. But, I think both of us felt I think the two of us together led to a much more effective place. I mean I could go to, you know, Cambridge for 3 months and it made no difference. Likewise he took a year off, was in Paris for a year and I talked to his students, and so it was very when we were away the lab didn’t slow down at all. And then we recruited other very bright people to be with us so by, oh, by ’66 we were probably you know, our group was as productive as Sydney and Francis and the LMB.
					
						We had, I was imitating Cambridge where, you know, we’d always have morning coffee, so you’d be talking we had a seminar room, and the seminar room was where you came together and talked. Wally and I didn’t have lunch together. You know, he was always more, Wally was doing experiments and, you know, I was doing academic politics trying to get him promoted or more space, so Wally never really was good at, I would say, at being a boss. He was very good at being brighter than anyone else but not as sort of, you know, he didn’t think like an Irish politician or he didn’t you know, that you sometimes have to give favors, you know, what the hell. You know, Sue used to say, Wally should we help you because Wally’s very good. Well, life doesn’t go that way. So Paul Doty and I, you know, managed to get, you know, Wally into a biology lab which inherently didn’t really want us, but Harvard at least had the good tradition you’re supposed to appoint the best person. You could say Wally was the best. So, Harvard has given that up. I think it used to be that you had to say the person you’re appointing is among the best three people in the world. Now they say, oh that’s unrealistic, but that’s because they’ve been misusing their endowment and have, not paying people enough. You always get the best people if you just keep raising the money.
					
						Because there was no long-term plan to have a, you know, a Department of DNA Studies so it was occurring in a Department of Biology, and you had other biological disciplines, such as they still remember the remark that we should not appoint anyone in ecology. It’s just not ever exciting enough. So they still can’t remember that I said, you know, and I told them at that time, absolutely don’t appoint a developmental biology, you will be definite old-fashioned because DNA hadn’t yet reached the field. Now, if you really didn’t think DNA that was an arrogant remark. It was totally correct. But it sounded arrogant. Okay. We slowly won by proposing people who were so good they couldn’t turn them down, so after Wally, no, after I came, it was getting Matt Meselson. That wasn’t any problem. He’d done the Meselson’s solid experiment. Then the next person was Wally, then Mark Ptashne then, you know, we got Steve Harrison, Don Wylie. If you appoint really people who are as good as anyone, if you propose people who are as good as anyone in the world, and if your university has any standards you might win, because no matter how much the people, the other way is for universities to make a bold move like Harvard did without the consent of any other faculty and say, we’re going to have a new Department of Stem Cell Biology, and we don’t care what anyone else at Harvard thinks. Larry Summers wanted Stem Cell Biology and they got it, okay. Now, if your president is, got right advice that may be the only way you can move forward, because to get a positive vote out of an academic faculty is sometimes, you know, if you go on the assumption everyone over 50 will be against you, okay, which is often the case because you’re trying to change radically what it’s going to be like, democracy is a very hard way. And that’s why most universities never change in rank, because once you’ve set in the principle democracy, they will try and continue to be exactly what they are. If they’re first class they want to be first class, if they’re second class they’ll be quite happy being second class and so on.
					
						We had a Biology and Chemistry Department and all space was assigned by departments, so the Committee for Higher Degrees had no space and the really most important thing in a university is space. Do you have rooms to do what you want to do? You know, can you give someone an office? And so space decisions are, set the tone for an institution. When I went to Harvard, even though they didn’t want me, one third of the building had never been built out since the Great Depression. One third of the building was waiting for times to get better, which now makes me worry that American academia may be in the same position. We’re just completing buildings which will only be completed when we’re out of the current great depression.
					
						That grew out of teaching ten lectures in Biology Two, and, when I gave lectures, I essentially outlined them and had some instead of a word like PH I would, you know, have a sentence. And then, I had long come to the conclusion that you cannot think and write at the same time, and so you can’t understand a lecture if you’re taking down notes. And so students shouldn’t take notes, and so I passed out lecture notes. The students still took notes even though I passed out the lecture notes, but the lecture notes would be, you know, what you should know to pass the exam. There was at that stage no textbook on DNA and so the molecular biology, or some of the middle chapters, came out of the lecture notes, and then I thought, you should write a couple of chapters of introduction so a physicist or chemist might be able to read the book. So you should give a 15 page summary of the great moments in Mendelian genetics or give, you know, 15- 20 pages which summarize the basic facts of metabolism of how cells get and use energy. And then I realized you probably should have a chapter on how molecules fold up in three dimensions. So I ended up I think with five introductory chapters which were not in my lecture notes but were trying to broaden the readership, so if you were a physicist and wanted to read it you get the basic principles and you didn’t need to know any more detail. So that proved to be, and then that was that. So I started it you know, the book started out with DNA, I mean my courses started out with, but then I realized, no, that’s not the way to start the book. The book should start with Darwin and put DNA in perspective to what Darwin and Mendelian where we were, say, in 1945, and it wasn’t, I was writing “The Molecular Biology of the Gene” and “The Double Helix” at the same time, so I remember writing the first pages of “The Molecular Biology of the Gene” in October. It was an awful October. All right, it was October 1963 when Kennedy was killed so that’s when I started it and no, I wrote the first chapter at the end of August. I was going out to Australia and they wanted some material and I thought, oh, I can it would be a way to go into a book. And so I tried to write a one page you know, first paragraph on Darwin and then go on, and I wanted to write, I wanted to write literature so I wanted it to not sound like the average biology text but write it as if it’s the Bible or something like that.
					
						I think I set out to write a textbook which could be read for a long, you know, that wouldn’t go out of date in three years, to try and put it in a broader reference frame. But, you know, everything was dominated John Kennedy in those, you know, several years. There’s features, the glamour of his wife, the and suddenly style was back, and I think I wanted to be part of that era and, you know, I wanted to be, you know, a writer like Galbraith or someone, you know, who was trying to do slightly more than the typical academic by putting it in a bigger picture, and sort of realizing, yeah, no-one had written the story and the, you know, there was a big opportunity to, you couldn’t just start with DNA, you had to put DNA in the context of everything. And then I wanted to end on cancer because I wanted to end sort of where you might be going in the future, so when you finished the book, it made you want to be a biologist. That was certainly my aim, but, you know, I didn’t go out and the one thing I was conscious before I started is I wanted to write a best seller because I was conscious that Paul Samuelson had a big house in Belmont from his textbook, so the, I was aware that textbooks made money. And so I never had a big seller but even the “The Molecular Biology of the Gene”, which came out costing $6, it doubled my salary as a Harvard professor which was very important because I would never have been tempted to leave Harvard for money, but, you know, if I’d suddenly married and had that salary of a Harvard professor, that’d be depressing, you know, because I had you know, some of my friends had nice houses, and by the time I was writing I’d begun to collect paintings so the books were a device to continue to be an art collector.
					
						Nobel Prize let me buy a house, and there was one in Cambridge which, I wasn’t married and I lived in this flat in Appian Way and it suited my style. If I’d been in a big house I would have, you know, all the time wished I had someone in the house with me. So it was sort of thought that I probably need one and therefore I just bought a nice, you know, it was probably, you know, one decent sized bedroom, three small bedrooms, you know, not a in no sense a big house, probably one from, oh, at least 150 years old. So, you know, it had been modernized, there was central heating in and it would have been totally comfortable to live in. I don’t think it had air conditioning in those days but virtually no house had air conditioning.But how about your status at Harvard? Did it have useful-?No well, you know, they, which sort of upset me the 8 months afterwards the time when Harvard sends out a little letter saying what’s your salary for next year. The only time they never increased my salary was the year after I got the Nobel Prize, and I still don’t understand why. I think they maybe thought other people needed the money more. It was before I had, it just led me to Bob Windward. I didn’t want to confront the Dean himself, you know when you’re very angry you shouldn’t express that to your bosses so I had someone else and they said, oh, it wasn’t intentional at all. You know, he’d got one year 2000 and, but they knew I was livid with anger that, you know, I had increased the prestige of the university and they’d effectively pissed on me. That’s still the way I feel, you know, Harvard pissed on me and, you know, they knew that, you know, I didn’t think everything about Harvard was perfect but, you know, part of the Harvard mystique is that Harvard makes no mistakes. And, bunch of- but meanwhile Harvard life was, you know, dominated by my association with one of the Gilberts and the Doty’s. Very important was becoming a Senior Fellow of the Society of Fellows which let me dine on Monday evenings with the Junior and Senior Fellows so that was a much that was Harvard-wide so you might meet a bright young lawyer or so it let me move outside the world of science, and I enjoyed some of the Senior Fellows a lot so that so Harvard, by making me a Senior Fellow, they had, you know I can’t I don’t think they were out to get me in any way, but I didn’t always feel that. At the time it was certainly the best university in the United States and probably the world because Cambridge and Oxford were, you know, beginning to, you know, they were just being starved of money, and if you were good and your salary was so low, you would just leave. And they weren’t putting money into science and so coming back to England in the ‘70s was always painful. It lasted really through the ‘80s. You know, I did know enough that the Labour Party was, you know, just as bad as you know, its net effect is Mrs Thatcher. Both of them really didn’t see much need to strengthen people who thought.
					
						Once Kennedy became president, wanted to move in when Kisty asked me would I be, George Kistiakowsky, who was, he had been the head of the Scientific Advisory Committee under Eisenhower and was still on the committee about 6 months after Kennedy became President, said would I want to work with biological weapons? They wanted someone. Of course I said yes because, you know, it might let me, in a quiet way, influence policy. I think everyone wanted to go to Washington, hoped that the Government would act more effectively and sensibly and, you know, in this case is don’t use this sort of weapon. So I’ve written about it in “Avoid Boring People”. And it was fun having, you know, I always said a White House pass to get in and-Did you have an influence?No. Well, yes, not in ways that I consider probably I made a mistake and partially both Paul Doty and I got put on the committee to investigate Rachel Carson. That’s the way it was almost phrased. When “Silent Spring” was written, the President apparently, well certainly Jerry Wiesner, Science Advisor, wrote the, read the sort of advance material which appeared in “The New Yorker”, and somehow Jerry thought that, you know, if there really was going to, you know, all the songbirds were going to be killed, this was worth discussing and were the pesticides in the food chain, could they harm human beings as well as birds? And so I was put on this committee and most of them who were there sort of took the view, yes, we had a problem and there would have to be regulation. And the Department of Agriculture fought it. Industry which was producing and making a lot of money from pesticides, they didn’t want any regulations, but we came out and said there’s enough evidence that the food chain may be threatened. And we didn’t say what the regulation was but I think we urged that there be rules and, you know, DDT effectively became banned. And when I say, you know, now it wasn’t clear that DDT has ever hurt one person and that, you know, it might, if it were used in Africa, it might be preventing, inside homes, a lot of malaria, so it was a one-sided approach. On the other hand we knew that the approach of the chemical industry, Monsanto and these large makers of it, was pretty vicious. You know, they tried to stop the report and but Kennedy insisted it came out so that was-And did it have teeth in the sense that it would-?Oh, it did finally, yes. I mean, the organic phosphates, the deodorants, the odorants, which clearly were more toxic to animals that DDT was, their use was severely curtailed.
					
						EJ Corey was to investigate chemical warfare, and I was to follow our efforts at biological warfare. And I don’t remember the chemical war I know, in the biological weapons the Venezuelan equine encephalitis was weaponised, and at the time of the Cuban missile crisis it was in planes in Florida for deployment against Cuba. So it had gone that far.And what about the assassination attempts, were you involved in that, was that discussed?No. I did go, I think, my first tour of Fort Dietrich, they showed me around the buildings, and I said, what’s in that building? And they said, special projects. If you heard the word special projects, then substitute assassination, so this was the, the building which prepared assassination chemicals. And so when I went in there trying to, their object was to get the puffer fish poison available, into weapons of assassination. And they were trained to do chemical synthesis instead of getting it from the puffer fish. And were, Bob Woodward was consulting, them. You know, Harvard’s chemist, they’d gone to him, how would you synthesize the puffer fish for us? And then, then, oh, God, it was in June of ‘63, I once had a date with the daughter of Desmond Fitzgerald, who was, who was the, one of the social registered members of CIA. And by that time he had been given the task by Bobby Kennedy of assassinating Castro. So, I remember talking to Desmond, no, I was telling him of the, that I wouldn’t, that I didn’t like, oh, yeah, yeah, one of the things they had was, well, was staphylococcal enterotoxin. It would just make you vomit and it had never been known, no one had ever died at a barbeque or a picnic. So he was spraying enterotoxin over the rice caddies, paddies of Vietnam. Everyone started throwing up. You just go over and they’re helpless. The trouble was that when you, when the monkeys ingested it by aerosol, they promptly died. So enterotoxin in the lungs is deadly poison. In your stomach it only makes you vomit. I remember telling Desmond, you know, that some of these things that, you know, the agency was hoping to, you know, win wars without killing anyone. That was bacteria like this incapacitating agents. And staph enterotoxin, and Venezuelan encephalitis was being proposed as incapacitating, even though it killed the young and old.Well, that’s incapacitating.Yeah, I know. So, but it was interesting because you always had the belief that Kennedy actually would stop such things, so it was the belief that actually his political instinct was the, whereas the military just felt, we will give these weapons for the option of the president to use. And then our job was just to evaluate them as weapons, but never as whether they were politically deployable. We were always asked whether they would work. And I found it impossible to make the distinction, because it was a choice. I was terribly in favor of that staph enterotoxin, until the monkey result came. I pushed it, you know, I thought-Could we assume all that stuff is gone, deep-sixed?Oh, I doubt it.You think it’s still there in a drawer or somewhere?No, no, no. It’s hard to kill these things.
					
						So, you know, when the committee was set up, the Monsanto and those people, hopefully we would sort of come to the conclusion that Rachel was just a silly old, maid. Instead we came to the other conclusion, yes, that, pesticides do spread through the food chain, there’s got to be regulation, and, I don’t know when England reached the same conclusions. But, you know, but the alternative is that night soil is safe, but, chemical fertilizers are bad, is crap. The big poison that occurred over lettuce in the United States, oh, no, spinach, organic spinach.Was it organic spinach?Organic spinach, so that, so no one, and the price of organic food is about 20 to 30% higher, so, it is a diversion from poor people, and not letting you best deploy your food money. You know, you’re being asked to spend more for it, and the idea that, you know, chemistry never promotes better living.
					
						I was, rewarded, for my services on the pesticide committee, by being in charge of a committee to investigate whether you could stop the boll weevil from coming in to Arizona from Mexico. And there the big hope was the technique if you flooded Mexico with sterile males that no young boll weevils would be born and Arizona would be saved. And Arizona had an ancient senator who had requested to Kennedy that Arizona needed health protection from the boll weevil. Because once the boll weevil came in they just don’t know how many million dollars more the common farmers were going to spend on pesticides. So, you know, that was the-Conclusion?Well, then there were, you know, then there was a very, was integrated pest management, small plots don’t ask me to remember, promoted by a professor at he was the university come from probably Davidson, a very good guy, who was put on the boll weevil committee. And you know, I wanted someone who, whereas the boll weevil committee was located in State College, Mississippi, with Jamie Whitman who was head of the agriculture appropriations Department of Congress. He ran agriculture. The president had nothing to say about any aspect of his budget. And so if you were fighting the boll weevil, we did it in Mississippi, which at that time was weak in science. But Jamie’s, I remember her niece, Jamie’s niece, she worked there. So, you know, it was, but a congressman’s whole job is in contracts.
					
[Q] Now, you’ve had a brother-in-law who’s a CIA person.
My sister, yes. He was... when I went around the world in 1961, he was Station Chief in Phnom Penh, and he was opposed to the war. He was against Americans being in any country in which they couldn’t bribe the enemy. So, we’re still in the Philippines and do not ask whether we’re bribing certain people, but, so he was very much a... what was the word? ‘spheres of influence’... his...Hans Morgenthau, the German-born political scientist, sort of, before Henry Kissinger. So, Bob was a student of his, so... and Hans had told Bob that CIA was a much better job than the state department if you want to get anything done, so he was the one that, you know, would just... and my sister, and they had a fight, he just joined the agency and disappeared for four years. So, then, came back and asked her to marry him. But you know, it was four years spent on the offshore islands of, you know, fighting the Chinese communists, but he spoke Chinese. I mean he was a real expert then, you know. You know, he was one of these people, you know, you don’t fight wars that you can’t win. So, he was very bright and my mother thought my sister was marrying a Republican, but he was actually a Democrat. That was a sort of scary moment, but he was very careful not to seemingly reveal his views.
[Q] I won’t ask any more questions.
And my sister never told, you know, her family that she was marrying into the agency. We did know she had to get a security clearance before she could be married, a very wise thing. I mean, you know, in a sense, some people are just born communists.
 

						My lab really took off once we had the basic principles of protein synthesis. It was messenger RNA. You could make proteins in vitro, you could essentially do biochemistry, protein synthesis, with the help of genetics. And so, beginning in 1961, I think that’s when Mario Capecchi became my graduate student, so for a couple of years I got a couple of students a year, instead of say one. And, by ’65, we were sort of in the top three or four places, Fitz Lipmann’s lab and Dan Nathan’s, Cambridge was, emphasis was in Sydney Brenner in genetics, not biochemistry. So, and, so we essentially began to do biochemistry as well as molecular biology, and mixing them together, and because Louis had never put my name on, I’ve never put his name on any of my papers, I just went along with it that way. And I think it motivated the students and Wally Gilbert when he came on board in ’62, ’61, so by ’65, we were, you know, we could have said we were the best place in the world. Sidney would disagree, but you know, it depended, we were, sort of, intermediate between Arthur Kornberg which was everything in enzymology, and Cambridge. So we were trying to do some biochemistry as well, and I never knew any but my students seemed to pick it up very well, and we were in advanced degrees, higher degrees in biochemistry, but Mario I think was in biophysics. So, you know, it didn’t matter much.Does it bother you that you’re not connected to your progeny, because when you’re gone and they’re gone, who will know that Capecchi was your student?Oh, certainly Mario will put it out. He was interesting, you know, he left, he took all his creations he seemed absolutely, a total lack of affection, and he told me, you should never expect gratitude from your students, instantaneously, you know, if they’re really just focused on themselves, which is probably the best, you know, hope that they get gratitude when they’re 50. And that’s sort of how it became the case of Mario, you know, he really thought back, well, he wouldn’t be where he was, if I hadn’t given him all these opportunities. And, so I think it’s best, you know, that students who are highly competitive to try and promote their own queries. Now I know people worked closely together, they weren’t really in any, ever got the sense they were, one was trying to push the other down, but they were all trying to push themselves. I think that’s the main thing, and out of my total of 25 students, about five were people that I took on because Meselson or someone else didn’t want them, and I didn’t want them totally thrown out, and I took them on. And with one exception they weren’t very good. You know, they, but of my, the 20, I think there was a success rate of about 17 or 18 and later, good jobs in academia. By good jobs I mean Cornell, Iowa, you know, universities where you yourself could remain a scientist. So, they almost all were being scientists, I think, until the end.
					
						This year, 2009, is the 50th anniversary of my giving a course at Harvard in the college, not the medical school, in Cambridge on the biology of cancer. And it had only five students, but the year before I'd become very excited because I had thought I had probably the likely answer to why some viruses were tumor viruses. The first tumor virus, the Rous sarcoma virus had been discovered I think in 1911. Peyton Rous got the Nobel Prize for the work about 50 years later. And I first heard about them in 1947 when I was in my first year in Indiana and took a course on viruses given by Salvador Luria who afterwards became my PhD supervisor. And so normally, viruses which can infect plants, animals, bacteria - Luria worked on bacteria which were much simpler systems. Let's say, poliomyelitis was a virus, the common cold was a virus - that certain viruses, they could be either DNA or RNA viruses, sometimes instead of multiplying within the cell converted the cell into a cancerous cell. And so that was a total mystery when Luria gave the course and that was before we knew the double helix or really anything. But when I went to Harvard as an assistant professor in 1956, I was required to teach a course. And I didn't think about giving a course on DNA because we knew the double helix and virtually nothing else. You know, Kornberg had just published evidence of - that he could incorporate nucleotides into DNA, but you could have given a course on the chemistry of DNA but I wasn't a chemist. And I thought most of the details were pretty boring. You know, that was just when, you know, Paul Doty's lab was working out denaturation. And you know, Paul would have been the first to talk about that, not me. So my course was largely biological. But the third year I gave it, during the previous summer, Seymour Cohen had told me that, at Woods Hole, that the DNA of the phages T2, T4, T6 which had an unusual base. It didn't have cytosine, it had 5-methylcytosine, that the enzymes required to make the cytosine or it was 5-hydroxymethylcytosine - I think, yes, there was a gene for it. So until then, I thought viruses just provided genetic information for their [unclear]. But suddenly, these viruses would carry genes which would be, you know, preparing the host cell to replicate the nucleic acid, sort of making the enzymes or turning on the cell cycle or moving it to a phase when the enzyme needed to replicate DNA came up. Of course, we didn't know the immense complexity then. And so when I was lecturing on tumor viruses, I can't say the moment but suddenly I thought the secret of tumor viruses lay in their carrying genes which turned on DNA synthesis, 'cause if you'd say a virus would want to multiply in the liver, the liver cells aren't multiplying so you would need to somehow turn on the system. And it just seems such a wonderful, simple idea. I found it difficult to explain the RNA viruses, but that was, you know, long before we knew that RNA could be converted to DNA and there was really nothing different about the genetic structure of RNA viruses and DNA. And - but that spring, when I was so excited by tumor viruses that the work in our lab was really going very fast and I went over to Mass General and went to John Littlefield's lab and he was - who had been working purely on protein synthesis. And he was purifying the Shope rabbit papillomavirus, so I just thought that would be an interesting system.
					
						But then that spring, Francis Crick was in Cambridge at the chemistry department as a visiting professor and we suddenly got news that we were awarded the Warren Prize, Massachusetts General Hospital's triennial prize. It was worth $3,000 and we would share it. In return for receiving the prize, we would give lectures for an audience in what would prove to be the Boston Science Museum. And Francis was then very, very happy about discoveries on transfer RNA and the amino acids being attached to them and that, you know, amino acids had an anticodon and codon. And so he had really - and the - so anticodon provided the adapter that Francis had in this adapter hypothesis of how the code was read, which he'd had back in January of 1955 and wrote this paper on the adapter hypothesis and passed it out to members of the RNA Tie Club. He never published the paper. And, but then with Mathew Holden’s work on tRNA, suddenly it looked like Francis was predicting. His lecture was, you know, a great lecture, and I didn't really have anything exciting to say except DNA, but that was - well, five years before. So I wasn't going to talk on DNA. And the only thing I really could talk about or I was enthusiastic to talk about was my ideas on how viruses cause cancer. And I gave the lecture and, you know, when it was over I knew that it was not a success because it was too speculative, and people really liked to know things which were true or, you know, soon could be tested and there was no way to soon test my ideas. Ernst Mayr came up, I remember him, and said, oh, he most enjoyed my lecture, but you know, I didn’t enjoy giving it. But it remained - and then six months after I gave the lecture, we got the first indication of the existence of messenger RNA in T2 infected cells. And so suddenly, the lab came very alive and we could study protein synthesis and sort of have a scheme for doing it. So until then, you know, we had, you know, shown the ribosomes were composed of the big and small sub-units which have a big and small ribosome RNA molecule and that magnesium was necessary or seemed to be to make them stick together. But we had no idea why there were two sub-units or anything about it, so - but suddenly, when you added the component of messenger RNA sort of moving across the surfaces, so ribosomes then became factories for making proteins.
					
						At the time I gave my lecture, research was starting on a small DNA virus called polyoma, molecular weight only I think about 4 or 5 million. And it was nucleic acid, it couldn't be more than 2 million I think, which when injected into immunocompromised mice gave rise to a variety of tumors. And soon after, there was discovered a human virus - it was a monkey virus but it also multiplied in human cells - SV40, Simian virus 40. And so work began on both those systems. And sort of the hypothesis - and soon afterwards there was discovered in the nuclei of cells which were made cancerous by the virus there was a new antigen, it was called T-antigen or tumor antigen. And so that seemed to be a likely candidate for the protein that turned on DNA synthesis, so, well, this was - began to be studied pretty extensively by Renato Dulbecco at the Salk Institute. Renato and I had known each other since 1947 when he was a sort of senior post-doc [unclear] and Renato and I were in the same room. So we're long and good friends. And the culmination of Renato's work came in 1968-69 when the English post-doc's lab, Joseph Sambrook, did experiments which showed that the viral DNA after it got in the monkey cell became integrated into the host DNA. So it was very much like a lysogenic bacterial viruses, where the DNA instead of leading to a lydic system where the virus multiplies, becomes integrated into the bacterial DNA, and then upon certain signals which were at first obscure suddenly changed from being a [unclear] virus to suddenly leaving the chromosome and becoming a multiplying. So it seemed from Renato's work that at least my ideas that the viral DNA was carrying some information which made the cell cancer by inserting itself into the host DNA was right.
					
						And in 1968, I had become director of the Cold Spring Harbor laboratory, while remaining at Harvard because the Cold Spring Harbor laboratory was about to fail, it had no money. And it was giving the summer courses which the community of molecular biology almost depended on. It was giving one on bacterial viruses, one on genetics of bacteria, and one on animal viruses, and sort of training the scientists that we were needing for the field to progress. And I just liked Cold Spring Harbor. I had been there in summer '48 and so I said I'd be director if I could be most of the time in, at Harvard maintaining my duties, but that I would hire people who would work on tumor viruses. And the first person I hired was Joe Sambrook who had done the experiments in Dulbecco's lab, and he arrived in the summer of 1969.
					
						The post-docs worked on their problems, and the graduate students, you know, initially, would come what interested Wally and I. And their judgment wasn’t as good as ours. Except for Benno Müller-Hill who had the isolation, the dream of isolating the lactose repressor, and approached me coming to Harvard and I said, the perfect place, because Wally Gilbert also wants to get the lactose repressor, and they worked together. So, he was, I think, our only successful, only post-doc who went on to, you know, a good career by himself. So, it was at Cold Spring Harbor later, we didn’t have graduate students, and we had post-docs, but because, when they came to Cold Spring Harbor they had to work on small DNA tumor viruses, which was what I said that the lab was about. They couldn’t fail if they were intelligent, so they were working on the good problem where the Bob Tjian became the head of Howard Hughes, and Phil Sharp, and these people in the beginning all became important professors. But by the same judgment they said they wanted to come in and work on, but once they got to Cold Spring Harbor we didn’t tell them what to work on, but you know, they came to work in a certain area, so good people, you just give them space and freedom. And, you know, money.
					
						During that time when things were going very, very well, I was writing my two books, “The Molecular Biology of the Gene”, so and I wrote them in my office; I didn’t write them at home. So, I was in the lab all the time, and I think that helps, you know. And people would know I was interested, but I didn’t come up every day and say, what have you done. You sort of figure if they’ve done something they will come and tell you, if they’ve got something. And if you have to ask people what they’re doing, you know, it’s a bad sign. And they took, you know, they took long weekends, they went to [?] in the White Mountains a lot when the summer would come. One summer they went off to Peru and places like that. So, they were an adventurous group, and much more relaxed today, than today. The summer was for having fun in those days. Now, the summer is indistinguishable from the rest of the year, and people work in, you know, I just say no-one should work in August, but they work in August. And, you know, it always amazed me, Bruce Alberts is a wonderful person, but he said didn’t want to go the coast of Miami, he wanted to work. He really viewed his students as working on his problems. He wasn’t creating independent students, they were Bruce’s extensions of his personality. And I don’t think he’s had many famous students.Why do you think it’s changed now? Why are people working harder now?Oh, harder to get grants. Many more people in the field, often you knew your competitor was taking off half the summer, or you were both going to a meeting in Europe and you knew everything was going to slow down, certainly in August. And less self confidence, but I mean, if the money is shorter and you’re totally confident, you can verge on being a fool. So, I’m not saying they have that much choice, but it was, sort of, sort of, you know, the impression of what I got in the summer of 1948 when I went to Cold Spring Harbor and began to see it, that’s our way of doing science. It went on till almost 1980, and then it was suddenly gene cloning, you know, once the regulations and everything, you could clone genes and money entered it because things had commercial, things, so people were rushing to get patents. Whereas in the early days, people were aware to the extent their competitor was just, who could do the science first, and not who could become rich. So, most of my friends, you know, didn’t become rich. I was the only one slightly above the others because I wrote two book, which, if I hadn’t been writing the books, I would have probably wanted to interfere more with my students. Yeah, trying, you know, ask, well, what have I done? Well, I haven’t published any papers, ideas, who remembers the conversation? But the books were, you know, really established me as not needing Francis Crick. We really done that, but people say, well, you didn’t need Francis Crick, but now you had Wally Gilbert, so you could still be, I had someone to make up for my inadequacies.Do you think another reason that people work harder is the technology allows you to move faster and work 24 hours a day, because-Yeah, you buy re-agents, you buy antibodies, this way, if you wanted an antibody, well, that was 6 months.So, this lack of downtime has prevented people thinking as much, because they don’t have the time.Yeah, and you don’t have, that’s my impression, people read much, much less. Yeah, the only person I could be sure to do the facts, was Sidney Brenner. Sidney in his way must have spent a lot of time reading. It’s the only way you can sort of really think far into the future, because you see other systems and, I don’t know how to bring back the wonderful days when you could take off the summer, and where you didn’t see your students as the root to keeping your grant.
					
						We chose to work with SV40 because there had been a sort of significant contaminant in the first batches of the Sabin vaccine. So some 4 million Americans have been injected with SV40 and there was no immediate spike in cancer incidents. So we didn't think it was an immediate danger, but you couldn't say that it wouldn't lead to a spike of cancer 20 years later. It was one of those sort of things we knew we had to work on. Medical microbiology had had a tradition of sort of maybe the investigator dies from the disease he's investigating. And we put the lab under negative pressure so that everything would flow into the lab and not flow out. So we did about as much as we could do without really slowing down the rate at which we did experiments, but I think the community just went ahead. Under today's climate, it might not have been so easy just to say, we don't worry about whether innocent technicians will come down with it. When you can't measure risk it's hard to know - whereas the risk from cancer was high and we thought at the time that studying the viruses was the best way to get at the essence of cancer. This was before recombinant DNA, so there was no way really to go in and investigate the, whether the normal DNA contained sequences which were changed in cancer. Everything changed in 1973 when the possibility of recombinant DNA opened up and you could clone sort of big pieces of DNA. But then in a much more serious way, also a general question was raised whether recombinant DNA was dangerous. You know, could you use it to make biological warfare more efficient? Or, you know, when you're inserting into the recombinant DNA and cloning cancer genes where, you know, the possibility that this DNA in some form or other could infect the people who are working with it. So in fact, it was one of our staff members at Cold Spring Harbor who raised it, the possibility. And I think at this time we wanted to seem like good guys. And so there was a meeting at MIT, I think David, in David Baltimore's office, and we wrote out a small paragraph calling for a moratorium on recombinant DNA experiments until we had more properly thought through the question of whether health hazards should restrict the way such experiments were done. That led to, you know, a year later, a meeting in California near Monterey at a conference centre, the Somer Conference Center, where sort of 100 molecular biologists, best and brightest, assembled to discuss whether to just go ahead without regulations. To my annoyance, I found that everyone felt if we had a meeting we would disappoint the public for which this was appearing in the press if we didn't regulate it. But Joshua Lederberg, who I've never really been very fond of and sort of instinctively was sort of opposed to most things he did, he gave a very impassioned speech again regulating and I found myself totally in agreement with Joshua. And I think Stanley Cohen was against it.
					
						And, but everyone else sort of felt there had to be regulations. And so the, there were sort of groups of people who went in, you know, how would you regulate tumor viruses, how would you regulate others, etc? And no formal conclusions could be reached, but at one point I spoke up in, you know, extreme frustration and said, you, when you have no quantitative estimate of the risk, you shouldn't regulate, because we can see all the good that would come from it. We would understand cancer. People are already talking about commercially useful protein products. And so that, the seminar ended with sort of further discussions are necessary before we go ahead. And to my annoyance, I found that the, you know, the people who work with bacteria for whom - at least E. coli, there's no evidence of risk. They could go ahead and have the fun of recombinant DNA, but those who want to work on cancers. So some left wing oriented bacterial people were formed out of MIT and Harvard Science for the People, which you know, were looking out for the people. And I remember, from England, Bob Williamson was there and so, I was so annoyed - you know, those – they - and he always wore black suits. And you know, communists wearing ties, and I couldn't stand him. You know, he was all for more and more regulations 'cause it would look good and we were saving the people from this harm. I was perhaps the most visible person trying to write against the folly of regulating and I wrote an article which appeared in the Washington Times showing a picture of me and Robert Redford at some benefit, in which I attacked Robert Redford for supporting the Sierra Club. And the Sierra Club had come out again recombinant DNA. So the sort of environmental groups were against DNA. We were going to pollute the earth. Sanity finally prevailed, but it was four years before we could work on cancer viruses, two years before non-cancerous things could be done. So by 1977, the recombinant DNA era, but for cancer it started in '79. Quickly, everything went very fast. It seemed inconceivable. About the net effect of the regulation, the simple.. was that you couldn't drink Coke in a laboratory when you're dealing with recombinants. So this, so you could regulate, no food consumed in laboratories. That's about it. You know, there were lots of committees. You know, Teddy Kennedy who was first at wanting to protect the environment, I think his staff quickly saw that the good guys didn't want to be tied up, so he didn't prove to be on the wrong side too long.
					
						My lab at Harvard sort of went on till ’76 with Wally, though in ’74, so I had, and I brought down a couple of the new graduate students from Harvard who wanted to work on tumor viruses. One of them Rex Risser became very good, and then he died of a heart attack early in life, so he got a job with McArdle in Wisconsin. No, I went to Cold Spring Harbor in ’68, that was “The Double Helix” came out, and in a true sense I didn’t have a lab at Harvard. You know, I had one, but I wasn’t, I didn’t think of ‘my’ experiments, you know, it was the group’s experiments, and just gradually into another level, instead of doing science with your students. Having a science that interests you, done now by young staff members. So, as long as I controlled, in a broad sense, what were the experiments done, running a lab would just be, I didn’t want to write. You know, I wrote some of the first big grant applications, the sort of centre grants for Cold Stream Harbor Joe and I, but I was raising big sums of money, but I didn’t want a grant. And, I didn’t, you know, oversee the, I had a lab at Harvard for 20 years. So, you know, that was long enough and so I was, you know, I became a manager of science. You know, I was managing a baseball team filled with stars, and you know, how do you deal with them?
					
						My idea was to provide a place where young scientists could do important experiments and be offered jobs to move elsewhere. So, when people left, in a sense it was success, not failure. Until ’83 when Wiggler came and was offered a job at Princeton, and he’d just then isolated the first human cancer gene, and once you got to a certain size, it was getting a bit precarious. So, Mike got tenure. Whether he would have gone to Princeton, I think he knew he’d be a lousy teacher, but Princeton was big enough to have someone who just, you know, he didn’t make teacher because he added enough esteem to them. So I think he could have moved there without you know, he might have taught an undergraduate course for one year and you know, no one would have wanted to take the course the next year and it would have been over. Then Stillman got a job offer to go to Berkley and at that time I think I was running the genome project, so some tenure was coming in, and then we had got some money coming in. So, we got a gift of $8 million for a research fund, and that was, eventually was, you know, worth about $110 million. I think it’s down to about $60 million again with the market collapse. But the thing about Cold Spring Harbor is we were a success because we chose the right thing to work on, and also we had a disease. So, the neighbors, we could tell them we don’t understand cancer so they would enthusiastically give us money to understand cancer. Now things have changed. They want us to cure cancer, and Cold Spring Harbor isn’t a hospital and our people maybe they just think they can go on studying cancer. I think they will find that if the financial base falls away that after 50 years or so of studying cancer, don’t you know enough to cure cancer? Actually, I think we almost do. So, if I went into cancer research I'd only go in to cure it now, I wouldn't go in to understand it.You think we understand enough?Yes. I mean, you know, we understand Marburg effect, you know, and there are some pathways which really are only in early development which are really called into play in a number of cancers, so you get them and it’s not very toxic.So you are optimistic about treatments?Yes, I'm optimistic. I think the cancer community is more pessimistic than they should be. It’s just a way of life, studying cancer, and if they try and cure cancer, they will fail, whereas studying cancer, now, you can’t fail. You’ve got all these techniques, there are so many genes involved, you can always say the work is necessary and good. So, it’s just not at the frontier anymore.So if you were dolling out funds you would fund direct attempts to treat?Well, vaccines against cancer are going to work in some cases. So, and the Volkmann idea has never been tested. That is sort of my big goal now, is to finally get it tested. Unfortunately, I mean, because I don’t know where I can get it, the cancer community will never give it money to be tested, and the venture capital field isn’t giving any more money for anything except drug tests. So how we will fund this is not clear. But China has enough money, Singapore, you know.So do you see vaccination as treatment or as prevention or both?Probably best after you’ve had a cancer removed and you don’t have too many cells to kill. If you’ve got too many you probably can’t. The logistics are against you.But even solid tumors?If they’re small. So, you know, I think you are going to have to not have any too fixed beliefs. But I think what we have to really focus on is non-toxic things because your best really bet is prevention, or you know, no recurrence, yeah sure, surgery.
					
						When I was approaching my 70th birthday, I didn't want any party at all marking my 70th birthday. So we decided to return to Australia and on the way to our flight which started in Los Angeles, we - I went to a meeting on gene therapy at UCLA, which had, well, two consequences, I think a good consequence. The bad consequence was that at the sort of dinner marking its end, I was seated next to the newspaper reporter Gina Kolata and I couldn't withhold my enthusiasm for the work of Judah Folkman who'd been in Cold Spring Harbor about a week before and talked on endostatin, a proteolytic fragment of collagen and - which was an inhibitor of angiogenesis. And it was not toxic, it was present in our bodies, and - but it somehow stopped the formation of blood vessels. And Judah, throughout his entire career, had problems in raising money and found a company which, you know, would give him $1 million but then would get the commercial rights to everything in his lab. It was a big giveaway. It was a company called EntreMed and one of the junior scientists in Judah's orbit was a friend of its president. And so they were manufacturing it and it was going through a phase I clinical trial and had people who were very, very sick from cancer. But Judah in his talk at Cold Spring Harbor had showed data which said he cured mice of cancer and it - so I was, you know, thought, why not, you know? And- but then after I returned from Australia about six weeks later, in the New York Times on the front page was an article on, you know, I was quoted as saying cancer will be cured in two years from Judah Folkman's work. And the next day the shares in the price of the company, EntreMed, shot from 10 to 100. And luckily, I didn't own any. And, but one of our trustees had heard me being enthusiastic and had bought some shares. And he sold them as it was going down on the same Monday at about 60 and then donated all the profits to the lab for our cancer research. But you know, I would have- the trial proved afterwards unsuccessful and so, you know, I was just glad I didn't own any shares, because that would have looked pretty bad. But I get very enthusiastic at times. And I had never met her to my knowledge and she's still with the Times and still writing articles which sometimes badly annoy me. And we still don't know whether they work. The endostatin was commercialized in China and it's been given to people with lung cancer together with a more conventional chemotherapy. And it seems to extend life by several months, so- which is, you know, about what most drugs do now, but far from the miracle drug we all need.
					
[Q] Your vision for Cold Spring Harbor when you started, did it include building this exceptional, large research institute?
No, no, it was just you know, I learned the rule, you either get bigger or smaller, and like we when monoclonal antibodies came along, we thought well, we have to have a facility to build them. So we built, by any standard, a small edition. We called it the Sambrook Lab, and there, you know, in that building at Harlow they had antibodies and that was the experiment that showed that the Adno E1A protein bound the RB. So, we've finally understand tumor suppressors... So we hadn’t built the building [unclear]. So, good staff will leave, but that then leads to finally you are becoming bigger than... I think that way would work if you didn’t have tenure, but really, every place in the world has tenure and so after a while every place gets too big. You know, finally, I mean just like in a Malthusian way, you will  increase faster than your inherent resources. And so all these new buildings we built, they may stay half empty for the next 20 years. But, you know, if when the recovery occurs you are going to have the buildings and you can go ahead. At Harvard, the reason I could go there with assurance is the bio labs had never been completed. It has space that was never finished. It was built during the Great Depression, you know, a decision, and but then when it was finished there was no money to occupy it. So, we have six buildings just finished now, and we don’t have the money to... I think if we make the decision where we try and cure cancer we could occupy them, but I think we will persist in just going along understanding cancer. It’s going to be very hard, so you’ve got to... you’ve got to always sense where you are in history.
 
 

						They sent someone to pick me up and drive me to UCLA from our hotel. And he was a chemist from - and why he was there, I don't know - but from Arizona, and his aim was to make a long- life form of melano 4 stimulating hormone [?] by - it's a small peptide derived from a much bigger - turned out to be proopiomelanocortin. So he clipped off the N-terminal end, but you could synthesize it and he had synthesized it with a number of abnormal amino acids in it so they wouldn't be proteolytically cleaved. And it showed that it was chemically - if you put it in, I think their first experiments were with animals, they had a fairly long life in this form. And chose himself to be the first person who got it - human to expose himself. And his skin didn't immediately turn dark. It was, you know, it was going to be called melanotan, where you could tan without getting, exposing your skin to the ultraviolet light which would cause skin cancer. And, but he said the effect of it was an 18 and a-half-hour erection. And so this was before Viagra had appeared, just before it had taken over the market, so you know, he was hoping of another way to be - getting rich. But you, but you know, that led me, you know, to try and learn more about it. And that's when I learned it was first made as proopiomelanocortin. So at the C-terminal was an endorphin. So when the sunlight would stimulate proopiomelanocortin and then be cleaved to give MSS, you'd have an endorphin and feel happy. So I thought that was really - explained a lot, that happiness was a reward for doing what you should do, which was going in the sun and getting vitamin D. And the fact that it led to erections could explain the long believed sort of association between sun and sex. You know, England's not sex but the Mediterranean is sex. And it could be nothing more than, you know, you don't get enough sun here. Again, you know, bacchanals in the summer and- so that then endorphins were made also when people ran long distances. You got the runner's high. And it suddenly occurred me that, oh, it was among the ways you can stimulate the synthesis of melanocortin was leptin. That had just been found. And so leptin is released by fat cells. So the - this completely explained why anorexic women had to run and were - essentially, why supermodels had to be under drugs, because the fashion dictated they were so thin that they weren't producing any leptin, they weren't making endorphins, they were miserable. And so that's why the world of supermodels is drugs. I'm sure it's the case. So I thought, you know, had an almost missionary zeal to let people know that being thin, we finally knew why being thin led to your being unhappy. And so I prepared the lecture which I gave here in London, you know, I had a picture of Kate Moss as an example of someone, you know, in the news both because of her face and because she was a, you know, she and her boyfriend - drug world. And then, you know, I'd always liked the paintings of Botero, the artist from Colombia who paints these obese people. So I put in a Botero painting of a very fat nude woman. And, but I thought it was good art, but it turned out it did sort offend people and - so I never wrote it up after the sort of, it got into the London paper- Sun and Sex, Fat and Sex, you know, that fat women are inherently more responsive in sex than thin women. And you know, whether it's right or wrong but it's one of these myths, you know. Why do - so. But now I'm going to write it up because no one has still ever written up the idea that there's - and I think it was Keats, you know, a poem that the sun makes me frisky. And so that, you know, having biology explain poetry or something like that I thought would, particularly in England, be appreciated. But afterwards, I gave the lecture in Berkley and, you know, afterwards, my host was pretty shocked that I had, you know, said that thin women can't be happy or essentially avoid ultra-thin women, you know. It was, you know, the ultra-thin, you're looking mostly if you're - So I verged into, you know, political correctness of, you know, not allowing - but to me, this connection, you know, proopiomelanocortin, endorphin associated with MSH and it was suddenly happening that you wouldn't be happy unless you were doing what your body wanted you to do. And that makes perfect evolutionary sense. You know, if you would be happy and you were ruining your body, then you certainly - it would be a death spiral for the human species. So, you know, so it was - and several of the women in Berkley even six months after or six weeks after my lecture went to a columnist in the San Francisco Chronicle and had him write a column describing my irresponsible talk. You know, I just thought, thank God I'm not on the Berkley faculty. But you know, the - so that was a - I didn't lose any sleep over their unhappiness. But I guess I thought maybe I better think about something else, but now I want to write it up as sort of a memoir and see if, you know, a magazine like Current Opinion or something like that wouldn't publish the thing. And I think I still have the PowerPoints for that. And so I have the offensive illustrations.
					
						In general, I’m for doing anything that would improve the quality of an individual family’s life. So, that’s sort of the principle I start with, so if it helps a couple good. And I don’t care about, I don’t try and think through whether it’s good or bad for the country, or good or bad for anyone else, I just think it’s too hard to, the individual people are so different in what they want out of life that I wouldn’t want someone to tell me what sort of child I should have or what, because I would disagree, and it’s so important too, I guess. There’s nothing more important than what your family is like. And not having any religious feelings and never really had at any time in my life seems to me makes you so much freer, so I’m not worried about, and I’m not worried about offending people by their faith, because I think if they want to be offended I can't do anything about it, it’s not going to change me or what's good for me. I know I agreed with, when Francis gave that talk, that it shouldn’t be declared alive until two days after birth, so that you wouldn’t too rapidly keep an infant alive who has no future. You know I don’t believe in the sanctity of life, I just want to face life as it is, so sanctity of life is either religion or philosophy, and I think they just get in your way. So, you know, some of the things that Peter Singer says, you know, he almost didn’t get his Princeton position, because of this, but, on the other hand, what Peter Singer writes about animal rights I find almost demented. He wants to give rights to animals, I don’t think rights exist. Who do they come from? I think we can collectively say we have a need for an education and we have a responsibility, sort of in this to see that young people get educated. So, you know, we have needs and responsibilities. This concept to right I think is, it’s just fucked upped everyone, you know. No-one, you know, to me has human rights. The Chinese [unclear], you know, don’t respect human rights. I just find this question never should have been asked.Do you think it’s okay to select embryos on a base of sex if you want a boy or you want a girl?Yes, of course.And what about manipulating the genes in it?Oh, if I could, you know, if you could, you know, to the extent in pre-implantation techniques. You know, get rid of the curse that the Hemingway family, of bipolar disease. So, you know, you don’t want say, every generation there’s someone to blow their brains out through a rifle. That's a terrible situation! So I’ll just get rid of the gene and, you know, embryo rights, what the Catholic Church says, I think they’re, you want to be kind to say it’s a medieval thought and, you know, medieval thoughts really have no place today.You know that most bipolars though, if given the choice would you prefer to have been normal or bipolar, they usually say I’d rather have been bipolar?I had a nephew who died a bipolar, I have strong feelings, and I'm looking at it from the viewpoint of a parent. Should parents have to go through the agony of a bipolar child? I say no! Not if you have the choice. You know part of the reason that they saying they wanted it, that’s slightly crazy! So, you know, should you take equal credence of someone who’s crazy or, you know, different? So, you know, parents have needs or limits, you know, to how they can, what you can ask someone to do.You know that Carl Djerassi has this view that very soon middle-class children will all be born by in vitro fertilization and you’ll select on, you know, where we know enough-I think we will, you got to be careful. Certainly in vitro fertilization let’s women have children later, and so it will increase for that reason, and then, but then you’ve got to worry about the age of the father and the knowledge that we accumulate mutations as men get older, and so the chance of having a genetically damaged child will increase with the age of the father probably means in a wise society you would store sperm at the age 15, and then use it when you want to have a child. It sounds, but I know, you know, someone who had cancer or radiation therapy, and prostate, but took out his sperm and has had three children with that. So, you know, it hasn’t I think being sensible is, you know even people who are not, don’t reason that much, after all follow the leader and people will follow the leaders if it becomes the custom. And, you know, there’s less autistic children born, because all the sperm are coming from 15 year-olds instead of 55 year-old professional academics. So it’ll be good!If you were doing it again you would freeze your sperm at 15.For sure. Well, you know, I have a schizophrenic son, you know. Did that mutation occur between when I was 15 and -? Assuming it was from me and not from his mother. But, you know, the fact that I can give a risk factor for me and not my wife, I couldn’t say that, but of course, I think my father’s father was bipolar that’s why he was so unsuccessful as a stock broker. And there’s just so much to learn about these diseases and they’re proving to be much more complex than we thought, we might have thought, you know, a bipolar gene. Now, they say it’s not going to be that way, so, but I just want to get the knowledge as fast as possible, we’re going to have to have some sort of big science and just say that getting the data sooner is worth, you know, not letting every individual psychiatrist think he can be part of the game or have his own geneticist. It’s not going to go that way.
					
						It’s hard to believe they won't be very important. Now, whether, you know, you can bring back a substantia nigra… It sounds like too tall an order, but what the [unclear] would find in biology is that things happen easier than we might have expected, so it’s not worth trying to predict. It’s just worth doing it, because the amount of money you would expend trying to see if they would work is so insignificant compared to that spent through handling the suffering that comes with the disease. So stem cells seem to be a no-brainer as far as, to me it’s a no-brainer that, in a real sense we should soon double the amount of money that goes toward disease fighting in the United States, because it’s one of the few areas where you can say the United States still has a leadership. And it will have financial consequences and, you know, people will want to come to the United States to be treated and all that. We just can't lose medicine. Whether Obama will have strong feelings after he becomes president with the realization that, my success in life has been to really not worry that I’m offending people, because I know I’m going to offend some whenever you go off the beaten track, and you have to go off the beaten track. It’s a question of whether you have friends. That if you have the proper friends you can get away with enemies, so those people who are afraid to have enemies are those people who don’t have friends.
					
						I used to worry that it would be bad. No, you know, if a mother had lost a perfect 6-year- old son and you could bring him back, and he was a perfect 6-year-old son, and if, clones will be clones, but because of epigenetic things I really don’t know to what extent, you know, the personality of the clone will be identical to that. We wouldn’t know whether it’s bad until we do it, so I guess under that argument I would do it. Saying that one clone isn’t like one nuclear bomb set off in Piccadilly Circus, it won't change the world. The other would! So we can exaggerate. It’s something we can, no, you could say well it proves it can be done and therefore the people of Singapore are just going to do it and we’re going to, we’ll just encourage people to be less responsible to ourselves. I think that’s sort of dismissing other people as not being sensible. So the older I get the more I would let happen.So do you think in animal experimentation for example there are any limits to what you should be able to do, given that it’s an important enough question or the need is important enough?No. No, I think the saving of one human life I just think you have to make a distinction between humans and any other form of life, you know. They’re 1,000 times or 100,000, they’re just not in the same league. If you have to kill all the mice in the world in order to save one human being, I’d probably do it.How about chimpanzees, how many chimpanzees?I don’t like chimpanzees, I’ll get rid of all! They’re particularly, you know, you know, and I’ll get rid of baboons even faster. A gorillas no, they seem, you know, they’re more like us. But I don’t like, you know, a chimp is too violent for me to have affection for, and I think it takes a rather awkward person to really like chimps.
					
						There’s already a future for it, I mean, you know, it’s, and, you know, now, what was it I saw? You know they found GM genes in Mexican corn, supposedly there’s no- The difference there it’s that the Mexican farmers like it, want to use it, and think the regulations are crap, and they’re not going to follow regulations which seem to make no sense. There’s a sort of protect the ignorant. I mean to allow the ignorant, you know, to sort of pay attention to the dummies, so you can't control genetically modified. If it works people are going to use it. If you ban it people will use it.So where did Europe go wrong do you think in this regard?It was partly because Monsanto was stupid and didn’t license it to British firms, they didn’t, so people could object, we don’t want Americans to control our food source. So anti-American feeling was probably as important as anything else in keeping it out of France. Whereas if it, you know, been three or four French, large agro-chemical companies had had that, so it’s all Monsanto. The President Shapiro, he was a goose, you know. He got slaughtered. You know, in the way, you know, I fought; I just didn’t want patents to confuse the human genome. I just thought, God! And, you know, it was patents, I think it was the money aspect which kept it out. There was going to be a transfer of money to the United States, not an improvement of the French economy. And then, you know, the usual leftist, Marxist, communists who, when they can't fight for communism, became environmentalists, because, you know, as an environmentalist the chief evil was the rapacious corporation, which is going to destroy the air, the soil, the oceans, etc. So it was, you know, Marxists need bogey enemies.Well, I guess corporations aren’t a bogey enemy in the sense that their only motivation is to make money. By law that’s what they have to do, it’s if they’re a public company it’s -Well, to make money, they’re supposed to listen to their shareholders and that was crap when you really get down to it that shareholders were the only things that were important. Your employees are as important as your shareholders. So it was, you know, ideology, the usual sort of crap you read in The Wall Street Journal.
					
We know they are and I forget which, you know, when you get some emotional experience in a man the right amygdala lights up, and in a women the left. Why? And, you know, there's more connections between two sides of the brain in women than men. Women for this reason use both sides of the brain more than right-handed men, so they will recover from strokes better than right-handed men. And we know in testing things that men do a little better at mathematics, that women do better in verbal things. The IQs of boys and girls are both 100, because they've adjusted the test so that the strengths of women are countered by strengths in boys, so that it comes to the same. What they didn't do is equalize for the developmental age. Since boys develop slower than girls, if a boy has the same IQ at 12 as a girl does at 12, at 25 he'll probably have a higher IQ, but only by a couple of points. But I'm glad I belong to the sex which has the higher IQ, but it doesn't mean much, it compensates, you know, for the fact that I'm not Chinese. So, you know...
[Q] How important do you think it is in terms of women dropping out of the hierarchy at a fairly early stage in science and academia?
I think most people sort of say men are, sort of more naturally seek dominance over other people and as you go on in life it finally only functions if someone person's in charge. So, you know, it's not an absolute rule, shown by Mrs Thatcher. Boy, she... so it's not as if men are one way and women are the other, but it's been my observation that women tend to find more accommodation than men do and that probably, you know, it's not just an arbitrary thing, but it has some biological or genetic basis. But finding it won't make much difference, it's just, it's really how people behave and I don't think we can change that very much.
[Q] You can make a case that males are responsible for a lot of the problems in society and I think most people who study these things come to that conclusion. How do you...?
Yeah, well sure. I mean, you know, Stalin was a man, Hitler was a man. Yeah, so you could say all the real evils are due to men, but, you know, we did invent the telephone, the reaper, the chip, etc, so if men didn't exist would the human society have advanced at, would it have taken, you know, 100,000 years to happen what we've done in the last 10,000? Could be! So, I like leaders, because, you know, generally what I find wrong with most men is they have zero leadership ability and yet they're technically the leaders. So I'm all for any woman who'll be a leader, I'm just for more leaders. Right now we've sort of demonized leaders. That you really want to find consensus. But I generally find consensus in science. We just never move forward.

[Q] How would you feel about castration, chemical or surgical, for pedophiles or rapists as an alternative choice to staying in prison the rest of your life?
If it worked it would save society a lot of money, so I’m in favor of it.
[Q] It seems to work, you know, pedophiles and rapists say that their urge goes if you castrate them, and they would like to be...
Then do it!
[Q] We don’t, you know we don’t, but you see no reason not to?
No, I would do it, yes. No. I mean on the other hand what to do about psychopaths? If Adrian Raines is right one in 30 people is a psycho-sociopath and so when you, you know, they commit a nasty crime you just automatically lock them up for life. Or you just shoot them.
[Q] It’ll be interesting to know about castration in that situation. And mostly are men I assume, do we know? One in 30.
No, I think there are a lot of women...
[Q] Are there?
But we didn’t really hear about that. He said one in three people seeking temporary employment in Los Angeles is a psychopath, and I think women and men are about equal, so that’s why I think I would’ve heard that it’s only... so it’s a very interesting... so it’s as if, you know, the collection of genes which make us altruistic or have empathy or something like that, something is missing, and so they don’t feel it. I don’t want to name names here as to which scientist I might think, you know, have zero empathy, but they exist! And, boy, they are often successful, hated people.

						Well, living one, only, you know, Roger Federer, the tennis player. But I would think, no, there’s no younger person I’d want to be like. Leó Szilárd was someone who I, I admire, because he could think three or four steps at a time. You know, he saw the consequence of the nuclear chain reaction so fast, he went through British Admiralty and patented it as a state secret. Now, that’s really thinking ahead. You know, you had Roosevelt, right I mean, he wrote the letter that Einstein signed. It was Leó who got Fermi to, you know, work with him on the nuclear pile. I think Fermi was one step, you know, you did that, and you did that. But not, assuming step B works, then what’s C, and then, maybe C leads to D, you know? Leó was, you know, out of Germany within days of Hitler’s coming to power. You know, fast. He saw. You know, I don’t think there was anyone faster than Leó. So, it was really, and, that is most people want too much certainty before they do it. That is, they don’t want to say, if A means B, and B means C, then D will happen, because they say, well, they’ll probably have A going to B, you know, until that happens, don’t worry about the next. So, you’ve got to take seriously an 80% probability, and assume what’s going to happen, and then you’ll find C, and then, well, the probabilities are less, but you, you work that way. You know, within seconds of learning, you know, that Kennedy had been shot, Leó was worrying about how to influence Lyndon Johnson. I spent the evening, that’s all he was talking about, how to get to Johnson.
					
[Q] I would say this is... what you’re admiring in him, is one of your unique qualities.
Well, that’s maybe why I like him, because he was one of the few who thinks this way. But, I think if you’re concerned with, you know, preventing disasters, or you know, saving civilization, you’ve got to think in terms of probabilities and not certainties. He was just, you know, he could be, was often wrong, but he was, he almost... see, our brain is organized so what whatever we do, we associate it with where we are. Almost everything has a hippocampal location, as well as something else. So, the... it’s so important to know where you are. So... now, everything we learn should be, at the same time, given a probability. And, most people don’t think that way. Just, what is the probability? They wait until it’s a fact, whereas sometimes, most things ahead of you are probabilities.
[Q] So, that’s an important point, because people are very bad at assessing probabilities. But, do you think that...
So, you know, I guess now they wouldn’t say probability, they would just say basing on analysis, the new way of, but, it’s the same thing.
[Q] But, that enables you to see ahead, because you’re assessing probabilities as you would in a chess match?
Yes. Yeah, you’re trying to yeah, predict six moves ahead. And, so and, that’s what a lot of people are afraid to do because they don’t want to be wrong. If they never try to go from B to C, from A, then they never make a mistake. Whereas, the other is admitting that you’ve made mistakes all along the line. Whereas, I think the human temperament is... doesn’t like uncertainty.
[Q] But, when you predict ahead in picking an area to invest in, say the Cold Spring Harbor, do you consciously go through, and, A, B, C, D, assessing what would happen if, what would happen if, what if I?
No, no, no. I don’t, you know, I’ve never put this But, I, I think that way, yes. You know...
[Q] Do you play chess?
No. It’s too much work. You know, I life is a chess game, for me, so I don’t need... you know I’ve played... yeah, I’ve played life as a chess game. So, yeah. So, to me, that is the greatest feeling of most of the people I know, is they’re... it’s too restrictive of what they think about. And so, I like to think ahead, and then I realize that you can’t succeed unless you make the odds bigger than they probably are. You know, the chance that this will happen, because, unless there’s a reasonable chance, you don’t get worried. You know, you’ve got a... so you’re both most optimistic, you know, I don’t like to do anything, unless it’s to have a 20% chance of succeeding. You know, I wouldn’t want to hit a tennis ball with a 1% chance. Now, I aim for the line, but I actually think I have no chance of hitting the line, after many years of trying to practice toward hitting the line. But...
So, I see life, you know, and, that probably helps, you know, I’m so miserably helped by not having religion, and anything else that might cause something to happen.

[Q] So, as, as a passionate atheist, and a rationalist, how do you feel about the rise of irrationalism and fundamentalism?
I’m not sure it’s any greater, but if there is, it’s just that the world is getting harder to deal with, and people need some way to deal with it. So, I don’t have only one... we’re almost nothing on evangelical people, which is the fastest growing group. Now they, in some wacky way, make people feel empowered. You’re not just passive, you’re...
[Q] But, it is rising. I mean, fundamentalism, it’s not just the Christian Evangelists, it’s the Muslims, the...
No, but the one the fastest growing religion in Africa and in South America is Evangelical Protestantism. And, because I think that more than just taking God’s will, you, you become God. I, you know, I don’t know what crap they... I think it’s just the, change is occurring faster, we’re asking people to handle things much harder than they would in the past. You know, we’re giving them the power to have a divorce, we’re giving them power to have drugs. There’s so many more ways that you can go wacko.
[Q] But, there’s something more fundamental, and that is that the fundamentalists breed like rabbits. That’s part of being a fundamentalist, and, it doesn’t matter whether this is Judaism or Christianity or Islam, they breed fast.
No, we’ve somehow, you know, got to get the top 20% of the world. Singapore tried it briefly, a bonus for having children, and the size of the bonus a function of your income. That was a pretty strong eugenic statement, and apparently the United States really hated this Singapore, and almost used some pressure so they didn’t say that they only want wealthy people to have more children. But, of course, that makes sense, because wealthy people, on the whole, don’t have mucked up fiends, as unsuccessful people. So, it’s a... the truth is, when I was in Italy, I learned that a number of them wanted a Save Italy Campaign, like Save the Redwoods. The redwoods, if you’re in a redwood forest, they’re as they’re as high as a cathedral, and you need to be about 300 feet to get a sense of awe. You really get it, it’s that high. It’s what you get from the redwoods. So, I’m in favor of saving the redwoods. But, you could save Italy. You could never say, Save Belgium, if they didn’t have any children no one would get upset. Or, save Holland, no, you know Save Italy, and everyone except Italians likes to be there.
[Q] And, you want to see Berlusconi re-elected three, four more times? Why would you want to?
Well, that’s because Italy is in such a mess, that that having one child is an indication of how life is, really... you know you can say Berlusconi. The Left Wing has been just as bad!

[Q] Would you like to live forever?
No, I’d be too short. You know, part of my identity is believing I am 6 feet tall, and you know, I’ve lost at least 2 inches, or 3 inches. So, you know, if I really cheat slightly, I’m only 5 foot 11 inches now.
[Q] But, what if we could stop the ageing process, now? Would you like to live forever?
Sure. If you’ve stopped the ageing process. But ar what... at what age should you stop ageing? You know, would you let people?
[Q] Ten years ago, in you.
You mean you mean they allow everyone to be?
[Q] Get to 50, and then you stay right where you are.
Stay, at 50.
[Q] Or at 60, yeah.
Uh, I’d freeze women at 35.
[Q] You? What about you? Would you like, though, the idea of living forever? Does that have appeal?
I know it won’t happen, so I’m not I, I can’t...
[Q] You can’t think about it?
Really, I can’t think about it. I can think about... you know, right now, I haven’t met a 100-year-old person I'd want to look at. So, you know, we have to... and... you know, it would be basically, we can only live to be... if in some way you genetically engineered all people to repair their DNA better, then we’d probably live longer, the mutation rate would be lower... you know, we’d have less autism, we’d have less schizophrenia. We’d have, probably, less ability to adapt to new environments, but then you could say, well, you’d try and have the earth remain the same, if people have got to remain the same. Uh... I, we’d have many fewer children. We’d be spending less of our national product on education. We’d be spending less on health. People would die of accidents. Yeah, it would be better. I mean, all these... ageing is an awful thing.
[Q] You see it as an awful thing?
Yeah, strokes...
[Q] Strokes, not good, but not everybody has strokes.
No, but if you don’t have strokes, and if you don’t have diabetes, and if, you know, your hips don’t give out after 3 years of being a tennis pro, and things like that, the... and if you have the genomes where you really could know the major obstacles, that we could handle them. The... the only... the major advantage is that, if you lived to be 1000 years, you’re probably going to see some curious nuclear explosions, and so... you’ll be still alive and there to warn people. So, the chief age... the chief, you know, advantage of grandparents was the wisdom. They’ve been through the experiences before books. It was before you could have a guide, so grandparents were... old people really did have something. So, 1000 years would give you more wisdom. On the other hand, that’s not worth worrying about. I think, the only thing to worry about is how to get rid of Alzheimer’s. Then, if you can get rid of Al, you know, so...
[Q] Are you optimistic that we’ll get rid of Alzheimer’s?
No. You know. I don’t have reason. I can’t say, I think the probability is 80%. I have no reason for saying that. And so, until that probability gets high enough that that is the absolute prerequisite for moving ahead. You know, trying to keep anyone older, is, right now, you would want people to die sooner. I mean, it’s going to be a, a...-
[Q] Will we have an epidemic of Alzheimer’s?
Yeah. Yeah, well then, probably if, you know, we get more Alzheimer’s, you will find an imper... a much larger percentage of people who would like to assist in the death of their parents who don’t recognize anyone. So, there will be a movement not to keep someone alive 10 years after they’ve had no emotional contact with anyone. And, that’s still the norm.
[Q] So, what do you think about all of this? What should be done?
Well, how your father behaved. Yeah, totally. Yeah, if I knew it, die before, while you’re alive.
[Q] Do you think the law might be changed in your time?
Yeah. Economic necessity. And, just enough... people worn out by handling their parents. Although, happens... who will be able to keep Alzheimer’s people living longer. So you know, there are different definitions of death. You know, I almost play doubles tennis called death. So but, you know, it depends what...
[Q] So, do do you have any fear of death, dying, any of those things?
Oh, I... of course. I mean, I, I think the one you’ve, I fear the most is stroke. Yeah. And then, cancer. But, stroke often puts you in a position where you can’t even do anything. Cancer, if you knew that you had that, you would just take a pill and die, and not have to go through it. Strokes are often such that people, sort of, go from controlling their life, to total lack.

My death doesn't bother me. The death of the earth has a stronger emotional... because then no one would read my book, The Double Helix. I mean, everything would just vanish, and you know, if the sun cools down, and then suddenly there's nothing, and...
[Q] It will.
And that, I, I know, and that, if I think about it, could make me gloomy. Individual death, not so, but, it's just because you can really consider the extraordinary, how extraordinary human beings are, and what we've done with civilization, and our difference from trained chimps. And, I mean, it's unbelievable. And, all this would vanish. So, that source of, you know, it's not the end of the disappearance not the end of civilization, it's the disappearance. So, we somehow have to conquer going to other planets.
[Q] Right. So, that's an obvious implication. And, and, do you think we should invest in doing that?
Yes. Eventually, yes. If, you know, this global warming, I refuse to get excited about, but the cooling down of the sun, I would get excited by.

I gave this talk at the Double Helix Theatre in New York, probably the most effective public talk I've ever given in my life. It was about 10 days ago. And I started, you know, my first sentence was, like Barrack Obama I'm a product of the South Side of Chicago where, you know, books, birds and Franklin Delano Roosevelt gave us hope for the future and where four family values held us together during the Great Depression and World War II: pursuit of the truth; personal honesty; fair play towards other human beings; and civic responsibility to the less fortunate. Now that sort of summarizes what I think I am. So you know, pursuit of the truth is not what these academics want. Personal honesty – they're quite willing to be dishonest. I don't think they're showing true civic responsibility to the less fortunate. One out of every three black kids in New York City winds up in prison. That's a pretty high level. It wasn't true 50 years ago, we had a much more law-abiding black population. This Black Panthers and all that rap music, it's awful! This Kanye West, terrible man, glorifying, you know, criminals. So all you do is you, you know...
[Q] I would have said that the four points you made, there are others who would say the same thing, but it doesn't capture you as what distinguishes you from others, I think, is an intolerance for hypocrisy that distinguishes you. There are others that have those same views about honesty and so on, but the thing that makes you, I think, among many things, but one in this arena...
This was, you know how it was developed? The absolute hypocrisy of my Irish grandmother, who was just saying, just you know, things were good. The Irish were just totally hypocritical. Well, what was up? So you know, I just used to, the word hypocrisy I have was synonymous with my grandmother. She was very kind to me, she was, you know, there wasn't, it wasn't that, but it was just not... So these are things which go so deep in my childhood that were all there by, before I went to the University of Chicago and, but my father, he really was...
[Q] Did he have that as well?
Well, as I say in my book, he hated anti-Semites. So you know he really, he really liked people who pursued the truth.

The Human Genome Project, serious talk about starting it was in 1986. It was first, you know, proposed in a written article by Renato Dulbecco who said that we needed the human genome before we could understand cancer. And we had just got the power of recombinant DNA and we were, you know, having no difficulty cloning lots of cancer genes. And so initially the Human Genome Project was opposed by most good scientists. And I think part of the reason it was, except for Dulbecco, it was being proposed by, particularly by scientists at the Department of Energy who we didn't think were really first class scientists. So I was afraid that the project would get started under the Department of Energy instead of patronage moneys of the National Institutes of Health. So I worked to get Bruce Alberts to be head of a national research council committee that discussed whether the Human Genome Project should start. And we met in the beginning of the Fall of 1986, right after I got money from a nice person, Michael Witunsky, who was running the McDonald Foundation out of the Aircraft Corporation in St Louis. And he paid for the committee. And he was at the Cold Spring Harbor symposium on the molecular biology of Homo sapiens where Wally Gilbert had written on the board: '3 x 109 nucleotides x $1 base pair equals $3 billion'. So that was a real sort of conclusion that that was sort of the price range that the project might cost. In fact, by the time it was completed, it could have been done for less cost. But I think about $3 billion was spent throughout the world getting out the first genome and making me even more desirous of, you know, not only to keep the bad guys from getting it, but just I wanted to start it. But since our eldest son Rufus was having severe psychological problems and failing at school and we had the fear he had schizophrenia and understanding schizophrenia which, you know, I read ran in families was probably going to require, just like in cancer, you had to find the bad genes. And the chance of finding the bad gene without the Human Genome Project seemed pretty remote. So I was driven by, finally, a lot of reasons. So I probably personally, you know, wanted it done certainly as much as anyone in the world. So I found the money for the... to get the committee and Bruce chaired the committee and there was really no dissention in the committee. The only surprise was that soon after he joined the committee, Wally Gilbert said he wanted to resign because he was going to form a private company to sequence the genome. He thought it was a more efficient way than a consortium of different labs. But after we raised initial seed moneys from Congress, Wally was never able to raise money for his genome company. It was after he'd been pretty successful forming a new biotech company, Biogen, and so, you know, Wally believed in companies if you wanted to do big projects. I didn't like the company idea because I thought, I didn't want someone to patent the genome and own it. I thought that would make - genetics was already almost inherently controversial with people not liking genetic determination and I thought it best the genome belonged to the people of the world and not to a private company.

The National Institutes of Health, unlike the Department of Energy, had no enthusiasm for the Human Genome Project. The director, Jim Wyngaarden, was in favor of it, but the staff below him wasn't. And - sort of reflecting, you know, the views of the scientific community they supported, which just saw it as a possible big diversion of money away from pure science or an applied project. But David Baltimore and I - went in front of a group of key senators in May of 1957, David saying that Congress should vote money for HIV, that AIDS was a world crisis, and we had to immediately put - at that time we really didn't know how fast it would spread or anything. So we had a very good reception and several key senators liked it enough, so $30 million was inserted into the NIH budget by the Senate. And I think the House - there was a compromise, we finally ended up with in the first year with $18 million being given to NIH to prepare for the Human Genome Project. And that led Jim Wyngaarden, who wanted it to start, to organize a meeting which was led by David Baltimore outside Dulles Airport in Reston to discuss how it should be done. And by then, David was in favour of the project. Once, you know, you've defined it, it's very hard to be against it. And Wyngaarden saw it as an add-on. It wasn't taking money from NIH but it would be additional moneys. And that, I think that proved to be the case. And he did this by saying he would set up a new institute of human genome and it wouldn't be part of the Institute for General Medical Science which was run by Ruth Kirstein, who really didn't like the genome project. She just saw it threatening basic research. At that meeting, there was discussion who should head, which I was not part of, but Tom Caskey from Baylor College of Medicine, he was very active in that meeting as a human geneticist. I think he supported the idea that I should be head of the project and later that Spring, Jim came up to Cold Spring Harbor and asked me whether I would lead the project. And I said if - because our son was being hospitalized and that I couldn't give up our home in Cold Spring Harbor but I, you know, wanted to stay head of the Cold Spring Harbor lab and so have two jobs. And Jim said fine and then afterwards, I think there was a ruling that it was totally illegal. You know, that I couldn't be doing government business from my desk in Cold Spring Harbor because Cold Spring Harbor was receiving money from NIH. But that only occurred several years afterward. But when Jim's successor, Bernadine Healy, wanted to get rid of me because I was opposing her idea on patenting cDNA sequences, the lawyers told her, you know, that she didn't have to worry. I never should have been - had the job. In fact, they could prosecute me. And - but before that happened, my aim was to try and give the money out to highly intelligent people who were in favour of it. So we ended up with advisor committees which were - Eric Lander very early came in, he was sort of David Botstein's prodigy, a Rhodes Scholar who had joined, was then a - had briefly been an assistant professor at the business school of Harvard, had become interested in biology and was working part time in a drosophila lab. He wanted to be part of the project and afterwards became a key person. And Maynard Olson, who came to replace Wally Gilbert on our committee, had come up with the yeast artificial chromosomes, which, into which you could, er, were cloning vehicles. So you could clone large fragments of DNA. So you can imagine not having to deal with random mixtures of human DNA but precise, hopefully a collection of overlapping acts along all the chromosomes which we would sequence. The - in 1990, I was told that in the NIH there was a - someone very keen to sequence human DNA, Craig Venter, that I then met and I liked him. And he submitted a proposal to sequence human DNA but we had first a committee on mapping and - mapping of fragments, so mapping the human genome. And then sequencing was finally going to be the real thing. And so Lee Hood had said he had an automated machine which would sequence DNA and there were several sort of clever proposals on how to do sequencing, one of which was Wally Gilbert's. And so there was a special, just giving out first sequencing money to see which ways we should use it. Craig applied for some of this money for the NIH and the committee - and I forget who chose him, it was either Joe Sambrook or Eric Lander, I think was that. They decided they would, you know, focus on sequencing bacterial DNA or yeast DNA, smaller things. You do, you know, you want to show you can sequence a bacterium before you could go on to humans. And the decision was made I think to have five groups, and so Craig didn't get any money and the money went to Caltech and Lee Hood, who wanted to sequence with his machine. Craig reapplied and the second time it went around he was again turned down, and then he had met Sydney Brenner at some meeting. And Sydney had - actually was the first one to make cDNAs have reverse transcriptase, copy messenger RNA fragments into their DNA as one strand RNA, one strand DNA. And then from that you could just copy the DNA.

						Craig moved on to cDNA, frustrated that he wasn't getting any money for sequencing. And so someone at NIH, Reid Adler was their lawyer, somehow he wrote up patents for all the cDNAs Craig had produced, many of which, you know, had no function whatsoever. I thought this is - so when I heard of this patent thing, I sort of, you know, said it was, you know, just bad and - but Bernadine Healy who'd become the director of NIH in consequence of George - yes, she became director of NIH sort of in 1990, because the first George Bush was President. And I had seen her earlier when she was all for regulating recombinant DNA and biotechnology and thought she was misguided, but I said, you shouldn't give a patent to something a monkey could do, so that led to another meeting where Craig appeared in a monkey suit. And then - and my pro-patenting, I mean, anti-patenting thing made some people uneasy with me 'cause they thought I was against America's competitiveness. So Bernadine essentially fired me and she could do it because, you know, I was still at Cold Spring Harbor and I had two jobs and I shouldn't have. It cost me $10,000 to resign because I had to get a high powered New York - Washington lawyer to see, you know that I wasn't being prosecuted for being sitting in my desk and doing it. And so I remember it was a pretty awful two days or something like this and - but one of our trustees had, oh, I can't now remember the name. He was almost, you know, the most prominent lawyer in Washington, but of course I didn't really see him, I saw an associate of his. And that happened in April of 1992. And about a year later, Francis Collins was appointed. He had found the CF gene. So I ceased to have any very active involvement in it. At the time I was fired, I had been in London just before going around to the MRC and to the Wellcome Trust with the hope that they would make a big commitment because to Sydney Brenner's, you know, annoyance or not annoyance but the MRC really didn't want to spend much money on the Human Genome Project. In fact, he was - Sydney had a small human genome project where he did his cDNAs, but it was all being done like it was basic science instead of big science. And if that hadn't, Sydney would have made all those cDNAs. And the MRC was run by Dai Rees. And the Wellcome Trust had just, I think Bridget Ogilvie was about to take it over. And they made the, you know, big decision that they would fund the British components of the - and the MRC was out. And that was just the time when the company had been sold to Glaxo, to Glaxo Wellcome. And so they were suddenly very, very rich.
					
						I was put on, oh, within a year or two, the British Genome Committee, sort of like Sydney had been on ours, which was very nice 'cause it brought me back here fairly often. And I could watch the creation of the new campus at Hinxton, 10 miles outside of Cambridge, which I visited yesterday and - extraordinary. It's the, it’ll be the genome centre of the world, the European bioinformatics sort of thing. And you know, there was great vision of the Wellcome Trust in creating it. And they then I think funded about 30% of the genome. So, more in proportion to the size of England and it was really done because John Sulston working with Bob Waterson in St Louis had the project of sequencing the worm, C. elegans. And soon after I was fired, Craig Venter hoped he would be appointed as director of the Genome Institute, but he was passed over when Healy chose Francis Collins. And soon afterwards, Craig formed the Institute for Genome Research, supported by private money for a new company called Human Genome Sciences, which would get all the commercial rights to the cDNAs produced by Craig. And so Craig's institute was just north of Washington, five miles from NIH, fairly close. And they produced the first genome sequence out of a tiny salt- loving bacterium which had a sort of reduced genome. So the Institute for Genome Science besides producing most of the relevant cDNAs did bacteria. And whereas I had - and Dick McCombie who had worked for Craig when he was at NIH, when Craig moved to the Institute for Genome Sciences, he accepted a job from me at Cold Spring Harbor. So we began to do sequencing, but we worked at the beginning of the thing and never became a big component of the Human Genome Project. We worked largely with plant DNA which wasn't funded by that.
					
						During that time, after the genome project started, we began to have some meetings on genetics and mental illness at Cold Spring Harbor. But certainly looking back at the programs, it was pretty much waffle. You know, there was a meeting where the chief families in our group of Irish families, which were, the genetics was being done by Ken Kendler at the University of Virginia. And you know, they got some evidence of linkage in chromosome 6 and now it's thought to be a protein [unclear]. But it was always marginal. And so that you probably really couldn't do anything until you got the human genome, which was completed in 2003. And before it was completed, there was a - the idea of putting tiny DNA fragments on chips and you would have an ordered array in which to put the whole genome, or represent - it had representation of the whole genome and, say, first it was maybe 50,000 spots, 50,000 representations, and now it's at, you know, a million or two representations. So you were sampling maybe one-twentieth of the DNA of the human genome at a high point. So the development of the DNA chips, which really came out of the Silicone Valley and where the whole chip industry had developed in the United States, you know, I first heard of it not being really - someone who thinks high-tech. You know, I didn't get excited until I saw real results. But - so we got the chip technology and then the cost of DNA sequencing.
					
The Human Genome Project was sort of results came in two phases. In - it was sort of 18 - I mean, 19 - I think - '98, Craig Venter, or '97, made an announcement that he was forming a new company, Celera, to sequence the human genome, the same objective as Wally Gilbert had had roughly 10 years before, but now the sequencing machines were a main staple and there was going to be a new version with capillary sequencing which was going to radically speed it up. And he proposed to assemble it by just sequencing so much that you - and computers had increased in their powers, so you just randomly sequence small fragments of DNA, sequence them and then found overlapping segments of sequence and assemble that. And the Human Genome Project was - the international consortium had chosen to first map the whole DNA onto yeast artificial chromosomes and then bacteria, things called bacs [?] which contained - you had more DNA. And so we didn't want to sequence something until we knew roughly where it was on the genome and - not wishing to take a chance that you could sequence enough, because sequencing was expensive and maybe, you know, it would just cost too much to have the coverage which you'd like for what was called the shotgun. But Craig said he'd do it by shotgun. But in fact, when he put forth a preliminary draft, he used all the human data. And the human data had a meeting in Bermuda in about '96. It was a very important meeting where the point of the meeting was really to discuss the distribution of sequence once you sequenced. There wasn't much sequencing that had been done at the time of Bermuda, but the decision which was really, I think, initially really promoted by John Sulston who was, I think he didn't have his Nobel Prize for the sequencing C. elegans, that came a couple of years later. But John wanted it released, so the people who did the sequencing didn't get a first look. And so it would help everyone by doing that. And there was a sort of unanimous vote in favour, including Craig Venter, but I think afterwards he realized he was, you know, no company would fund you to put out sequences for which the company would have no prior use. So he changed his mind soon when he formed a private company, but used all the international data together with his shotgun data to present his first sequence. So at the time of assembling the genome, it was clearly a competitive race where the last part of it was done by a marvellous man named Jim Kent at Santa Cruz. He'd been in a computer company and was in - had left industry to come back and get a PhD and by, I think, working for two months he developed the algorithms which let him essentially put the Human Genome Project together. So, the project was, on the human side, was put together at Santa Cruz where the sequencing was not done. And it was quite clear, you know, if all the sequence was on the web, it allowed everyone to work on it. So that was June in 2000 - I know it was 2000 because Bill Clinton was still President. And the - there was a White House announcement and I think it was outside. It was, you know, in June, and Craig Venter and Francis Collins came out to represent the two opponents. And it was a happy occasion. But it really hadn't been finished, it was just sort of first drafts. And so it was finally the international, not the company which came out with the complete referenced sequence in 2003. Craig, it turned out that the human DNA that Craig was synthesising, er, sequencing was none other than Craig's, whereas the human DNA had been mixed up so it was a donor of six anonymous or eight anonymous people from Buffalo which had provided the samples that went into the cloning thing. So 2003 had the sequence and the DNA chips would be made and you could study, you know, among other things, look at cancer DNA and measure using chips whether some DNA was amplified or not. So, one way of promoting cancer is just to have 10 copies of a cancer-promoting gene caused by a crossing over process which amplifies the number of copies of the gene. So the first genome was very important.

						There were ideas for new ways of sequencing - high throughput, low cost sequencing which would greatly reduce the cost of sequencing. And in - sometime, I think it was in the fall of 2004 I got a visit from a young entrepreneur/inventor, Jonathan Rothberg, who had formed a company called 454 in New Haven. It was his second biotech company. And he asked for my DNA, could he sequence me so that I would be the first person whose genome was done. And I said yes, but I didn't want to know whether I was at risk to Alzheimer's disease, so I said that you could release all my DNA sequence except my apolipoprotein E one which was - if I had two copies of it, I probably already by then had Alzheimer's. And so I worried whether I had one copy because my grandmother had Alzheimer's. And so I said, you can just put it up. And then I didn't think about it at all. And until the late Fall two years later- or no, I think it was January, they came and told me that they had already sequenced half my DNA and the other half would be done a month later, it was going to take some two months to sequence me. And the company 454 had been bought by Roche, so it was Swiss-owned. But the, it was still located in New Haven with the same technical people. Jonathan had left it. And it turned out that it was early June of 2007 when I went down to - and then in assembling the sequence, they had got the help of the Baylor Genome Institute. There were three main sequencing centers finally in the United States: one at MIT, the Broad Institute; at St Louis, Washington University Genome Center; and then Houston at Baylor College of Medicine. And so the genome group at Baylor, led by the Australian-born Richard Gibbs, helped in the assembly of the - of my genome, comparing it always to the reference genome. So I went there in an early day in June and I had the reassurance that I was then 79 years old and I wasn't likely to, you know, worry if the, you know - I had already lived a full life. But they told me I had mutations in three DNA repair genes, which if I'd known when I was 20 I would have, you know, thought, well, I'm going to be an early victim of cancer. So I wouldn't have liked that knowledge at that time. They didn't find any, you know, well know genetic disease for which I was heterozygous, like cystic fibrosis, I had a one in 25 chance of carrying on allele of it, which would have been useful to know 'cause I could then tell my son Duncan he should check himself. He would have a 50% chance of having, you know, my bad allele. So I saw the sequence as a way of being useful to him, to warn him that he should test regions [?]. They told me initially I had a mutation in my BRCA1 DNA. The gene became very famous for its greatly increasing the susceptibility to breast cancer. So I worried that - my sister had had breast cancer so maybe that was the reason she'd had it, therefore I should notify her daughters that they might be carrying it. But before I did, I had the sequence looked at by Marie-Claire King, who was - had first mapped the breast cancer gene to chromosome 17 and even though the company Myriad had first cloned the gene and patented it, she knew well the mutations along the gene. She called me up and greatly reassuring me by saying I didn't have the Jewish variant, which was breast cancer, but I had what she thought was a harmless Irish variant.
					
						They told me I also was homozygous for a change which - gene where you have Cowland’s Disease [?], which - in some way would be a very bad fate. In fact, I probably shouldn't be here if I had it in any way. And only earlier this week in Edinburgh did I learn that someone had looked at my genome sequence and concluded that my mutations in it were not the disease causing one but, you know, one removed from the disease causing one. So I didn't worry about it because I was 80, but again, if I'd been told that at 20 I might have, you know, thought, my life won't be very good. But of more value, and that came from Craig Venter who published his own gene sequence soon afterward, which he did by the old fashioned way. So we calculated that he must have spent at least 20 of his shareholders' money sequencing himself, if not more. But they published an article which compared his cytochrome p450 genes with Craig's and Craig was superior to me and that he had normal variants, but in one of them, cytochrome C2P6 or P2C6, yes, yes- but anyway, it's the cytochrome which metabolizes beta blockers and also converts codeine into heroin, that I have an Asian variant. I was homozygous for an Asian variant, which means I metabolize them about 10-fold less, slower. And that immediately explained why when beta blockers had been given to me to control my blood pressure, they controlled my blood pressure, but you know, within a week or so I was just totally asleep during the middle of the day. So when the doctor knew this, he gave me another beta blocker that did the same thing, but he didn't think in terms of the fact that, you know, I might be - have genes which led to the enzymes being sort of inactive. So that's greatly benefitted, now I take a beta blocker, you know, once every eight or nine days instead of once a day. And they control my blood pressure just as well. The initial announcement didn't tell me that I had only one good copy of the lactase gene, so I'm somewhat milk intolerant, which explained why in 1953 when I was at Clare College the year we worked out the DNA structure, my stomach was always giving me gas problems. And you know, I went to the local prominent GP who, you know, sort of thought it was psychosomatic. And in those days, no one associated constant gastric problems or intestinal problems with inability to do milk. When I then got that news, I looked up the literature on lactase, including one paper which concluded that very, very likely Charles Darwin's mysterious disease was that he was homozygous for it. He did have one good copy and so four or five hours after a meal, he would just feel desperately ill and probably drank lots of milk because Down House had a farm. But even though these articles appeared, the sort of Darwin world hasn't seized upon it. They always thought, did he pick up some parasite when he was in South America? Because I think the problems - he didn't have those problems until he returned from the voyage of the Beagle. So that's why they thought it was something he picked up. But often, you sort of slowly lose when you're - what you lose is your ability as an adult to lac, as a young child you have a different promoter doing it. So Darwin may have, you know, had smaller amounts by the enzyme and by the time he got really old, it stopped being made. So I now carry with me lactase pills which I take if I know I'm going to, you know, going to eat a lot of ice cream or something like that.
					
						So you know, up to now, I've benefitted from knowing my genome. Craig learned he had one apolipoprotein E4 variant. And he's now 60, so people with one tend to be affected in their, you know, maybe in the late 70s and 80s. So he may regret knowing it. So how we're to, you know, move into - you know, then my genome cost $1 million, so one wasn't worried about what would happen when very large numbers of people have their genome sequence. And - because NIH has given money to companies to promote finding, developing technologies which lead to the cost being only $1,000 for a genome, which will be, you know, much less than the cost of actually analyzing the genome. So - and that day is likely to arrive maybe as close as three to five years from now. The cost has been reduced down to roughly $20,000. Using now the dominant machine that was developed here in the UK by a company that started out at the chemistry department at Cambridge University, Silexa [?]. Then [unclear] produced a machine which sequenced cheaper than 454 and it was bought by the DNA chip company, Illumina, American company. And there, when we got the machine, a genome was $200,000. Now it's about $20,000. So at $20,000, it would probably be worthwhile even at that cost to sequence large numbers of the mentally ill, because what we've learned now, certain genes now have been shown to cause individual cases of mental illness. But it doesn't seem that anyone is going to be - mental illness won't be like cystic fibrosis, being caused by a single gene. Quite possibly as many as several hundred could lead to the weakened brain which then becomes prone to psychosis. And it doesn't look like even the most common changes are more than 1% of the disease. So it's going to be hard to be sure since there's lots of natural variation spotting the variation which is new. And one way would be to sequence individuals both of whose parents have no trace of mental illness and look for new mutations in the offspring. And then by sequencing pretty large numbers, hopefully to find repeats. And best would be the use of large families of - where mental illness goes through a number of generations, where you can compare the sequence of affected members and unaffected. But it's made difficult that the - it's clear already that the penetrance of the genes which we're studying, one in particular which causes either schizophrenia or major depression and one case with bipolar, does not have 100% penetrance. It's sort of semi-dominant. Some individuals appear, but some people that are thought to be totally no sign of mental illness still carry the gene. So it's not as clean as we would like, but there's a family in Scotland that - people in the genetics department at Edinburgh University assembled over many years, which has 180 members, and we're collaborating with them and have sequenced the first two. We started, they may have almost finished sequencing - that is getting the raw data now, the first two personal genomes of the mentally ill. So I was in front of, went to see Senator Tom Harkin about getting a congressional hearing for the need of more money to find out what's wrong genetically in the seriously mentally ill, bearing the grim news that basically the medicines for treating mental illness have not substantially improved over the past 45 years. They have become maybe marginally better, but the only thing we're sure of is that they're much more expensive. But they don't, you know, lead to a child who can really go back into society with schizophrenia. You know, I'm saying, there are exceptions, but on the whole. We want to find drug targets, such as has been possible by doing the genes behind cancer. So we want to understand mental illness, which will be like cancer, involve many genes. Might consider, $1 billion. So I think we'll get a hearing and then the problem is that unlike cancer, families which have, you know, multi-generated in families don't really - like to reveal themselves, because you know, if you know that, you know, your son has schizophrenia and his, say, uncle had it and so on, you don't talk about it because maybe, you know, it'll make people worry whether the sister of the boy who has schizophrenia has it. And no one wants schizophrenia in the family.
					
						So there are lots of partisans for mental illness research - for cancer research in Congress, almost none for mental illness. It's so - sort of diminishes, you know, not only the life of the people who are victims, but those who, you know, have to take care of them. So I think things are better now in the UK. Stephen Fry coming out and making very visible that he's bipolar is a very good thing. Bipolar of course is - people when they're not in the manic or the depressed phase can be very high functional. Schizophrenia, you're never high functional. And up to now, you know, the Wellcome Trust has been very actively providing money to do cancer genomes and not mentally ill. It's just not that the - but the financial harm caused by mental illness probably exceeds that caused by cancer, because even though the number of victims is much smaller they're affected all their lives and they don't die necessarily early, they just have a normal life with many of them when their parents die being the homeless on the streets. So it's a major interest of mine now, you know, having started the Human Genome Project to see if we can't at least in this one bipolar family in Scotland find the gene. You know, and then find others, but just show that we can do it. It's a risky one. You know, the evidence just may be messy, so I don't know. And you could say, well, if it was only $1,000 for a genome, we'd only spend $200,000, so why spend 20 times that amount when we're going to do it cheaper? But if you're the father of a child with mental illness, you just want to - it's worth doing at $20,000 and we'll see if we get to the $1,000. I was - for bipolar disease, if you could find the gene which, you know - then there have been two sort of hypotheses - that mental illness is due to really a sort of gene with strong effect, either dominant or recessive, versus you know, genes just slightly predisposing you and if you get too many of them you do it. But the sort of way it runs through families, at least in those cases it looks like genes with big effects, 'cause you're either very sick or you're not, which wouldn't be the thing if you had something caused by 20 different genes and it could dilute out and not be so strong. There's now a sort of change of thinking which was at the Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Evolution, molecular aspects, in June, which is everyone has sort of been thinking that, you know, animals evolved by your finger getting a little longer, a little longer, a little longer. But it may be that, you know, you go from a short finger to a tall finger in only a couple of changes, sort of by big effects. So - in which case, in the case of mental disease, a gene which caused mental disease would eventually be selected out, depending how bad it was, might run through three generations, five generations. I think you find longer families with predominantly bipolar because the people can reach the age where they have children and it's not - but you’d like to be able to find the gene and then do antenatal diagnosis and let someone who bears the disease have children knowing the children won't have it. You know, I know of such families, and it's an awful disease. My sister's only son died of being bipolar. So I've had a son with schizophrenia and a nephew with bipolar. Whether, you know, my sister and I were lucky we had the, you know, same bad gene but it didn't penetrate through, I don't know. Won't know until we see it. And you know, I'll always sort of act as if I don't have it. It's certainly the most rational way to go through life.
					
						This penetrance of schizophrenia is long seen, you know, if your father is schizophrenic, you might think if it was a dominant gene you had a 50% chance of getting it. Yet the figure it's about 10% of a parent. And in identical twins where you know they have the same DNA, it's 50%. I think the problem is that if you asked if the people were slightly odd but not psychotic, not hospitalized, that the frequency of the twin having some problem might be 75%, but I can't speak with the assurance that I think - there's a weakness that you're subject to psychosis. And people don't really know whether - what aspect of mental illness might be associated with genetic changes where through methylation or other modification of the histones, reagents either become over-expressed or under-expressed. And looking at the - looking at brains that have been collected after the deaths of schizophrenic people, there seems to be an overabundance of expression of templates for a gene which is - does a lot of methylation. So - and one of the medicines taken to bring you out of mania is a histone deacetylase. So, you know, psychosis could be – an epigenetic change. So the gene may or might or might not make you schizophrenic depending on whether the epigenetic thing - and I think within five years, we'll move on from just sequencing the DNA but looking for methylation changes. The problem is that generally we just have blood from people with schizophrenia. You know, they're still living, we do not have a sample of their brain DNA. So schizophrenia in that sense will be harder to find the epigenetic changes which we know are behind some cancers. Then - so it's going to be a hard problem finding out why we have it, but you know, some people like to say because, you know, not every identical twin gets it, it's not genetic. But it's many more than, it's a much higher percentage than you would have by chance. So generally, the chance that if your brother is schizophrenic that you will be schizophrenic is again 10%, but identical twins is 50%. That doesn't quite add up to me. You know, I like sort of 20% and 50% or something like that. But there's something more than genes, but we think, you know, it's modification of genes, not just, you know, non-genetic changes to your brain.
					
						In the United States, all mentally ill people were called schizophrenic, whereas in the UK half were called bipolar. Now - so upon, you know, initial hospitalization for being ill for a sort of psychotic thing, you can't decide whether it's bipolar or schizophrenia by use of - insulin has no effect on schizophrenia. So - and when - and people who have schizophrenia are cognitively impaired generally. Their IQ is significantly lower than they would be if they didn't have the disease, and that often reflect a much impaired working memory. And so our son does not, at least now - never psychotic, but he has, he works with a diminished working memory, which leads to really an inability to plan for the next day or - he's just not future-oriented in the way you or I would be. And for many people whose intelligence is, say, at the lower end of the IQ, the changes which come from having schizophrenia would almost move you into the mentally retarded category. So schizophrenic people on the whole have to be cared for all their lives. And you know, when medicines came, there was a great rush to empty the hospitals and that you could have community centres and it may be cheaper for the governments to do this, but it's not clear that putting people in halfway houses, giving them money to have a slightly independent life is probably not as good as if, you know, they were with their families. But most family just don't have the resources, you know, with both parents working and so on, how do you handle it? So I think it's going to be - always remain an enormous burden on society until we find ways to cure the disease or to partially cure it. So that's, you know, I think if you had a sort of rational congressional hearing, that would be the starting point of discussion, that, you know, living with mental illness is more than the average family can handle today and we don't have the big snake pit hospitals anymore. So what's to be done? I'm sure many of the sort of shiftless, disorganized people that Mrs Thatcher would just have described as slackers - well, mentally ill. So you just - and it's a real problem for society is who cares for the people who can't care for themselves? And this may get worse as society gets more complicated and the skills needed to live in a city are, you know, you virtually couldn't exist unless you have a credit card. Well, what if you lose it all the time or- ? And I worry now that what seems to be an awful trend in the United States may be coming here too, that sort of lower middle class people seeing their standard of living diminish as sort of low skilled jobs increasingly disappear. And so people are - and I think there's just no doubt that we demand more. The effort level of where you have trained intelligent people, even the brightest may not be competent at handling all the information that they're thrust with.
					
						I think I was, you know, talking about whether the increasingly complex world in which everyone lives is making demands on - of people with lower intelligence that they can't easily handle. That is, we're - as we go more and more into a computer age, certainly if you're not - can't handle a computer, increasingly, you know, you can't be a shop assistant, you can't be - we will sort of declare that or find that we have a higher percentage of people that we now call unemployable or effectively become unemployable because they're not very functional. And this percentage may be higher than it was 100 years ago because life, you can't live by your physical strength. You can't, you know, you probably can't be a traffic warden unless you can use a cell phone. So - and right now the response to the increasing complexity of our lives is to say that we can solve this by keeping our children longer in school and making them learn more and, you know, raising the age of the school leavers and - hope it works, but I don't think we should in any way count on it, because IQ seems to be, as far as we can know, just stable through your life until modified by cognitive decline. That is, you don't get great change, you see. I was just in Edinburgh to meet Ian Deary who's in charge of the Scottish data on studying IQs over a life. In 1947, they did the IQs of everyone in Scotland and repeated it 20 years later, worried about cognitive decline, that people with lower IQs had more children and you might find a dysgenic component, but they found no change. So that was - but you know, logically, you'll say, maybe it's true. But you know, there wasn't big enough - whether the fact that the IQ stayed the same because people are - IQ clearly has to be affected by education on a short term. There's an effect called the Flynn Effect which seems to be real, that IQs have increased over time, but not in the basic core things that they say contributes to genes, things that correlate between different tasks, general intelligence. That has not increased much, but sort of - we can - we've been more stimulated early in childhood, we can handle more, which would mean that, you know, we can do things at an earlier age than we could before. But no one believes that the people today are really any brighter than they were 20 years ago. If you take it and look at it, it would just mean that the average person 20 years ago was almost mentally retarded. It wasn't true. So more, lots more remains to be seen, but I've been dominated by just observing the cognitive limitations of my son.
					
						Very hard for things to get into his long-term memory, once there they can be recalled and - so long-term memory, if it get there, is good, but his ability to handle lots of facts coming simultaneously, certainly shown by - he doesn't get any pleasure from what gives me great pleasure, sort of Beethoven's sonatas, things which- or later Prokofiev or something, where they've very subtle and you hear lots of sounds coming at you fast. It's not clear the brain can actually handle it. It becomes blurred. It's certainly important to know, because it's how you try and compensate for these limitations. In Rufus's case, he didn't want to go to school 'cause he couldn't do the work. We thought, you know, it was something much more complicated - he didn't want to go to school 'cause he felt he'd be rejected, etc. No, he just didn't want to be in a situation where he couldn't perform. And as he got older, that became harder for him to see. So - so I've always, when I was young my IQ was not that of a genius or anything, so I thought I would never, you know, be a highly successful academic though I wanted to be one. I think I took sort of security in the fact that biologists seemed to be a lot dumber than theoretical physicists. And so I was going into a field where you didn't have to be as bright. With time, I think my teachers thought I was all bright, even though I didn't feel it. So I'm sure if I had to take an IQ test, I wouldn't do very well, but I wasn't very good in actual visual things, turning things upside down and seeing symmetry, which you could say, well, how did you ever get the DNA thing? Well, the answer is Francis. He had the, you know, thought symmetry, whereas my strengths lay in reading comprehension. I could, you know, I seem to do that the fastest in my school, which is more a test that a girl does better. And then, you know, I learned that the reason why the IQs of boys and girls are the same when we have different strengths and weaknesses is they balance the test by giving you a combination of tests where girls do well and men do well. And so it can always be that way, but it doesn't of course tell you whether you would be good at a given field. So IQ is just a - and because boys develop earlier, you could argue that boys, I mean, the boys develop later, that you shouldn't compare a 12-year-old girl with a 12-year-old boy, you should compare a, you know, a 12-year-old boy with an 11-year-old girl because the girls develop sooner or something like that. If you kept tests with the same proportions boys who then have a slightly higher IQ, not much difference, but it's arbitrary to start with. You really have to look at the components before you want to predict people.
					
						So I've had a good memory, never took notes and sort of survived, often by looking at other people's notebooks, it's sort of unfair, but now I find my memory seems much worse I like to believe that it’s just that I’ve exceeded my storage capacity, which you don't know. But so much in success is, you know, associating one fact with another fact, something explains something. So having a lot stored in your brain and being able to bring it forth certainly, I think it has to be at the heart of a lot of creativity. You just, you try many more possibilities than other people. So maybe I have a high IQ for actually what is counted in making me successful, but I find, you know, when Seymour Benzer was, you know, 86 just before he died, I still found him a formidable intellect. He probably couldn't recall names as fast, but his brain was still very- And I was with Aaron Klug two days ago and he seemed so frail, coughing, but boy, when you got him talking about science, he was great. So he still, you know, was highly competitive at wanting to be first or, you know, his friends first. And so - you know, Sydney Brenner is still pretty formidable. And Francis didn't seem to fall off absolutely at all. He was, you know, had an article when he died of cancer at 86. So I'm hoping I can have fun out of science at least another five years. But it's very hard to find a role model who's in his 90s. One, there are few of them, but you know, the - Paul Zamecnik, who with Mahlon Hoagland did all the great work in the 50s on establishing in vitro systems for - he's still doing science at 95. He saw me at a Cambridge Massachusetts Legal Sea Foods and waved to me. And I went over, I didn't recognize him, and he's still at work. So you know, I have one role model if Paul can keep it up. And my tennis at 81 is certainly better than at any time in my life, so I'm almost able to play at a college level. And I think that's because I didn't play any really between the ages of 20 and 65 so I never wore my body out and I never tried to put a lot of top spin on it or something which, you know, Andy Murray's wrist is going.
					
						Oh, I found the base pairs, okay, simple, but in the morning, Francis came in and realized the symmetry of the base pair implied the chain flowed in opposite directions. You know, I might have seen that if I had longer, but he instantly sensed that. And he really, that was a key fact, because the space group that the crystal DNA gave, said, had two chains running in opposite directions, which Rosalind Franklin never appreciated the significance over the space group, so she never talked to Francis Crick and told him the space group. He would have told her because the haemoglobin crystals, particular ones he was investigating had that same symmetry where they were upside down and - so he wasn't studying chains, but the space group told him there would be two chains. Rosalind never understood that.Does that mean that you saw that it was a double helix and he - ?No, I was trying to build a double helix held together by base pairs, and once I learned that there were - the hydrogen atoms that had had a keto structure rather than enol, which changed the location of the hydrogens, that enabled me to build the base pairs. So I had been using the wrong structure trying to make base pairs and I was told they were wrong by the chemist Jerry Donahue, who, you know, if you really looked at it, we should have put his name on our paper because without him - there were two key facts, but you know, he had not the slightest interest in DNA. So we thanked him. And the rest of his life, he seemed to be pretty bitter.But nor did Rosalind Franklin have much interested in DNA- I know, which was again part of the reason she didn't get the structure. And Francis, I had certainly more, because, you know, from my, you know, learning of the Avery DNA phenomena probably when I was - I could have learned it when I was a junior from lectures by Sewall Wright. You know, DNA was the molecule I wanted to find the structure of. And most people would have been encouraged to focus on proteins 'cause they were enzymes and they were much more interesting. Most biochemists weren't thinking in terms of templates, whereas we wanted something which determined the order of the sequence, which was a problem that the biochemists had never really worried about. They were, really they were more chemists worrying about how the molecule functioned, that was where the reward was, which finally meant they had to go to the three dimensional level and they made, you know, hypotheses about active sites. But it was seeing the active sites really - promoted it.
					
						As my 80th birthday was approaching, I got funds to hold three meetings marking sort of my concerns now. One was, "How long should we be expected to work?" with my answer being probably 80 years old unless you're disadvantaged. And another meeting was called, "Can we make our brains work better?" which was, you know, it was thinking about cognitive decline, you know, that, can we continue to function? And the last meeting I wasn't sure whether to call it, "Will we ever cure most cancers?" or more optimistically, "How will we cure most cancers?"
					
						And so the cancer meeting turned out to be good and I think I chose the right title, "How will we cure most cancers?" So a number of people came and I think at the end of the meeting, I had, you know, talking about drug development and used in combinations that there was hope. And I think the chief reason for the hope is that attention has turned back to Otto Warburg's observation of lactic acid production in tumor tissue. And the significance was that increased glycolysis or diminished oxidation that lay at the root of it. And so I'm now almost manic about it, you know, manic in the sense that I think about it at night. You know, that we should just move fast, you know, perhaps we can, you know, I'll probably die of cancer unless someone gets a cure for it. So what seems to be, you know, the - and this comes out in part from the work of an old-fashioned biochemist named Peter Peterson at Johns Hopkins, whose work was post-doc with Albert Lehninger whose, you know, goal in life was finding the enzymes for oxidative phosphorylation, you know, until Peter Mitchell came along and said that you're not going to find enzymes, you're going to find pores and the whole proton pump thing. And - but he studied the Warburg Effect and the conclusion was that glycolysis runs much faster, maybe at least ten times faster in a growing cell, and that the cancer cell is just a growing cell, it doesn't have a distinctive biochemistry except for those that initiate, but the most important thing during growth is to make the precursors so that you can make the new molecules. The function of main use of glucose is not to make energy but just to provide two or three carbon intermediates which can then be used to build back big molecules and that energy production is, you know, the ATP made during glycolysis is pretty irrelevant because oxidative phosphorylation makes so much. So that's a key event in cancer cells is turning on glycolysis or in dividing cells. And one of the - now the best known signal I think is hypoxy-inducing factor, a transcription factor, which is normally a very unstabilized molecule but through a clever pathway it was stabilized in dimoriasis [?] with another relative and jumps on the DNA and turns on a number of enzymes, including a glucose transporter which brings the glucose into the cell and the amount of the glycolytic enzymes go up. And I think this is probably now a solid fact. And then Lew Cantley in his lab, Matthew Vanderheiden and the - another post-doc named Christophe that I didn't meet, made the, I think, very important observation that in growing cells, in cancer cells, the pyruvate kinase is spliced differently, the template for it, and that you get a splice variant found only in dividing cells. And this enzyme is inhibited by phosphotyrosines, which are sort of - signals for growth. So when you turn on, a hormone or something turns on a start of a signal to divide, phosphotyrosines appear. They block the pyruvate kinase and so the intermediates instead of being converted into pyruvate, get shunted off into the pentose phosphate shunt and used to make nucleotides, lipids, and so on. So there - is a few essential differences. The hexokinase Peterson showed translocates in the dividing cells to the surface of the mitochondria and attaches to the proton pump. So when the ATP would come out, it would immediately be seized by the hexokinase and glucose phosphorylate. So I think - and then Peterson found or one of his students had a molecule, 3-bromopyruvate, which they say inhibits hexokinase 2, which really stops the growth of hepatocellular carcinoma. You could say, well, stopping glycolysis, how would our heart beat and you're cutting off - and the answer is, you can do it. So you can, by a certain amount of inhibition of of glycolysis, the cells go into apoptosis. So you can sort of say that if a cell is halfway through cell division and suddenly doesn't have energy to complete it, the organism just sends out a signal to kill the cell rather than have a damaged cell around. That's sort of trying to make apoptosis look, you know, functional. There's the problem that, you know, if it kills all dividing cells, what do you do with the non-dividing cancer stem cells? You know, they may be there, but it might be enough that if you reduce the tumor to a really small size then the immunological responses against cancer cells which we know exist would be sufficient to kill it. So I think, again, you know, if someone told me I had a cancer that can't be cured, why not try a glycolytic thing? So Cantley and Craig Thompson from Penn and Vanderheiden formed a company to try and exploit inhibiting glycolysis and I'm told they've been quite successful in raising money to get it going.
					
						But everybody's now excited by glycolysis. There appeared several articles in the New York Times, one by Gina Kolata had written this article which certainly I didn't want which said I said cancer would be cured in two years. You know, it was a sort of survey of where are we going in cancer research and if you’d read the articles you'll just have a feeling that the only thing we can be sure of is that the drugs are more expensive, but that you'll still die. So you'll take drugs which might give you six months more life, cost a lot of money, but the grim fate still will hit you. And so I decided to write an article which I entitled "Cure Cancer Today, Not Tomorrow," saying that maybe we finally, with understanding the Warburg Effect, actually know everything that's wrong in cancer or we will soon know it because there's now big cancer genome projects in which we're just sequencing cancers and finding out exactly what's wrong with them. So we'll know all the sort of genetic causes, so all the things we'll want to inhibit and we'll see if anything new that can't be, you know, it's not apoptosis, it's not telomerase, so on. I would say the odds are at least 50% we finally have the big picture. Three years ago we didn't because Bob Weinberg in his very good book, the “Biology of Cancer”, you know, some 700 well illustrated pages. If you look in the index, there's not one reference to Warburg, glycolysis, or lactic acid, which I did have in the second edition of “Molecular Biology of the Gene”. I had increased glycolysis. So in 1970, I started, but then I lost faith in it and in the third edition of “Molecular Biology of the Gene”, Warburg and glycolysis was gone. I was, you know, happy writing, there was more material on tumor viruses and I wasn't thinking glycolysis at all. But the, you know, basic intermediary metabolism of cancer cells is very different from that of non-proliferating cells. So the article came out and a few scientists wrote me saying, you know, they liked it, but the people who really liked it were sort of intelligent outsiders who had read the series of articles about cancer and could only, you know, regret having read them 'cause it just leaves you sort of in despair as to where we're going despite spending all this money. So they liked the idea that I actually said it was important who President Obama appoints as the new head of the Cancer Institute. We actually need a general who believes he knows how to cure it and just tries and isn't really worried by a lot of people saying it's, oh, we need ten more years of knowledge, which is easy to say because then you don't fail, you're bound to get more knowledge. So – and - so I was in a major cancer institute recently and to my amazement, the director had just never heard of glycolysis. So, you know, the molecular biologists don't think biochemistry. And so the cancer field is now controlled by molecular biologists. You know, whereas, you know, when I was a boy, molecular biologists didn't exist and the big people that everyone respected were the good biochemists, starting with Warburg. And so you read a lot about how DNA is made and transcription and all that and, you know, the krebs cycle. I never learned it. There are a couple of places where if it’s interfered with it does cause cancer, it fits into a rational explanation. So I think anyone working on cancer ought to really know, think metabolism and this new field of metabolomics, where you try and describe all the small molecules present in a cell and quantitate them. How much glucose is there, or you know, how much of the glycolytic intermediates, what might be limiting? Just to get a feeling of the flow of cellular building blocks, how much, how you can stop them, which, you know, uses mass spec. It's sort of expensive biochemistry in its infancy, but - and I was told, I said, how many small molecules are there in the cell? And I think on the most complete metabolic chart, you get about 300. But they said there's 1200, so lots of pathways we probably don't know exist. And you know, just like, you know, now we have the human genome, there are lots and lots of proteins whose function has not been described. I think half the proteins' functions haven't been described, unknown. So you know, if I were, you know, doing a PhD, I'd do it metabolomics, you know, if you wanted to be a biochemist because you're likely to get a good job afterward, 'cause everyone will see the need for it.
					
						The latest thing that excited me is I was in San Francisco in a lecture before community oncologists, the ones where, you know, clinics in more isolated regions where there's not a big hospital or a big cancer hospital where most people are treated when they get breast cancer. And so one of the doctors was from Olympia in Washington seemed focused on vitamin D and asked me how much I was taking. And I said, feeling, you know, really 2000 units a day which has been increased twice with recommendation. Vitamin D, unlike vitamin C, really does seem to have anti-cancer effects. I don't know - there is a mechanism. I should know it, but it's not easily available. But he said I should be taking 50,000 once a week and that there is some evidence that people - the chance of recurrence of either breast or colon cancer is related to how much vitamin D you have. Now, I've been probably always been low in vitamin D because having Scotch-Irish ancestry I got a skin cancer in my 20s. I tried to avoid, you know, stopped wearing shorts, stopped playing tennis in midday or anything like that. And so it's very easy to be deficient in vitamin C. And the people who are really most at risk are those with dark skins, so - which have been adapted for the tropics where you need very dark skin so you don't get skin cancer, but that means you've got to stay in the sun longer than if you have white skin to make the same amount of vitamin D. And it could be the explanation of why there's a higher cancer frequency - most cancers have higher frequencies in blacks than white people. So you know, maybe just a vitamin D supplement which essentially causes no cancer could help a lot of people who are trying to avoid the sun.
					
						And out of the metabolic thing, there's the interesting fact that people with diabetes get less cancer or type II diabetes, and that's because they inhibit or the - they activate or break down the glucose and an enzyme called AMP-kinase. When your ATP is depleted, your - you have more AMP. There's a kinase which is specific for it. And it turns off protein synthesis and leads - yes, as well as inhibits a pathway in the glycolytic pathway. So it stops glycolysis and the argument is you just don't want to go through cell division and fail because there's no ATP. So it's a sort of sensor as to whether you've got good supply. So the bad thing in diabetes is glucose breakdown and the bad thing in cancer is glucose breakdown. Then after I learned I had low grade prostate cancer, I read a paper that said people with cardiac glycosides who take - get less cancer. And that is very good data. And it's because it stabilizes these - stabilize the - or, that’s it. If you get cancer, you need - glycolysis has it - so destabilizes HIF, the cardiac glycoside, it's hypoxia inducing factor. And the figures were about 30% less cancer, which is sort of to me exciting because we can actually give mechanisms for these and they're non-steroidal anti-inflammatories require the HIFFA [unclear]. People- they stopped the test because, you know, Celebrex might be damaging, but I'm taking Celebrex now, just because I - it seems to be a sort of proven anti-cancer link. Now, whether that would mean I don't have to take the cardiac glycosides, but there's very little money being spent, no sense of urgency of really studying cancer prevention. In fact, sort of all cancer research sort of now, you know, I'd say no one works on Saturday or Sunday. You know, the initial war on cancer, you know, and sort of my New York Times article said we should restart the war. You know, it should be a 24-hour-a-day thing, if we were really, you know, responding to what the people of the world want. If we could do something, why aren't we doing it faster? And in part because you're - no one's going to make money by preventing cancer. You know, it could be inexpensive. But the diabetic medicine, 37 cents [unclear]. Conceivably, for $5 a day you could take a good, reduce your incidence of, well, by about maybe 50%. So, you know, that's possible. I just want some general to lead the cancer effort, you know, someone who thinks he might win and, you know, doesn't mind opposition. But we don't have a general yet. And you know, after my embarrassment when I said cancer was going to be cured in two years, they were wanting to make a public announcement that, you know, people could be - you know, are afraid to risk their reputations by saying that something can really happen and, you know, crying wolf when you can't do anything. But it'd be better to fail than do nothing. So - and you know, it's, you know, just as a matter - there's no newspaper, you know, writers who really know enough to handle the issue. You know, they can write with much greater assurance about what we should be doing in Afghanistan and you can have the pros and cons. But you never see a level of real discussion that we should be doing something or we shouldn't do it, which means we really suffer from the - not having people who can understand us. And - I mean, magazines like Nature could do it, but they don't, probably 'cause they don't want to be controversial. But you know, they could have a column by someone who, you know, the editor says he's bright but I don't agree with him. But we sort of have a belief that as scientists we should, you know, only say something when we're absolutely sure, rather than in a true life situation, you have a gut feeling maybe 80% you're going to succeed or, you know, you can sometimes see your chance of success at odds of a few percent, because of lack of knowledge. You know, you don't want to commit yourself. But I'd say, I would willingly risk losing with the thought that I could, that the odds are better than 50% I could have good results, you know, either in preventing cancer which is the best thing or in curing it once it comes into existence. Conceivably, you know, low doses of molecules that you would need to cure advance cancers, much lower doses would prevent them from ever coming into existence. But it takes a certain amount of guts to - but you know, Jonas Salk and Albert Sabin had guts. Yes, there've been failure before, so you know, they both wanted to be heroes. And I don’t think I wanted to be a hero. You know, I - because of the death of my uncle from melanoma, you know, early on I wanted to, you know, become a scientist and cure cancer. So, you know, I think it's just the horror of seeing other people suffer, not that you want the personal glory of doing it, but just to - you just don't like suffering.
					