james.lovelock

Born in Britain in 1919, independent scientist and environmentalist James Lovelock has worked for NASA and MI5. Before taking up a Medical Research Council post at the Institute for Medical Research in London, Lovelock studied chemistry at the University of Manchester. In 1948, he obtained a PhD in medicine at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and also conducted research at Yale and Harvard University in the USA. Lovelock invented the electron capture detector, but is perhaps most widely known for proposing the Gaia hypothesis. This ecological theory postulates that the biosphere and the physical components of the Earth form a complex, self-regulating entity that maintains the climatic and biogeochemical conditions on Earth and keep it healthy.

I was turned when I was only four years old. It happened because my father gave me for Christmas a box full of bits of wire and a bell, lights and other things. The kind of stuff that kids nowadays get in a kit. But in those days, that would be about 1923 or '24, kits just didn't exist and he dreamt it up himself. And it was by far the best of presents I'd ever received. And it enthralled me and I remember pestering my relatives and even the postman asking, 'Why do you need two wires to send electricity along when gas or water requires only one pipe'? And nobody, of course, could answer the question, and I think that it was that that made me realise that if wanted to know about the world I'd have to find out for myself. Perhaps I should add my father wasn't... a well-educated man. Indeed, he grew up in the country, he was born in 1872 on the Downs above Wantage. And things were very primitive in those days, he had no education at all and taught himself to read and write when he went to London in his 20s. And I have in my files a certificate from the Borough Polytechnic saying that he's literate. But it was a long time ago, 130 odd years and things were very different then.

The next step in my science education was when the whole family, we moved to Brixton in South London and my mother and father ran an art shop there. It's a crazy thing to do because of all the neighbourhoods in which to sell up market stuff like that nowhere was worse than Brixton, but they were a bit crazy in some ways.
And my mother was a great reader and she took me along when I was about seven years old to the Brixton library and I used to pick up books, at first there on science fiction and that kind of thing, like HG Wells and Jules Verne and so on. But soon I moved onto hard stuff and discovered they had a basement in the library which was full of textbooks on science. And by the time I was eight I was avidly reading Wade's Organic Chemistry and Jeans' Astronomy and Cosmogony and Soddy's The Discovery of Radium. And for biology my favourite was JBS Haldane, especially the experiments he did on himself. And in that I was interested to discover that he was also John Maynard Smith's hero. Maynard Smith was lucky enough to go to work with him, but all I had was his books which were wonderful inspiration.
But all of that reading turned me onto science and gave me a kind of grounding right the way across without any disciplinary barriers. And when I went to grammar school I found the science taught was almost unbelievably dull and took very little notice of it. And that kind of started me out in... in science and I kept an interest in it and I think you've got to have that. You've got to be turned onto something, if it's going to be your life's work. It's not something you can just sort of decide to do in your teens and think this'll be a good career. It's got to be a vocation and when I was young I wanted nothing more than to be able to work in a lab for the rest of my life. That was my, going to be my life.
I was lucky because my parents were fairly poor. Their art shop completely collapsed in the depression and there was no way that they could afford to have me go to university. It wasn't a matter of getting a... a scholarship there or a grant to go to university, it was the matter of they needed my income and I left school to support the family. And so, I got a job as a technician for a firm of consultants in London and I was very lucky, it was run by a man who looked a bit like Mr Pickwick. He was rather plump and very amiable and affable and he spoke with an accent like the old actor George Sanders. I don't know whether you can remember him. Very British upper-class kind of accent, very plummy. And, but he was a wonderful teacher and he taught me that science is really serious, that if you're doing analyses and, they actually, what they worked for was the photographic industry. They covered all aspects from the gelatine used to make the film to the dyes used for colour photography and so on right the way across the board. They took on odd jobs like making fingerprint powders for Scotland Yard and so on. And, anyway, he taught me that I must get all the analyses I did for him absolutely right. There was to be no fudging and no halfway, and if I was just to tell him because it was okay if I thought I had made a mistake. That didn't matter. The worst thing I could do would be to put in a false answer. And after months and months of training I began to realise how right he was.





An interesting thing happened when I got to Manchester that revealed the importance of the training I got as a technician. I'd only been about a month in the department there and the professor who was Alexander Todd, a very famous chemist who became a Nobel Prize winner later and after that became Lord Todd, President of the Royal Society is one of our most distinguished scientists. Anyway, I was lucky to have him as a young professor. After I had been there a month he suddenly called me into his office and said, 'Lovelock, you've cheated. I'm angry we've let you in on your second year with special consideration and you've let me down'. And I thought, what on Earth is he on about? And he went ranting on and he said, 'You're very stupid'. He said, 'You turned in the results of a student exercise that were exactly right. You should have known that students never get the right answer. And you're stupid because most students who do this kind of thing copy the correct result from the invigilator's book down and pretend they've done the experiment, move it a little way from the right answer just so we don't realise what they've done.' And it took me nearly 20 minutes to explain to him that I was a pro at that particular analysis which was the amount of bromide ion in a solution in water - just the kind of thing that was done for photographic chemistry - and I could get the right answer every time. He just still didn't believe me and it wasn't until two weeks later he came to see me do a gravimetric analysis of the sulphate ion, which is much more difficult that he realised there was a difference between somebody who had been taught to do science professionally and the average student. And I think we both wondered then what the university training was all about. Was it producing scientists or was it producing people who could pass examinations in science, which is a very different thing. And that particular little episode came back to haunt me very many years later. I was involved with the discovery of the chlorofluorocarbons in the air which led to, of course, all the concern about the depletion of the ozone layer and so on. Now, I'd made my measurements as accurately as I could, I was the first person to measure them, but I didn't think they were all that accurate, I thought they were about 20% because measuring things at the part per trillion level is very, very difficult. But, American scientists all claimed that they could measure these things down to 1% accuracy. I was very impressed, I knew they probably got very high-tech apparatus compared with my home-made equipment and they must be very good. And it went on for a while until the National Bureau of Standards in America grew rather suspicious of what was going on. And did a survey of all the labs that were claiming to measure chlorofluorocarbons in the atmosphere and they found that far from being 1% accurate their results scattered over 400%. It was a result mostly of, not always, but in some bad cases of scientists confusing precision with accuracy. Many people do. You know, for example, I can say that your weight is precisely 91 pounds on my weighing machine. It obviously isn't, but the weighing machine will show it precisely as that every time you stand on it. That's precision and inaccuracy. On the other hand, I could have a variable weighing machine that gave you a weight of anything between 91 and 250 pounds, but somewhere in the middle, if you took enough readings, it was accurate and it's important to recognise this difference and I'm afraid a lot of scientists don't, probably because of the nature of university teaching. It's not important to them to know it. Anyway, it all took me back to my experience with Professor Todd and the teaching in universities, and I think this is a problem in science generally.

I left university at about the age of 21 and was exceedingly lucky to get a job at the National Institute for Medical Research in London which in those days was at Hampstead in an old disused hospital. Now, the reason I was lucky was that my professor, who I've already mentioned, Todd, at Manchester, happened to have as his father-in-law Sir Henry Dale who was director of that institute and apparently Sir Henry Dale had asked him 'Do you have a young scientist who could take, available for a job that we have here'? And for some reason Todd recommended me. I don't know whether it was the cheating episode that made him, because a got a very poor degree only, a bottom second from Manchester and they normally only employed Oxbridge people there.
Anyway, I got this job and it was wartime then of course in 1941, and academic science had gone to the winds. It was all ad hoc problems to deal with the war. Problems that had to be solved yesterday if possible. And one of these problems that landed in our court was how, methods of preventing burns to service personnel under battle or naval condition, naval battle conditions. Because burns are very disabling injuries, but they're very frequent during warfare. And one of the first things we needed to know was what's the heat radiation flux that causes first, second or third-degree burns. First, second and third-degree, of course, are intensities of burning. A first-degree burn is not much more than a reddening of the skin which will heal spontaneously. Second-degree produces blisters and third-degree destroys the top surface of the skin completely.
Anyway, we wanted to know the radiation flux and they told us to find it out by exposing the skin of shaved rabbits to radiant heat at different magnitudes to produce this effect. My colleague, a chap called Owen Lidwell, I looked at one another and thought, oh we can't do that, it's… It might be alright for biologists, but it's much too cruel a thing to do. Even though the animals were anesthetised, they'd have a lot of pain when they came to. And so we thought, well we can't let anyone else do it, we have to do it on ourselves. And we did and it was exquisitely painful at first, as you can imagine, but a very peculiar thing happened. I don't know whether it was the fascination with the results we were getting or whether there was more to it, but we both found that the pain of burning gradually diminished as we went on doing and towards the end it was not more than the pressure. And to this day I can hold a red-hot object against my skin and not feel any sense of pain. It could burn of course, I don't like doing it, but it'll… it's not a painful experience. It doesn't work with toothache.

The burning experiments brought back to my mind my childhood hero, JBS Haldane because one of the things that had impressed me when I read his books when I was young were the experiments he did on himself. For example, he swallowed more and more ammonium chloride to try and titrate himself, to himself more acid. If you swallow ammonium chloride, the ammonia part of the chloride gets burned up and you're left with hydrochloric acid inside you.
He said he thought his liver fizzed in the course of it. I thought he was a very brave man to do it. So we were in a sense fulfilling that childhood ambition.

Scientists nowadays are, I think, much hampered by health and safety regulations. These are fine in the workplace to protect work people from dangerous chemicals, radiation and so forth and are a great advance towards the end of this century. But scientists, I think, should be responsible for their own safety. They should know their job and be professionals to a point where they can handle dangerous materials without risk. After all, most of the hazards that scientists confront with, for example radioactive materials or dangerous chemicals are… represent no greater threat to life than driving a car, and we're expected to be able to do that safely, so why not? Especially since it's their job. I feel it's a serious matter that scientists are hampered because much of the work I did in the old days, which has been very useful subsequently, would have been impossible with the restrictions there are today on what a scientist can do.

After my first wartime experiences with the Medical Research Council, I continued working for them for 20 years in all. And it was a kind of long, extended apprenticeship in certain ways because it covered many branches of science. I worked in the physiology division of the National Institute, in the Virology and Bacteriology division, in Experimental Biology and I finished up in the Biochemistry division before I left in 1961.
And during that time, I encountered a wide range of problems, and science in those days, that was the 1940s to 1960s, was very different from now in other ways than safety regulations. For example, scientists were expected to invent and make their own apparatus. There was very little money available for the purchase of equipment, but ample facilities were provided at the National Institute to make your equipment. You could either do it yourself or ask the chaps in the workshops to build it for you. And there was also a very up-to-date electronics workshop that would help you with building amplifiers and things like that.
Now, this had a rather interesting consequence. Because we couldn't just buy things off the peg like they expect to do now, we had to invent, and this meant that automatically our equipment was 5 years in advance of anything on the market because that's how long it takes a manufacturer to put a new idea into the market place through R&D [research and development] and production and so on. So, we were ahead of everybody and one of the important things that was invented at the National Institute at Mill Hill was the science of gas chromatography. This was invented by Archer Martin and his colleague, Tony James. It was an invention so important that it got Archer Martin a Nobel Prize, quite deservedly so too.
And it probably has done more worldwide to advance industry than almost any invention during those periods. Now, the gas chromatographs that they made was a splendid instrument and answered a lot of problems but it was rather insensitive, it could only handle relatively large quantities of samples. When I say large I'm talking about a milligram, but in biochemistry and biology you occasionally have situations like if you want to know what's inside a single cell. You're dealing not with milligrams, nor even micrograms, but picograms or nanograms and those are very small quantities indeed.
So, I got involved with him in the invention of much more sensitive detection devices, and the first successful one I made was a thing called an argon detector that used a gas argon, it's a rare gas that's present in about 1% in the atmosphere, but it's got intriguing electronic properties that make it very suitable for the detection of traces of compounds in the stream of gas coming from the chromatograph column.
Now, in the course of this invention I accidentally stumbled on another detection device, which I'll call the electron capture detector, or ECD as most people call it, and this device was much more than just a sensitive method of measuring small quantities of chemicals. It was rather special, it was the most sensitive device, chemical analytical device in existence. It could measure down to 100,000 molecules. Which is a tiny, tiny amount of material, so small for example that if somebody spilt a litre bottle of a chemical it could measure in Japan and let it evaporate into air, we could pick it up here in Devon two weeks later, and you could pick it up anywhere in the world with this device in two years, the time it takes to mix with the atmosphere. So, it was, it was and still is one of the most exceedingly sensitive things ever. But it was much more remarkable than that, it was also uniquely sensitive to nasty things. It detected all the pesticides, all the carcinogens, all of those sorts of chemicals, but nothing else. And using it, scientists in other parts of the world were able to demonstrate that the pesticides like DDT [dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane] and so on were spread throughout the whole global environment. You could find them in the fatted penguins in Antarctica or in the milk of nursing mothers in Finland. And this was the base data that gave Rachel Carson the information that enabled her to write her famous book, Silent Spring, which I think everyone agrees was the start of the green movement and the environmental awareness that we now have. It was the device, the electron capture detector, that made us realise that pollution was global, not just local in scale. But it didn't stop there, because several years later it demonstrated that the chlorofluorocarbons were present in the atmosphere, because they were yet another thing that it could detect, and were building up in concentration and this led to the recognition that the ozone layer was in danger, which about… which I think everybody knows.

What is the meaning of life? Well, this is a question that has haunted me throughout the whole of my scientific career. It started when I was working at the National Institute for Medical Research at Mill Hill in the 1950s. And I was working in, at that time, in the Division of Experimental Biology and the task that I had been set was to find out what was the nature of the damage suffered by living cells when they are frozen and thawed, and how do you prevent it. Now, my biologist friends were working with all sorts of living cells and even whole animals a little bit later. I decided that the best model cell to use, to find out the nature of freezing damage, was the red blood cell. You know, the little red thing that swims around in your blood and carries oxygen. I chose it because very conveniently if a red blood cell gets damaged or bust, it lets out its red pigment and you can easily measure this quantitatively, and you get accurate results for your experiments. And I happily went on and produced a couple of papers on this, which seemed to answer the whole question of the nature of the damage caused by freezing and thawing. Indeed, the second paper in that series became a citation classic, the most cited paper in biology. But my biologist friends and people around immediately said, 'But you've wasted your time, and you wasted our time. You should never have chosen red blood cells, they're not alive! They can't reproduce, so they're not alive. You should have chosen a living cell to do your work with. You'll have to do it all over again'. So, I moved on to work with – being a fairly compliant sort of character – to work with spermatozoa. I said, 'Are these alive'? And they said, 'Oh yes of course they are the units of reproduction'. Of course, I think they're crazy because spermatozoa don't divide or split. They're only part of a process. But nevertheless, they were quite happy with that and you could see them swimming. I thought that the biologists were being a little bit dogmatic about their definition of life being solely determined by reproduction. I thought that metabolism and the ability to self-regulate to keep itself in a constant state in the face of attrition were also attributes of life just as important. And it so happens that red cells do have enzymes, they do have systems, they keep their internal contents exactly constant, they self-regulate. In other words, they behave just like a living organism. That they can't reproduce to me seemed to be a lesser matter.
Well, this business was to come back to haunt me again many years later when I introduced the concept that the Earth is a self-regulating system, just like one of these red blood cells. It can regulate its climate and its chemical composition and biologists, notably Richard Dawkins, who writes wonderfully well, jumped on this instantly. 'But this man is saying the Earth is alive, this is ridiculous! It cannot reproduce, it cannot compete with other planets and so become selected as the best planet', and so on. And, I'm afraid this has haunted me for a long time because I think he's still saying this, although his biologist colleagues, particularly his mentor William Hamilton, who is now sadly dead, had begun to see that indeed the Earth does self-regulate and the only quarrel now is on the meaning of life. Is it alive or is it not alive? I'm inclined to think that it is alive in certain ways. They won't have it because it doesn't reproduce. That's a small matter. The important thing about the self-regulating Earth, and that now that most scientists agree about it, is that we have to understand that the Earth is a system that includes the life on it just as much as it includes the geology and geophysics and all the rest of it. If we are to live through this century and not perturb it too far so that conditions change and become uncomfortable for our civilisation.

The notion of the Earth as a self-regulating system, what's subsequently became called the Gaia Hypothesis and then Gaia Theory, all arose at the Jet Propulsion Labs in California in America. And the way it happened was this: towards the end of my time at the National Institute for Medical Research in London, I grew more and more fretful about wishing to go off and work as an independent scientist. By independent I mean working like an artist works or a novelist works - working from home, not doing science in a lab. There were many reasons for this, one of them was tenure. I had tenure and I could see sort of tramlines of continuity going all the way down to retirement and then the grave. And this was appalling. And I thought I can't spend the rest of my life just coming along here every day and just going on like this. It was, yet it was the, probably one of the best institutes to work in the world has ever known, conditions in work were ideal, our pay was better than, was so good it was better than the average American pay at that time. We had everything that we needed and a great degree of freedom. And my problem was, I couldn't think of a way to tell my bosses that I wanted to leave it and go off and work on my own.
Also, it isn't the easiest thing to do when you've a family of four children as we had then. And you want to go off into the uncertainty of freelance science life, little bit irresponsible even. And then suddenly out of the blue, while I was fretting about these things, came a letter from a gentleman, Abe Silverstein, who happened to be Director of Space Flight Operations for NASA. Now in 1961, hardly anybody knew what N, A, S, A stood for, the National Aeronautical and Space Administration. It was only three years after Sputnik and long before men went on the moon. And in this letter, he said would I be interested in becoming the experimenter on the forthcoming lunar surveyor mission, which was to analyse the surface of the moon. He'd heard about my sensitive detection devices and would I join them to apply them for this thing? Now, here was my ticket of leave. I could go to my boss, a man I greatly respected called Sir Charles Harrington and say, show him this letter and know that he would agree that this was something I just couldn't turn down. And he did, he was very understanding and didn't look on it as a brain-drain, but more as an opportunity for one of his scientists to join in with an exciting enterprise.

Anyway, I went over to California, I didn't work full time there. I took a temporary job in Houston at Baylor College of Medicine and used to commute to Jet Propulsion Labs [JPL] from there on a kind of monthly basis. And at first I worked with the engineers and scientists on the surveyor missions projects, but gradually I got drawn in to the work being done by the biologists to detect life on Mars, because they were preparing then to, even as far back as the early 60's, to send some sort-of mission to Mars, mainly to see if there was life there. Everybody believed the science fictional idea of a living planet. And I, of course, got very interested in this. And to my sort-of disappointment, I found that the biologist's experiments, that they were proposing to send for Mars, were exceedingly unrealistic. What they had in mind were experiments that would detect life on Earth as we know it, but they assumed that whatever was on Mars was just the same as there was here. Or, or, worse than that, was the sort of life that grew in the Mojavi Desert, which was just at the back of JPL and very convenient for going to. And I thought, no this won't do at all. So I voiced my doubts and I said, 'I think you need a more general experiment, one that will detect life whatever its form, not one to look for specific things like a given micro-organism or birds or something like that, something very positive'. And they got very annoyed at this. In fact, most of my encounters with biologists lead to them getting very annoyed and I was called over the coals before one of the senior people in JPL, a man called Mcgrublian [?] and he said, 'I hear that you don't think much of the life detection experiments', and I said, 'No, I think they're a waste of money, you shouldn't send them to Mars'. So he said, 'Well, what would you do instead'? which is a kind of question that raises the prospect of hanging. And I said, 'Well, give me three days and I'll come back to you with a general life detection experiment'. And he said, 'Right, I'll expect you here on Friday'. So, I was up against it, and I had to think hard and I thought hard and I came up with a whole set of experiments that Friday and I went into him and I said, 'I think the best experiment you could do to find Mars, life on Mars, would just to analyse the chemical composition of its atmosphere'.          
You see, you would expect a planet to be fairly close to chemical equilibrium at a state that's called a biological steady state. That's, the only thing that's stirring it up is sunlight. And, all the chemicals that have out gassed will be fairly close to equilibrium. But if you've got life on a planet, that can't be because the life will be obliged to use the atmosphere as a source of raw materials and also a place to deposit its waste products. And Mars is a very favourable case because it doesn't have anything an atmosphere. There's no oceans or anything there, as far as we can see. So, it's bound to change the atmosphere if there's life there. And he grew very excited about this, and said, 'That sounds like a great experiment. Go back home', which I was due to do shortly, 'and, you know, send in a report on it'. Well, I sent in a report not only to him, but also a letter to Nature, which was the first paper, I think, on life detection and it was called, The Physical Basis for Life Detection Experiments and it was published in Nature in 1965.
For quite a while NASA got very enthusiastic about it and indeed so enthusiastic that I found myself in almost a sort of unofficial lead experimenter on the next Martian mission, which was called Voyager in those days, and I was getting more and more scared as they were sort of dispersing hundreds of millions of dollars to all sorts of creepy people that were coming out of the woodwork with wonderful experiment. But fortunately, Congress decided they wouldn't send it after all. And I was relieved and able to go back to science.

In the course of that life detection experiment work, there was a day at Jet Propulsion Labs in 1965 when I was in an office overlooking the hills at the back there, and with the people present were Carl Sagan, now sadly dead, and Diane Hitchcock, a very competent philosopher who was advising on life detection experiments, and myself. Oh, yes, there was one other person, that was an astronomer called Lou Kaplan and Lou ha just brought in the latest results from the Pic du Midi Observatory in France, which had a multiplex interferometer attached to the telescope that could analyse the compositions of Mars' and Venus's atmospheres quite remarkable. Now, it so happens that that interferometer was invented by a friend of mine, Peter Felgate [?], who lives only a few miles from here. But what the results showed was that both Mars and Venus had atmospheres dominated by carbon dioxide and very close to the equilibrium state and therefore according to my theory, Mars was lifeless.
But in order to sort of prove the notion one had to look at a life-bearing planet and compare it. And of course the Earth's the only one we know and when you look at the Earth's atmosphere and compare it with Mars, it's astonishingly different. Mars looks like the exhaust gas that comes out of your car - mostly carbon dioxide. Very little oxygen, bit of nitrogen. The Earth's atmosphere, you've got this strange mixture of lots of oxygen mixed with hydrocarbons like methane. It's the sort of gas that goes into the intake manifold of your car, a reactive gas. In fact, if the composition were different it would be combustible or explosive.
And this begun to intrigue me as I sat thinking there, and I thought, well if you've got an unstable atmosphere like the Earth, hydrocarbons and oxygen mixed, and other gases that are stable, how on Earth does it stay constant? Something must be regulating it. And then it suddenly dawned on me. Well, obviously life produces these gases, life is regulating it. And sure, nobody said it very much, they mostly tended to be somewhat doubtful, you know, they thought this was a flight of fancy.
But then Carl Sagan, when I shared an office with him, said to me afterwards, he said you know, I don't agree with what you've said, but there might be something in it because did you know that one of the great puzzles of astronomy is how is the Earth kept a constant temperature when the sun has been warming up steadily since it begun? The sun was something like 25-30% cooler when life started on the Earth nearly four billion years ago than it is now. So, why wasn't the Earth frozen then and all the evidence suggests that it wasn't, or if it was warm enough then why isn't it boiling now, sort of thing. And, so immediately in my mind there came the thought, oh, so if life regulates the chemistry of the atmosphere then it must be regulating the climate also. And that was when the notion of the self-regulating system was, you know, firmly established.
Now, when I got back to England, living in the village called Bowerchalke in Wiltshire in those days, a near neighbour was the novelist William Golding. And most people don't know that he was trained in science when he was at university. And he was very interested in what was going on at JPL and those other places and we would often talk about it, and one day on a walk with him I told him about this idea of a self-regulating planet and he turned to me and said, 'Well if you're going to produce ideas, you know, about the whole Earth, large like that you better give it a proper name'. So I said, 'What do you suggest?' He said 'You call it Gaia, that's the right name'. We walked on for 20 minutes talking at crossed purposes because I thought he'd said G, Y, R, E, one of the great whirls that feed back on themselves and that would have been a natural thing to think about because it's a fed-back system I was talking about. And then it suddenly dawned on both of us that we… We were talking to the wind. And Bill said, 'No, no, no, no I mean Gaia the classical Greek goddess. And of course then all was light.
And I was very grateful to him, it was not often you get a wordsmith like Golding to give you the name for your theory and… but again, the biologists have hated it. And John Maynard Smith said at a recent Royal Society meeting, 'What a dreadful name to call a theory'. I don't know why they don't like it. You see, somebody might think it was metaphor envy. After all, the biologists, very hot at metaphors. I mean there's a selfish gene, the spiteful gene - they make a big thing of that - and I could go along and say how ridiculous, how could a gene possibly take thought and be selfish, it's an absurd idea, it's an anthropomorphic notion. But, I don't, because I think it's a jolly good metaphor, I think it has taught millions of people around the world, because Richard Dawkins writes so well, just the very nature of Darwinian Natural Selection. I think it's a splendid metaphor. So why are they so unkind to me with my metaphor of the living Earth? I don't think that the Earth reproduces. I never did. I think the living Earth is no different from the selfish gene. They're both good metaphors.

Doing science and becoming a famous scientist requires just as much dedication as becoming a…a famous painter or a novelist and quite often demands an awful lot of work on one's own. It's perfectly okay to have a career in science and an awful lot of scientists has done this, that way. But you have to recognise if you take on science as a way of making money and having a nine to five job, you are unlikely to sort of make many waves. It's not impossible, but it's not the same as really having a vocation. And that's the important point. You do have to have a sense of vocation. You have to be turned onto science very young, I think preferably before puberty, because that's the time when the young mind absorbs facts and methods just like a sponge and loves doing so and all of that information gathered in those young days becomes… not only do you remember it for life, but it's also immediately accessible. It's like the machine language of a computer. It's something that it can immediately use for practical purposes, and I think that turning on process, whether you're going to be an artist, a scientist or, is very important and it's why primary education is the most important education of all. I think what comes after puberty hardly matters at all. I don't mean that what we do after puberty doesn't matter, I mean what one's taught doesn't matter. That's the first kind of think I would advise a young scientist to have in mind.
The second kind of thing, which is equally important and I found important, is that you must treat your science professionally. And university training alone is not enough. It's a good idea to get as much hands-on experience by working as even a technician in some branch of science to get the feel of it, what it really means. Now this is understood in most other walks of life, but oddly in science it doesn't seem to be understood. I mean nobody would expect a photographer just to buy a camera and rush out and take pictures. He's got to do quite a bit of training before he can do it quite well, and the same is true of science.
So, that's the second important thing, is getting the professional attitude towards what you're going to do in your science in your life. Now, the next important thing I would advise any young scientist is that don't for a moment assume that you've got to have lots of money to do science, or that you need very expensive equipment and so on. To start with, there is an immense amount of science out there in the published literature, which you can see for yourself on the internet or anywhere else that has unanswered questions. You can start reading it and start thinking about it. Maybe if you think hard enough you'll find the answer. And that's the way many things are done. And if you consider the truly great scientists like Darwin or Einstein, they didn't have expensive equipment, they didn't spend vast sums of money. Einstein just had his pencil and paper and worked out his theories in his spare time when he was working daily as the clerk in the patent office at Bern. Darwin had a job as a naturalist on a navy ship and had he… the navy employed a dumber naturalist nothing would have come of it, but they might have been just as satisfied with the results. Darwin's work of course came from his mind, from his observations and has enriched all of us. And this is generally true, I think, the more money that is spent on a scientific, often the less use comes from it.
It employs lots of people of course, provides employment for scientists, but this isn't necessarily getting very far ahead. Let me give you my own example. I'd been much engaged with space research during my life and I actually have two bits of hardware sitting on Mars now in the Viking space craft that was sent there in 1975. All of the science work that I did that produced the prototypes of that, those essential components, was done in a cottage laboratory in Bowerchalke in Wiltshire at almost zero cost. So it is isn't necessary, even with space research, to have a huge expenditure or giant grants. You can do all sorts of things, and I would put out a challenge to young scientists around now: can any one of you, with no more funding than social security will give, really make a splash in the puddle of science? I think it could be done.

When you've got through the long years of university training and you've got your PhD and you're a real scientist, how should you start to tackle your first problem? Well, I think a very useful thing to do is to challenge the dogma, the conventional wisdom that your colleagues around you tell you is the basis of the science of the problem you're working on. Challenging conventional wisdom is the way to make waves in science. And let me give you a very simple example. When I first went to work for the Medical Research Council in 1941, one of the problems we had was how do aerial disinfectants works? The reason we were interested, there was great fear there would be influenza epidemics under the packed conditions of tube shelters in London during wartime. And they used to go around spraying the air with aerial disinfectants to kill any airborne organisms that were present. And one of the problems was how do they work and can we make better ones? And the conventional wisdom was that the organisms were killed by droplets of the disinfectant floating in the air colliding with them. Well, for some reason this seemed to me very dubious. I thought, I don't believe it, it doesn't make sense. And I did the sums and it soon came out that, knowing how many disinfectant particles and how many bacteria were floating in the air, that it would days if not weeks for collisions to occur. And yet we knew from experiments that the organisms were killed in seconds or at the most minutes. So something different was happening - what? And it was some… a few fairly simple experiments, I was able to show that the organisms were killed by the vapor of the disinfectant distilling over from the disinfectant droplets onto the bacteria and thereby killing them. And with that knowledge I was able to invent very much more effective aerial disinfectants that were very much more toxic to organisms and less toxic to people. In fact, the best one turned out to be simply lactic acid, which is a natural component in your body, but if you vaporise it in the air it kills an organism faster than anything.
And so, that's challenging the conventional wisdom and of course that has been my pitch throughout most of my lifetime. When I was working on freezing, the nature of freezing damage, the conventional wisdom was that cells or tissues or whole animals are damaged when they are frozen by the ice crystals penetrating the cells and sort of mechanically breaking them up. Indeed, they had film showing this happening on a microscope, freezing microscope, freezing microscope slide of the ice crystals penetrating this way. It all seemed very real. Being my usual sceptical self I thought I wonder if this true? And I imagine myself a cell being frozen. I thought, what happens? Well water is going to, when it starts forming ice crystals it'll form small ones at first which shouldn't be too intrusive, but it's going to separate as a pure substance, it always does; ice is pure water. So what happens to the things that are left behind? Cells float in a slightly salt solution, the salt would become concentrated and quite rapidly it became clear to me that in no time in freezing, the salt concentration would rise to the level of pure brine. At minus 20 it's five molar. Five is the, you know, saturated salt. And this is what kills all cells very rapidly. And a few experiments demonstrated that you can account for virtually all of the damage that occurred to living cells when they were frozen under the conditions that my colleagues were freezing, which is slow freezing by the concentrating of the salts in the solution. The ice crystals had nothing whatever to do with it.
And this led in practice to the invention of better antifreeze agents to prevent it. And one of them was dimethyl sulfoxide which has been used in freezing eggs and things, for keeping - human eggs - for keeping them for long-term for fertilisation procedures. And so on. And of course, in the work I did on the self-regulating Earth, the Gaia Theory, the great conventional wisdom of biology and of geology, come to that, is that organisms adapt to their environment. That is the great dogma of the subject. Well, it's something to think about. It assumes that the environment is a given, determined by the chaps who work in the other building of the university, the geologists, not by the biologists. The geologists, of course, assume that the biology does nothing to their evolution of the rocks, that the two processes are quite separate.
And the way to look on Gaia Theory is that it's a new theory of evolution, which sees the evolution of the organisms and the evolution of the Earth, the rocks, the air and the ocean, not as separate processes, but as two tightly coupled processes, evolving together. You see, everything alive changes the environment. You can't help it. You breathe out carbon dioxide you're changing the atmosphere. When you breathe in oxygen you're taking the oxygen away. Just with two examples everything alive is influencing its environment. So, we are not evolving in a geological given, we're evolving in a world that our ancestors have made. You could say we're evolving in a world which is made of the breath, the bones and the blood of those that went before us. And this comes from challenging the dogma that things just adapt to that Earth that's there, a given.

When I was working as an independent at the village of Bowerchalke in Wiltshire in the, it'll be in the 1960s, late 1960s and early 70s, I used to notice that during the summertime the atmosphere became very hazy, visibility ranges dropped to only a few hundred yards sometimes when the wind was from the East. From Europe.
And I'd been in Los Angeles, and I knew what smog was and it looked and smelt to me exactly like smog. I asked my friends who work for the meteorological office if it was possible there was smog in England because we didn't believe in smog here in those days. There was only winter smogs in a place like London when coal burning and that had all stopped. And they said, 'Oh no, it can't be smog it must be some agricultural haze or something like that'. But it smelt like smog and I got kind of puzzled so, I thought, well the only way to prove it was be to demonstrate that there is something in the air when the hazy air appears over Bowerchalke, that is unequivocally of human industrial origin. It's not a natural compound. Something that comes from cities or conurbations of people. And the best thing that I could think of were the chlorofluorocarbons because they are purely man-made, there is no natural source of them whatever and they mainly come from cities, great conurbations of people. So, the next time there was a haze, I measured the chlorofluorocarbons in the air and to my delight, they were three times as abundant in smoggy air as they were in the clear air that preceded the smog. So that kind of proved the point. And I also did the same measurements in far Western Ireland, which showed that the smog would travel even as far, right across as Bantry Bay and those regions. And it turned out that it came mainly from the cars of the millions of holiday makers in Southern France and Italy during the summertime. That's where the smog was produced and the air blew it all the way across the Southern England to Ireland. But I also found in Ireland that when the air came in from the Atlantic, it had quite a lot of chlorofluorocarbons in it. And I thought, well are these coming from America all the way across the Atlantic, or are the building up in the world, because they're such inert compounds there's nothing to remove them. And, at that time my friend Peter Felgate [?], who was professor of cybernetics at Reading University said to me, 'Well why don't you apply for a grant to the Natural Environment Research Council, Science Research Council to ask if they would let you go on one of their ships like the Shackleton down to Antarctica and back and take measurements of the CFCs [chlorofluorocarbons] in the atmosphere right the way across the world. This will prove whether they are building up in the atmosphere or not'.
So, I sent in my grant proposal to NERC and SERC and waited and they came back, promptly, cast out by the peer review committee. In fact, they were very cross about, one senior chemist on the review, among the reviewers said that 'this is a bogus proposal and they time of our committee shouldn't be wasted with proposals like that. Every school boy knows that the chlorofluorocarbons are amongst the most inert compounds known to man, it will be exceedingly difficult to measure them at the parts per million level and yet this clown is claiming he can measure them at the parts per trillion level. This is a bad proposal, don't waste our time with this sort of thing any more.'
Now, the civil servants at NERC, interestingly, were rather upset by this. Now, they couldn't do anything about it, they couldn't give me a grant because it has to be approved by… but what they could do was to let me travel on the ship with my home-made apparatus and do the measurements. And one of their representatives, a lady called Mrs Howells came to see me, to see that the apparatus really did work and could measure these things in the atmosphere and then told me that I could go on the Shackleton and they would pay my fare back from Montevideo, which was all I needed.
So, with a few hundred pounds I made the equipment and went down there and of course those were the measurements that started the ozone war, the ozone problems, depletion problems. But also, the same measurements, I measured the gas dimethyl sulphide in the atmosphere right the way across the world, and showed that it is the natural carrier of sulphur in nature and this has turned out to be a far more important discovery in many ways because we now know there would be no clouds over the oceans were it not for this gas coming from the sea. And this has climatic consequences of great importance. Without clouds the world would be 20 degrees Celsius warmer than it is now.

The scientific work that I have done in my life, such as inventing the ECD [Electron Capture Detector] and developing Gaia Theory are very closely related to green politics and green philosophy and yet, instead of being a whole-hearted supporter of the green movement and joining in their campaigns against nuclear power or genetically modified food, I find myself in very much the same position as George Orwell did vis-à-vis the socialism of his time.
One's only to read Animal Farm to see the doubts and scepticism that he had. Like George Orwell I saw, see the benefits and the good things about socialism. I'm a passionate supporter of the health service, particularly as it was, but I'm also aware of the problems and I think in some way they're sort of linked. I think much of the distortion of the green movement's wish to be representatives of a better Earth, of our living better with our planet come to grief because their origins were in CND [Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament] and the nuclear disarmament movements. They inevitably grew to look on anything to do with nuclear power as evil and harmful and as a consequence, they've neglected to note that is the one major power source that was available to us that doesn't pollute the planet to any conceivable extent.
I don't agree with their… the fuss there is about the disposal of nuclear waste and have offered to take here on my site the full output of high level waste from any nuclear power station that likes to send it here. I would see that it was properly buried in a concrete pit and use the heat from the nuclear waste to keep my house warm. What a waste not to so use it. But be that as it may, it will never happen because the local council will never allow it nor public opinion generally. But that's how I feel about, and I imagine that in 50 years' time, when the effects of the greenhouse are really upon us, that many will be saying what a shame it was that we were so against nuclear power back in the 20th century.

I think the same thing applies to their fears about chemicals and much of the push for organic food and so on, so that it'll be free of pesticides and other chemicals that farmers use. I'm not sure that this is very realistic. We've got a very distorted view of things like pesticides. We forget that the invention of DDT [Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane] is said to have saved more lived than any other chemical substance invented, mainly of course sort of used in diminishing malaria at the times when it was around by killing mosquitoes. And the inventor of DDT was given a Nobel Prize and unusually the rather splendid man, he gave all the money of his prize to his students for the benefit of the work they were doing. And that's not the usual green image of pesticides.
There's another part to it too. I'm very conscious of the sensitivity of the Electron Capture Detector. It's so sensitive that it will detect absurdly small traces of DDT and other things, traces so small they can't do the slightest harm to anybody. Now some foolish politicians, I think in America and perhaps Germany, introduced the concept of zero for pollutants. Now this was okay when they had simple, ordinary old-fashioned chemical analysis, you could easily set zero at the lowest level and it will be very reasonable. But when put the ECD [Electron Capture Detector] on the scene it's impossible.
I could collect organic vegetables from anywhere, from any supermarket or from the plot they've grown in and demonstrate most of the pesticides in general use in the world in them because the device is that sensitive. It doesn't mean in any way that they are not properly grown organic vegetables or that there is any danger, just that there is a misunderstanding about numbers. As soon as you attach a number to something it acquires a significance far beyond its real significance and truth. And people are not very numerate and they don't make these sorts of distinctions and I think the green movement has, sadly, drifted badly because of that kind thing. What they should be concerned about is the welfare of our planet, not wholly the welfare of people. Because in the long-run, if we don't look after the planet it will cease to look after us, which it's been doing for four billion years. And this is a more important and urgent need than fretting over small amounts of radioactivity or small amounts of chemicals in foodstuffs. They've got to get away from their humanist centrism and start looking at the Earth and respecting it.
 

My life as scientist has taught me several things about science and one of the most important and least realised is the uncertainty of science. No scientist can be certain about anything and yet people want certainty. And that's why science can in no way ever replace or supplant religion. People need certainties in their lives, they need to believe in things and science can never offer them that.
And one of the problems with science nowadays, it's drifting more and more into fiction and legend, and farther and farther. Most people's views of science come from programmes like Star Trek. They see it, that as the reality and not, and there's an awful lot of certainty in that kind of reality, which is not present in the real scientist's view of the world. It's a matter of knowledge. What… I've thought a lot about this and one of the things that a politian, President Havel of the Czech Republic, said in a speech he gave in America some years ago was that science has supplanted religion as the source of knowledge about the cosmos and about life and everything, but it has failed utterly to give moral guidance, which of course is a thing that religion does. But he said, there are two exceptions in modern science. One is the anthropic principle which gives us some idea of why we're here, and the other is Gaia, which gives us something to be accountable to.
And this is the point about the Gaia notion, which I think could be important. It is based in science, so it can never be certain, we can never be absolutely sure about it, but it is something that we can put our trust in. We don't have to put our faith in it, because faith means belief in certainty, but we can put our trust in it. And there is a need for people to have something they can put their trust in. And if science succeeds in replacing religion altogether it would be most unfortunate because people do have that need and perhaps some concept like Gaia or some other which is science-based that people can put their trust in might be something that will be very helpful to civilisation in the future.
[Q] Great.
Okay.
[Q] I think we've…
I think we've covered a lot of ground, haven't we?
[Q] Yeah, covered a lot of ground. 
I travel to a lot of labs, both now and in the past, government ones, big multinational companies, charities and so on. And one thing intrigues me very much, is the complaint by scientists that the bureaucrats and those responsible for the dispersal of public money expect them to put in outline management plans for their research, for sometimes as much as the next five years. This I find very amusing and quite absurd because how on Earth can science be predicted that far ahead? Imagine going to an artist anywhere and saying to him, 'Well if we're going to fund you for the next five years we want to know exactly what you'll be painting in five years' time'. He'll tell them to go away and so should the scientists. In real life, one never knows what one's going to do. You start out on a scientific course to find out something, but serendipitously, nearly always nature leads you off along another path, sometimes it's a good one and you find something far better than you'd ever imagined you would find on the first path. Sometimes of course it's a dead-end. But you can't predict it, the way it's going to go and one of my mentors early on said to me, and I can't remember which one it was, I think it was Sir Henry Dale, that it doesn't matter what you do in science as long as you keep your eyes open and I found there's a great deal of truth in that.
