john.bonner

John Tyler Bonner (born in 1920) is an emeritus professor in the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology at Princeton University. He is a pioneer in the use of cellular slime molds to understand evolution and development and is one of the world's leading experts on cellular slime molds. He says that his prime interests are in evolution and development and that he uses the cellular slime molds as a tool to seek an understanding of those twin disciplines. He has written several books on developmental biology and evolution, many scientific papers, and has produced a number of works in biology. He has led the way in making Dictyostelium discoideum a model organism central to examining some of the major questions in experimental biology.

I think I'll start with my family, and tell you a little bit about that. Because in some ways they were unusual, in very nice ways, actually. My father knew everybody, and you couldn't mention anybody's name, and he didn't say, 'Oh, I know Carl', or whoever it was. And he did. And not only that but he was usually a good friend of… And we were home one evening with - I have three brothers - the boys were in the living room and my father was reading. And we were discussing between the difference between, which I - don't ask me about - but the difference between Trotskyism, Stalinism or Leninism, and so forth. And suddenly my father interrupted and he said, 'I knew Trotsky'. And we said, 'Oh, my God, you've gone too far this time!' It turned out that in a period in his life, not a very long period, he worked as a teller at his father's bank in Brooklyn. And Trotsky used his window. And so, they'd have these long conversations through the grill. I wish that we had a transcript of those. That would be fascinating.
But anyhow, he introduced everybody to all sorts of people. He was a remarkable man because you would tell him something, and then, he would say to you that's not what you told me last year, which was a little unnerving because he could remember better our conversations than I did.

What my father wanted to do was to sing because he had a nice, tenor voice. And so he proceeded to pester my grandfather to send him to a place where he could learn. And this was ridiculous, as far as my grandfather was concerned. My grandfather - I never met him; he died when I was two - but I've always thought that he must have been just like the father in Clarence Day's biography.
He wanted to be an opera singer. And so he boiled about this for a while, not getting anywhere and suddenly decided to write a letter to Enrico Caruso, who was singing at the Metropolitan at that time.
And he was amazed because he got a very nice answer, says: sure I'll listen to you. Come on down such and such a day. And he did. And Caruso was very impressed, and said, yes, you need training badly. And he said, I know just the man in Italy to do this. And so he went to study for two years in Italy, and had the grandest time. And he even got a job in an Italian national… no, it was a company. And never sang a concert for them because just after he was given the offer, the First World War broke out. So he had to come home, and enlist, and all that sort of stuff.

My mother is Swiss. Her father was a younger brother of a very successful silk business in Zurich. And when he came over to set up the American branch, and she was 14 when she came, along with her mother. I would love to have known her then because she ended up being quite a remarkable woman. She was someone who had a very strong personality, but at the same time, though, she fit in with the Swiss background that she had. The role of the woman in the family and the household was definitely a sort of a slave, really. And she had to do, and believe, and agree to what seems to me now as terrible things. But she managed it perfectly because she kept her independence, and she kept her intelligence. And she just simply let all the other things walk away. And even her attitude towards her father was very traditional. He was the boss. And so when she married my father, my father automatically became 'the boss'. And I always remember her telling me that when the Kaiser entered Belgium in the First World War, he arrived down for breakfast, and announced very firmly that henceforth, German will never be talked in this room, in this house. And they said it never was, talked Schwyzerdütsch - Swiss - and they could talk French and English, of course, but true German was out, and that was a disaster for me because I later wanted to become a biologist and in my day, as a young student, almost all the good stuff was written in German, and I couldn't understand a word of it. All I could do was look at the pictures. And I even once brought a paper, and asked my grandmother to translate it for me, or help me translate it. And it was on sex and Chlamydomonas, which is a single-cell green alga. And it couldn't be more innocent a paper. And she just looked at it, before she even started, she looked at it and she said, 'What kind of things are they teaching you these days?' I calmed her down. She eventually got a chance at it.
She was really a remarkable woman because I think in many ways she was more intelligent, and had a better brain than my father. Although, my father was no… and yet, she managed to supress it in a way, so that everybody else around her thought they were fantastic, including her children, actually. She never completely approved of me, but she thought I was intelligent, but pig-headed. That was her… and I'm sure she was right, too.

I've often wondered how it was that I became interested in biology because there was nobody in my family who was a biologist, and I didn't have any friends who were biologists. But we lived in London for a year. And I spent every day for a walk in St James's Park, and just watched the ducks. And then, any house we rented in Onslow Square, well, Onslow Gardens, there were bird books. So I looked everything up, and had a grand time. And I walked to this museum in South Kensington, the Natural History Museum. That was heaven. They had these fantastic little exhibits, small ones, with hummingbirds in them. And the hummingbirds were all on sticks, or branches of some sort and they just looked like a little jewel, a whole box. And anyhow, I just had a wonderful time there. And I was fascinated by eggs and I got the curator of oology to show me his collection. And then, but all sorts of different kinds of wonderful bliss. And I didn't realise it, but this was really what started me.
My father, in his own peculiar way, decided that ornithology was not a kind of occupation which would give livelihood or anything of that sort. That's not true, but however that's what he thought and that I ought to do something more substantial. So he bought me, as a present, an HG Wells, GP Wells, oh no, Julian Huxley and GP Wells Science of Life, which is a huge volume, and typical HG Wells kind of organization. It was really a very good read, except that it has a whole section on mediums and tables thumping and stuff like that which seems rather quaint these days, but I didn't even read those parts. I looked at the photographs of people with ectoplasm coming out of their nose and that was my idea of all it consisted of. But anyhow, I really started to read this huge book. And my father was absolutely right. He trapped me. And he got me from birds to all of biology. And it's all due to Huxley, Wells and Wells… Huxley and Wells.

Around that time we were sent to a boarding school in Switzerland in the French part of Switzerland, not too far out of Geneva. And I just became enthralled by everything I could see in the little woods right next to the school, and it was just… I mean, it just absolutely trapped me. And my mother gave me her little binoculars that she used to take to the races. And that was bliss - everything was wonderful. And I tell you the thing I still remember so vividly. My bedroom was on the side of the building where there was a small wood, and so in the spring, I'd open the window wide. And every period I was going to sleep, I could hear a nightingale. And I've often wondered whether or not that was the thing that planted it in me because it was just so incredibly beautiful. And it's quite unbelievable, in a way.

The only thing was I didn't get along with the science master. I think he thought I was a total, I don't know what, but something you find under the stones. And he let me into his chemistry course, but he said, you're too young for this course. I said, well, give me a try and he said, fine. So one of the first things, we had a lab, in which he said a sulphate solution, and a much stronger one and we were to record in our lab books, the difference between these two. And I said, one smelled like one rotten egg, and the other smelled like two rotten eggs. And he kicked me out of the class! It was 'immature'. But actually, I still think my answer was pretty good.
And so that's the way I got into biology because I'd continue to read and continue to read. And my Swiss teacher made fun of my reading, too. And I've often thought afterwards, one of the reasons I'm a biologist is that he made me so mad that I did it just to be cussed. So anyhow that was the beginning.

Huxley and GP Wells, and I never met, to my regret, HG Wells. But Julian Huxley was… he came to Princeton quite often and I had wonderful times with him. He was really, he could talk about anything and he was always very interesting and a lot of fun, and very supportive, too. We were interested in the same bits of embryology, but his interests were all much broader than that, not just that and I think maybe he influenced me to have my interested broader, too. And GP Wells, one summer I taught in a field station in Puget Sound, in America and Gip was one of the other teachers. And we got to know one another, splendid, splendid man.
Now, as far as Huxley goes, people would ask me, what is Huxley like? Well, he's a man of the old school and he considers himself very distinguished, and this story proves this. He was invited to Yale to give a seminar. And he was all dolled up with a fancy jacket on and so forth and necktie, and his nephew, who was a young anthropologist, met him at the railway station, and said, 'You look awfully distinguished, Uncle Julian'. And his reply was, 'I am awfully distinguished'.

I still admire [Julian Huxley's] work. You know, he… I mustn't get on too much on him, but I'll just tell you one thing, and that is that he did some really fundamental work in the embryology of sponges, and things of that sort. But then, later on he became a great expert on evolution and he believed in progress that there was some sort of inner force which moved evolution forward. And to a rigid Darwinian such as myself, this is heresy. But I never discussed it with him but I enjoyed him for so many reasons, I thought that one little thing wouldn't get in the way.

When I went to Exeter Academy, which is a respected school, and has a tremendous reputation, but I discovered immediately that they didn't teach biology, and so I was fuming about it. And the headmaster was a charismatic, wonderful person - Lewis Perry - got up in chapel, which was every morning, and he said, 'Now, if any of you boys have any criticisms or comments about the school, I wish you'd come and see me, and tell me about them'.  And so I, a few days later, screwed up my courage and went to him and, terrified, I might say - he was a very impressive man - and he said, well, what can I do for you, John, or something of that sort. And I said, well… and I reminded him of his asking for comments from students. And immediately, his expression changed one to: oh, here comes another complainer and he turned with a definitely hostile look. And so I told him that I said I thought a school of Exeter's stature should be teaching biology. And he immediately… face shone a radiant joy, which I realised afterwards that this is something that the trustees - he was about to meet with the trustees - this is something they were going to discuss. And for him to be able to say, one of my boys came in and urged me to do this, would be just the thing to sell it and he did sell it. And it was a very successful year, my senior year. I took the course and I think I drove the poor instructor nuts, but I was under this modest illusion that I knew all of biology and I couldn't imagine there was anything more to say. But of course, over the years I've found out differently.
And the thing about that was, and it's always sort of delighted me, Lewis Perry, after he retired, he of course, knew my parents - everybody knew my parents - and he came down to visit them when they were living in South Carolina. And he clapped me on the back - Lewis Perry - clapped me on the back and said, 'Here's the man that brought biology to Exeter!' And of course that was a lot of baloney, but however, it's baloney that both he and I enjoyed.

One other thing that happened while I was at Exeter, I got my driving license. And I had to go to take a test with some man that lived in a little house, not too far from us. And I went, and he said, 'Do you like…' his only question was, 'Do you like jazz, or do you like classical music?' And I said, 'Well, I really like both, but if it came to a choice, I'd pick classical music'. And he said, 'Well, you don't need to take the test'. I said, 'Why not?' And he said, 'It's my experience, anybody who likes classical music doesn't drive too fast'. So that was my most successful exam taking that I've ever had.
 

One of the great men, I thought then, and I'll continue to think now, was Thomas H Morgan, who really is the person who put genetics on the map in the last century. He was a wonderful man. And I was home, and some friends were visiting, and he said, 'Oh, you know, he's my uncle'. And so I said, 'No, I didn't know that'. And he was an architect, actually. He said, 'He's my uncle, would you like a letter of introduction?' And I said, 'Indeed, I would love it'. And so he wrote me this note, to his uncle, saying, take care of this boy and I put it in Morgan's mailbox, in the marine biological laboratory in Woods Hole. And then, nothing happened.
So I finally called up my mother, who was a great arbiter of manners, customs, and how to behave. And she said, 'Oh, it's perfectly all right for you just to call on him, and so just some evening, when you think everybody's awake, just go ring his doorbell', which I did and I must say, slightly terrified. And I couldn't have had a more pleasant evening because they were playing a card game, I forget, probably bridge, but I don't remember. And I came in and I identified myself. And he said, 'Oh, yes, I'm glad to see you'. He said, 'Now listen, we're having this game of', whatever it was, and he said, 'I'm winning'. And he said, 'So I want you to sit beside me, and not say anything until I've won', which of course, I did. And then, we had a most delightful conversation with his daughter and his wife. I was just thrilled by the whole thing. I realised afterwards that I was really callow because I didn't know, for instance, that Mrs Morgan was a biologist, too, so I would explain in rather pathetic elementary terms or some things of what I was saying, but she didn't twig. She didn't say, 'Oh, I know that'. She was just very sweet.

He was just like Dr Parker. And he said, we've always been confused, we have the same beards.
And he said, 'When my daughter was quite small, she stopped Dr Parker in the street and said, “Daddy, can I have a nickel for an ice cream cone?” And he gave her a dime. And she looked at the dime and she said, “You're not my daddy!”' Because Morgan was famous for being stingy.

What happened was that I was so enamoured with Professor William H Weston and his biology, and the way he did biology, and what he did in biology that I decided I want to work for him. But I wanted to do some things right away and so I said, 'Is there anything I can do during the summer which would go towards educating me?' And he said, 'Yes', he said, 'my old friend, William Randolph Taylor, teaches a course in Woods Hole on algae'.  And he said, 'Now, I will write to him and ask him if he can take you on'. And he came back and he said, he wrote back and said that only graduate students are allowed. He said, 'Let me work on him a bit, and see what I can do'. And I got admitted.
So here I was, very young, I had just finished my freshman year, and was surrounded by really… Woods Hole in those days was sort of like Mount Olympus. It had all these people who were really great, like Morgan, who had done something like put genetics on track. And so it was a big experience for me and I had a great time. I learned a lot about algae, not all of which I remember today, but it was really very nice.
But then I did meet there Dr [Edwin Grant] Conklin, who I got to know very well later on, who is a famous embryologist and many others like him and like Morgan. It was really quite a collection of stars or inhabitants of Mount Olympus, as I should say. And of course, I just loved it. I loved to go to the lectures and so forth. My father finally came down to check up on me and it was great. We got along very well and it was very, very nice.

Two things that I remember about that was that I forced [my father] to go to Professor Parker's evening lecture and which is the kind of lecture that could only be given 100 years ago. And that is, Parker is famous for having shown that nerves in the skin produce substances which effect their surrounding cells. So you have these lizards which can change their colour, and they do that by these nerve processes that terminate in producing little chemical signals. And his lecture, this is what he said. 'Well', he said, 'you know, when I was working on this', he said, 'I was dying…' It's the same thing as a blush; blush is the same principle. And so he said, 'When I was working on this, I wondered how far down then neck a blush went'. And he said, 'So I decided to look into the matter'. And he said, 'And I couldn't get the answer!' He said, 'And the reason was that all the women, when I first started, wore their clothes right up to their neck, and then, the next step was, you could see everything'. And he said, 'And then, they didn't blush anymore'.

One other story about Woods Hole, which I find quite remarkable, there's a place you can walk along sort of a peninsula, which has a little curlique thing at the end, and this is called Penzance Point. And so I took my father for a walk out there. It was a very pleasant walk. And at the end there was a big house, which belonged to Dr Warbasse from Brooklyn, who was an obstetrician, much retired. And you could walk around his house if you stayed on the path; there was a very nice sign saying, please enjoy the walk. And just as we came into his place, there he was himself with a long, long beard, and leaning on a scythe - he was cutting, mowing the lawn, or hay. And he looked… all you needed was an hourglass, and it would've been Father Time. And so I didn't know what to do or say. So I said to him, I said, 'I want to thank you for allowing us to go on your path'. And then, I thought, my father was there. I said, 'Well, I'd like you to meet my father, Paul Bonner'. And he looked at my father and he said, 'Are you from Brooklyn?' And my father said, 'Yes'. And he said, 'Was your mother's name Theodora?' 'Yes'. 'I delivered her', which I thought was definitely a coup de grace.

My Swiss grandfather was really nice because he was the father of the family in the Swiss fashion, very rigid, but at the same time, he was a very kind and gentle soul. So he was totally adored by everybody. And people, if he said, we're going to do such and such, we did it with a smile. And he - there were lots of stories about him that I've always loved, he was very musical, and played as an amateur in the first violins in the Zurich Orchestra - and he told me one day that he had heard Brahms conduct the orchestra. And I said, 'Oh, you're not that old'. And he said, 'Oh, yes, we overlap quite a bit, actually'. But he was a splendid man. In his old age he couldn't play anymore because of his tremor, but he'd ask me to play quintets and Schubert trios, and things like that. And he'd sit beside the old gramophone, and he'd cry. It was really, very touching. I always felt as though I were invading his privacy.

When I had my first job, I wanted to go to Woods Hole actually to work on my first book. And I was then an assistant professor at Princeton and the department was reluctant to pay for a table for me. But they said, we know what we'll do, we'll ask Dr Conklin if he will have you and he has a room, which was given to him in perpetuity because he was one of the founding fathers. And Conklin said he'd be delighted. So I spent the whole summer in Conklin's room, although I did most of the writing in the library because Conklin love to talk which was not very conducive to putting sentences together. So it was really very nice.
And Conklin was endlessly entertaining because he knew all these German embryologists that were so famous, and so much on my mind. And he had very strong opinions. So he liked… some of them were great and some of them were terrible. And my hero was Hans Driesch, who was the one who cut embryos in two a certain way, and you got two small embryos, which would reform and become perfect tadpoles, or whatever they were, but half the size. And the trouble with Driesch is, he got so impressed by this that he decided it had to be a vital force, an entelechy. And so he became a vitalist, and wrote vitalist literature. And Conklin, who is famous for finding the other kind of egg, or one of the two people that did, which was one in which if you cut in half an embryo, it stayed a half an embryo and it was not able to regulate. And so everybody agreed later that you'd have two kinds that develop, both regulative and mosaic.
And I never knew whether or not his animus against Driesch was because he was the other side of the embryological question, or whether he just didn't like him. And I rather suspect it was the second. I think that Driesch was too sort of oily and cosmopolitan.

There wasn't any, except at the very end, there wasn't any course. So I did a lot of reading. And even - I would not advise any 15-year-old to do this - but read Origin of the Species, which I found extremely difficult reading. Now it's not so bad. So I obviously was thinking of that specifically, of Darwinism and evolution, and my first interests of that sort were in evolutionary biology, and not in developmental. And I really only became involved in developmental biology when I was my in my freshman year at college. But then, one of the things that I did was to try and bring the two together. I wrote a small book once called, Evolution of Development. That was a new direction for me, and one which is sort of the foundation of everything I did later on.

Harvard was a very different place then it is now. It's amazing what… when we were there as an undergraduate, there were waitresses in the dining hall. The idea of such a thing just seems incredible now. We had all sorts of perks. We had biddies who came to clean our rooms, and make our beds. It's hard to believe, but it's of course, left over from 19th century way things were done. And biddies were great. They were all Irish women, and we loved them. One day I was going out to some big exam and a biddy said, have a good day, or something of that sort. And I said, 'I'm terrible'. I said, 'I have to take this exam. And I'm not so sure I'm going to do too well'. 'Oh', she said, 'you'll do all right'. And I said, 'How do you know?' And she said, 'I lit a candle for you last night'. So we were very well taken care of by the biddies.

There are some courses that I took that weren't biology, which were ones I think I remember better, and loved more than anything. I took a course in French literature, it went by Professor Allard. And it was fantastic and I loved to read, and in those days I was sufficiently fluent in French so that I could read in French as fast as I could in English. So it was all pleasure.
But the thing that really educated me in science, was taking physical chemistry. I took a wonderful course - I'm a very poor mathematician, major understatement - and in physical chemistry, you spend a great deal of time with differential equations, partial ones, and everything. And I really learnt the basic calculus there, rather than in the awful calculus course that I took, when you had people going in row, rowboats and the current was going this way, and this that and the other thing. And well, you find yourself saying, screw the rowboat, I'm not interested. But the professor who gave the physical chemistry was just brilliant, and I had the greatest satisfaction. We had an hour exam and he put the question on the board and we all sat down. And there were always about four or five people who were immediately writing. And the rest of us just - there were 60 students - and the rest of us just looked at it and laughed because we didn't know how to do it, and I just stared for 40 minutes, 45 minutes. And then, suddenly I realised, I saw what the trick was with this question of how all these things were brought together in one basket and so I said, five minutes left, I just see how it's done. And then, I wrote down not the equations, but the description of what you should do to solve the problem. I got 95 out of 100. I don't think I've ever been so happy with a grade in all my life.

I have certain fixed ideas about myself and I know that they're totally inaccurate. For instance, I'll give you an example which chased me all my life and that is I couldn't write. And people would ask me to take extra courses and I always thought it's because I don't write well, and so they want me to do…
And my father, who turned up among many other things, to be a very successful novelist, he always said to me, 'If you think right, you can write well'. And I kept saying, 'Well, what the hell is wrong with my thoughts?' But at any rate, I had a really - for years - an inferiority complex. And I'd read a book review of something, for that book of my biography was in The New York Times, and TLS, and it got some good reviews, and I'd find myself saying, 'That guy must be crazy'. So it was really strange, I want you to think I'd finally agreed that maybe I can write in the last few years.

Because I'd taken a good biology course at school, I was allowed to go into the second year basic biology at Harvard, which was a botany course on lower organisms, cryptogrammic botany. And it was taught by a man names William H Weston, who I mentioned earlier. And he was just the most wonderful teacher I've ever encountered and he was a charming, sympathetic man. He just somehow rather took my intellectual heart; I took to him instantly. His lectures were just marvels and all extemporaneous, too. And he would… I remember the first lecture I went to with him. It was the first year that Radcliffe girls and Harvard boys could be in the same class. And I remember this so vividly because he was tall like you, but he was quite deaf and he had a box in his upper pocket. And so a girl in the back asked a question and he said, 'Wait a moment', and he unhooked his box and he took it in his hand. He went tearing down the aisle, and set the box in front of her on her desk where she was writing, and said, 'Would you repeat that question, my dear?' Of course, which captivated not only 'my dear' but everybody else in the room. And then, his answer was just so perfect. It was not condescending. It was not unsympathetic. It was just right.
[Q] So he was a big influence?
Very big influence, and what he's famous for was having lots of students who were working on algae, fungi, lower things, and since I started off working on algae, he gave me a bench space in a big, general lab with graduate students, which was great.

I was sitting in his office one day and talking to his very pretty secretary, and not doing any work, and I just reached above behind me. It's literally true, there were all his theses from previous students. I pulled one out and it was one on slime molds, and I just couldn't believe it. And so I immediately started reading it and it was by Kenneth Raper who got his degree, his PhD, about 10 years earlier than I did, and it was absolutely wonderful. So that's what… And I wrote to Ken and he immediately responded with cultures, and everything else. And at that time, there were only two people in the whole of the world who were working on those cellular slime molds, and it was only that a few others crept in, in the next 10 years or so. But then, the thing that happened was, when molecular biology came into the fore, then instead of having – I had a graph showing this – instead of having five or so papers per annum that were on slime molds, it suddenly went to 120.   It was the beginning of the slime molds, but I think already though, I knew I wanted to work on some organism like that, and I was actually searching for it and there were a lot of good possibilities, but this is the best.

[Q] And what did you want to know, really?
The answer is a mechanism of development. How is it that this one cell becomes a mass of cells and what different ways can it happen among…? Of course, that wasn't Cap's interest, not Weston's interest. And there just seemed to be infinite possibilities. But I'll tell you a story about this, which comes from when I was a graduate student and I was working on them, and had already done that early film I did which was better than anything else I did. And I was asked as a graduate student to go to Yale to give a seminar so I assumed it would be a small group of cryptogamic botanists and I arrived there and I was absolutely terrified because it was in a big lecture room, with the whole botany department, and the whole zoology department. And so I gave my seminar and I was fascinated afterwards because people really didn't show any interest in my brilliant experiments - they were only interested in hearing about the life cycle of the organism and it was really quite amazing. And after it was all over, I was going up to get a cup of tea and suddenly there was this voice behind me saying, 'Bonner, if I had to start all over again, I'd work with those slime molds'. And this was Ross Harrison who was probably the greatest, I think, embryologist there ever was, and a very modest, kindly sort of person. And anyhow, that was a big moment.
 

Slime molds were appealing to me and everybody else because of the fact that the cells come together and form a multicellular organism. So normally that's not the way it works. Normally, you have an egg, a fertilized egg, usually and that divides and divides and becomes bigger and bigger, and slowly turns into a toad or a flower or whatever.  Now these organisms do all their eating first so that they seem to be going in reverse, as it were. Because they feed just the way our white blood cells feed, on bacteria that have invaded our body, they feed on bacteria as individual amoebae. In fact, they're about the same size and their appearance is very similar to our white blood cells, only they live in the soil. They are no parasitic ones. But in any event, they really have a totally different way of becoming multicellular. And so as soon as I started working on them, this is the first thing that came to mind was why do they come together? Why do they aggregate to form these maybe one or two million cells with an organism that has a front end and a hind end and produces spores at the top and stalk cells below? What makes it do all that, what are the immediate causes? And I found that in the first place, I settled a question which had been an open question for quite some time. Some of the early work goes back to 1900. And that is the question of what attracts them to the central collection point? They do this when they're satiated, when they're full of food and no more food is available, and they start to starve, then they do this. So that seemed very mysterious. And there were lots of ideas about how they did this, but none were really satisfactory. And so that was my PhD thesis.

There was a man named Paul Weiss who was a brilliant, wonderful embryologist who was at the Rockefeller University, who I knew. And he kept saying to me, 'Check everything else before you say its chemotaxis because it probably isn't chemotaxis'. And he thought it was some sort of what he called 'contact guidance' where they were sort of feeling their way along; exactly how it's not clear. And so my whole thesis was to try and show that it had to be chemotaxis. And after I got out of the army, I had a few months to finish my thesis. And relatively early in that few months, I hit the solution. It was one of those wonderful eurekas that had me dancing in the lab and punching the air and so forth, because I instantly looked through the scope and could see that it was chemotaxis. And here's what I saw. I had a bunch of aggregates forming in a round dish and a stirring rod slowly making a circular current. And then what happened was I would go off into another room and do something else, not thinking this is going to be very much. But I looked at the scope 20 minutes later and I just nearly fell through the ceiling. What I saw was that you could see that where they… it's like looking at smoke going from burning piles of leaves in the autumn: the wind was blowing the smoke one way and so you didn't have any smoke up above. And here, you found that the amoebae up above had no idea where the centre was, but the ones down below were forming these long trails that go towards it. And so instantly, I realised that I can get my degree now. And although it was interesting that some of my professors at my final exam were very un-nice about that because they said, 'Why don't you know what the substance is?' and I got very defensive. But anyhow, I didn't do that until years later. I eventually did, but that's another story.

I thought that I should have some way of showing people what was happening because you try and describe it, and it's not… and so I asked Cap Weston if he had any time-lapse machinery. And he said, oh, yes, he does have one, this and this basement or something. And it was the damnedest thing you've ever seen because there were these huge brass wheels, very, very heavy. And they rotated an aperture in a box, which was just… I tell you, you've seen these boxes. You've seen pictures of old Keystone Cops, with a man cranking. Well, that was the box and only it was not man-cranking, it was this gearbox that was connected. It had eight speeds and it made such vibration that you had to put it on a separate table from the optics, so that they didn't actually touch and jiggle one another, and all sorts of fiddle things which are not important except that you're trying to repeat it. And just let it go and it was just wonderful. I couldn't believe it. And so I did have some very good professional help from a Labradorean photographer, Frank White, who helped me with the developing and all the sort of photography end of it. But in any event that film, I've often thought, was the real reason I graduated. I don't think people really cared what I wrote about it and because everybody likes the film.
[Q] What would we see? If we watched the films, what do they show?
Well, they show the remarkable fact that you have these amoebae that string together and then they produce a structure which has two cell types, stalk cells and terminal spores. So it's really quite a remarkable phenomenon.

I think at that time, I think I thought that there was going to be an infinite number of questions to ask. And there were and actually, I asked and answered quite a few of them. For instance, to give you an example, my old professor, Cap Weston, used to in his lectures say, 'Why is it that little fungi - and slime molds do the same thing - stick up at right angles from the substratum?' And this is true if you put them this way or if you try to change it because it's not a gravity thing. Well, what is it? And what I was able to show two years later was that these cell masses give off ammonia, and ammonia is a substance which they abhor so they're trying to go away from it. So if you're going away from it and you have a situation where there's some produced on each side, and what you get is you get a stalk bisecting perfectly perpendicular. Or you can put it in a cliff of agar and if you put it here, it will not touch the walls, but it will get right between the two sides of the cave. And then, that was before we knew it was ammonia. And then, we did some very clever experiments trying to prove that. That turned out mostly to be that you have a little chamber, which you put a block along, or near a hole. Now this is a closed in, plastic box, with one hole in it. And you put the slime mold, so that if this is the hole, the slime mold would be this way and it would… I'm not sure this is going to show with my fat hands. But any event, if you have that hole and had ammonia on the outside, the fruiting body would not go up, but would go down, but if you had nothing there, then they would go up. So in other words, it would always go where there was less ammonia. A physical chemist friend of mine pointed out the fact that I was just at the limit of the size of the chambers to make this work on a theoretical basis. But that's okay, it worked.

It turned out to be a much more general phenomenon because what you could do is you could put beads on the slug as it crawls. And you can put a bead which absorbs ammonia. And when you do that - I like activated charcoal - and then it will go towards the charcoal. But if you put it into something else, like, an inhibitor protein synthesis, and you remove again, the ammonia… Anyhow, there's lots of experiments you can show that ammonia is it. And then, in the meantime, other people have shown that they go towards oxygen. So in other words, if they have a choice of different amounts of oxygen, they tend to go where there's highest oxygen. So they go away from the highest ammonia, and towards the higher oxygen.

Jim Savage was a very well known mathematician, who was a professor at Yale. He was going to have lunch with me, and I got stuck on something. And so I said, 'Jim, I'll be with you in 10 minutes. Have a seat in my office, there's lots of books'. And I came in and he was reading that thesis. I said, 'Jim, of all the good books in there, how could you be doing that?' 'Oh', he said, 'this is wonderful'. I said, 'What do you mean?' 'It's wonderful because you got it out of your system at such an early age'.

Largely through the work of Paul Weiss, and it's wonderful work, on animal embryos - he was of the very strong opinion, and he liked to influence everybody else, including me, that chemotaxis was not something that you found in developing systems, but that it was what he called contact guidance, which it felt its way along. And although there was all… Anyhow that was the situation when I entered the battlefield. And so I tried to do all sorts of experiments, which would test this and I finally found one which I didn't have much faith in, but it turned out to be the answer. And that is that if you moved water around the central point of this aggregation that it carried something downstream which caused these amoebae downstream to orient up and crawl against it. And that kind of taxis is the same thing as if you have heat, if you had little heat spots. And so I had to look to be sure that it wasn't me. And I forget now exactly how we did it; it was a fairly simple experiment. And so the question that Paul Weiss had put before all of us was: a) did you have chemotaxis in development, yes; b) how can you demonstrate it so that you don't get a lot of arguments?

As soon as I got set up at Princeton, which in those days was really easy and you didn't have starting grants. You used the department microscopes, which were excellent. You used the department balances, which were primitive. And chemicals mostly were available, but if they weren't, they ordered them for you. And so I guess my attitude then, and starting up again was, I've got to…  I've got to just wallow in the developmental aspects of slime molds and see what I see. So I had this feeling that I knew it was chemotaxis but there were so many other things. What makes it so that some cells turn into spores, and some cells turn into stalk cells, and etc, etc? So there's this tremendous number of interesting biological questions which they need answering. So I dove in. After about a year or so, I got a grant from the NSF. The NSF had just started up and I got a grant from the NSF. And they wrote to me and said, please write us a letter at the end of your progress report. So I wrote them a letter. And the letter said, well, things didn't really work out too well this year. We tried this, and it didn't work. And we tried that, and it didn't work, and that was more or less my report. I got this priceless reply, which said, don't worry about it. That's the way research goes sometimes. And I continue to think that it's too bad we lost that.
[Q] It's changed?
Yes, you're just always are boasting about what you've done.

[Q] When you met other scientists, and they'd say, what are you working on? And you'd say, slime molds. Was that… I mean, now it's quite a very popular subject, but did people express scepticism that you could be so interested?
No, because I would say as a developmental of slime molds. And they knew they developed and so it seemed like a perfectly legitimate worry.
[Q] Because it's about one of the biggest questions in biology, I guess.
Yes, and particularly so then. I mean, now it's so involved in regulatory genes, and this, that and the other thing that the kind of experiment which I was doing back then really doesn't exist anymore. But I've always felt that I was at heart, and in fact, a 19th century biologist because they continue to be really interesting questions that do not involve molecules. I've got nothing against molecular biology. I think it's wonderful, but there are other things.

Well, that was really weird because I was asked through my father who knows everybody - he was a friend of Charlie Thomas, who was the head at that time of Monsanto, and a very sort of charismatic figure. He was a wonderful man, actually. That was before all of the miserable things that they found doing. And he invited me to give a talk, and I suspect that it was arranged through my father who said, I've got a son, and he does this, that and the other thing. So I gave a talk at Monsanto. And after the talk, there's this colonel, all done up in his fancy colonel clothes came up to me and said, 'What's your draft status?' I said, 'Well, it's pretty grim. It won't be long now'. And he said, 'Well, would you like to work in a laboratory?' And I said, 'Of course'. And he said, 'Well, I'll tell you exactly what to do, and how to get to my lab, which is in Dayton, Ohio. It's the Aeromedical Lab'. And so I spent the war there. And it was wonderful in some ways because I learned an incredible amount of high altitude physiology, not that that helped me with slime molds but it helped me in teaching a lot, and so I could talk about something else besides slime molds. And he arranged so I would come there. And I remember this very clearly because I thought I should call and say, 'I'm here', but there was no opportunity. And so I was given… one of the jobs I was given by the sergeant was to mop out the colonel's office. And I remember this awful feeling: I can't just greet him with a mop in my hand saying, 'I'm a genius with a mop'. And so I hid the mop behind the door when he wasn't there, so I was there with a mop [unclear] without embarrassment.

A lot of the time - I was there as a buck private before going to officer candidate school - a lot of the time I was just one of the guinea pigs in the high altitude chambers. And that always interests me because there were other people who did what I did, who were seriously affected by brain damage because they'd go at such high altitude with such low oxygen so frequently that they actually did damage their brain. In my case, it may have improved my brain, I don't know.
[Q] Could you explain what you were doing?
Well, it was a great variety of different things. For instance, there was one person who was studying decompression rapidly, so that if you have a bullet hole or a cannon hole go through the fuselage of the plane and you suddenly go from 30,000 [feet] down to ground level instantly, the question is, what kind of effect does it have on the body? And so I was a subject for that because I had big, wide Eustachian tubes and so I wouldn't get a terrific earache when they hit the hole. And things are equally uninteresting. I mean, it was fairly mechanical, although, an interesting group of people there.

[Q] Did you do any other science while you were in the army?
Well, yes, I did, actually. I sort of set up a little industry. And that is because of my training in mycology, which was scant, but sufficient. I worked on the question of how you keep equipment in the tropics from getting mildewed and what was the best way of doing it. And so I developed ways in which you could put an electric light bulb in a closet and things of that sort which would keep things dry. And so I ran quite a big lab and actually did some experiments on humidity and fungal growth, and they ended up designing things for the tropics.
After the war was over, nobody could get out of the army. It was just a tremendous jam. And so I wrote to Harvard immediately and said, please send me cultures and this, that and the other thing, instantly.
And so I started working on slime molds in a military lab. And the colonel, who was a very nice guy, stopped me on the staircase and he said, 'John', he said, 'you can't do that'. I said, 'Oh, I know I can't do it', I said, 'but I'm going to do it anyhow'. And I said, 'I can't get out of the army and I've got to get a thesis'. And so he just laughed, and went past and he said, 'I did mine, I said the right thing', and he obviously was going to ignore it. So I did start some experiments there.

We'd gotten to the point where we knew it was a chemical and so we had to call it something. And we didn't like the idea of calling it Substance X or whatever, so I happened to run across in Spenser's The Faerie Queene that there was a witch, Acrasia, who like Circe who would attract men and transform them into beasts. And this seemed very attractive because the name of the group from which these slime molds come are the Acrasieae or the Acrasiales. So what could be more appropriate than having this witch transform them into practically like, vitalism, or you have a witch that does it all? But anyhow that never became a problem. So it's still called acrasin actually because there are a number of different species of slime molds and they don't always have the same one. And so if it's this one, any attractant you call acrasin.

We spent some time in England. My parent's moved there. And again, as usual, got to know everybody, it seems to me. And an amusing story happened because of something that happened to me and that is that we were in a house for the summer, a lovely old house in Surrey. And we were having dinner, just the family and there was a visiting coach for tennis, tennis coach to teach the whole family, and a very nice young man. And he wasn't there for dinner and my father said, 'Where is so-and-so?' And I said, 'Oh, he's out with his tart'. And my father looked at me in a very strange way and said, 'Do you know what that means, son?' And I said, 'Yes, he told me'. 'What?' And I said, 'It's short for sweetheart'. And so he said, 'Well, after dinner', he said, 'I want you to come up to my room'. And so I didn't know what to expect. I wasn't upset, but I know I was confused. And so I went up and he opened the dictionary and fiddled around. And finally he said, 'That's what it means'. And he put his finger and I said, 'What is “whore”'? And he gave up and asked my older brother to explain the facts of life to me.

[Q] Tell me about life in Locust Valley.
Well, in the first place, it was very, very pleasant, but it's very different from today. In the first place, in Locust Valley, in the daytime, all the men wore white flannel trousers. I never seen this for years. I can't imagine anything worse because in the warm weather they're wearing flannel, and the fact that it's white doesn't make it any cooler. And we had all sorts of fun as children. And one of the things, the big thing was croquet. And also, I remember all the women with their lovely, big hats. And also, I remember the people delivering illicit booze in miserable sort of plastic suitcases. And I also have all sorts of recollections. And one of them was that the croquet games were lethal. I can remember, for instance, watching people play croquet when the stock market crashed in 1929. And I didn't really appreciate it as a child, but I knew something major had happened. But they all seemed as though, well, that's life. And I remember Woollcott saying, as he was about to shoot the croquet ball, Alexander Woollcott saying, 'Well, there goes my shirt!'
And one day they had a party in the house, and a bunch of people were coming in the afternoon. Suddenly Harold Ross appeared, and Harold Ross was the editor of The New Yorker, of such fame because he really set the pace. And he was a very nice man and I always judged people with whether they were nice to the children. But however, he got on my blacklist because suddenly he said, 'Oh', he said, 'wait a second', he said, 'I have someone in the car out there, I left in the car'. And so someone asked, 'Who is it?' And he said, 'Oh, Ginger Rogers'. And I thought if anybody that could be that way about Ginger Rogers is really black on my list. So he went out and got her.
[Q] So a lot of other famous people there, weren't there?
Well, yes, there were a lot of people connected with journalism. So of course, Ross was a part of a journal. And people who wrote for, like, FPA, who wrote for the world. And let's see, there were people, publishers and so forth, and one of their close friends was Harpo Marx, who was wonderful with us kids and kept us fully entertained. And I always remember feeling a special feeling for Harpo. And that is Woollcott had a summer island that he rented in Lake Bomoseen in Vermont. And there were big signs saying, 'No picnicking', so that boats didn't land on it. And suddenly we were all sitting around, and suddenly someone reported that there were some picnickers that had just arrived, and are setting out their picnic on the grass. So some people wanted to call the police, and Harpo said, 'No, no, I'll handle this'. So he took off all his clothes and he got a hold of a hatchet. And I never saw what he did, but however, he got rid of the picnickers very fast.

[Q] Did you have quite a happy childhood, would you say?
Yes, one unhappy period was sort of my 13, 14, 15, around in there, but it was no more than an average pubescent depression, or whatever you call it. And so otherwise, I was really happy all the time. And even then, if I was getting the blues during that pubescent period, I would just go out in the woods and that would liven me up.

The book [On Growth and Form] was published in 1917, by D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson who was a professor of biology, I guess - I don't know what exactly, natural history, probably - at St Andrew's in Scotland. And he was an extraordinary man because in the first place, he was a distinguished classical scholar. So Oxford translations of Aristotle, for instance, on the history of birds, or the history of fishes, and well, four of them, he translated. And so if you go to ask for the Oxford edition that's what you get. And he also was a very good mathematician. But as far as I'm concerned, his crowning accomplishment is that he wrote the most beautiful prose. [Peter] Medawar once referred to his prose as bel canto. I think that's just exactly right. And he wrote this book in 1917 which became very famous for lots of reasons. And then he wrote a second edition which was twice as long and really, not as satisfactory by any means. So the Cambridge Press asked me if I would do an abridged edition and I said sure, why not? And not realizing what a terrific job it was going to be because it was like asking someone to rewrite Hamlet only make it two-thirds as long, and that's difficult. And anyhow, I did it and it was really in the long-run rewarding; it was a lot of fun after it was finished. And I had interesting relations with the Cambridge Press, too, because after it had been out for a year, I was teaching a course which we used it as a text and a young woman came to me - Princeton, at that time was all male, no women - came to me and asked me if she could sit in on my course. And I said, sure. And it turned out that she was the daughter of a famous classical scholar, Bromer, and she brought the book home and he read it, and - he was visiting at the Institute for Advanced Study, just for a year - and she brought the book home, and he started looking at it. And he sent me a message through her, namely that there were quite a few errors in the footnotes, particularly in the Greek, and some of the other languages. And so what happened was that just then, I got a letter from Cambridge Press saying, they were reprinting. And if I know of any errors, please… And so I said to Bettina, I said, 'Bettina, I want to scheme with your father. I told her about this and I told her that Cambridge Press is really kind of snooty about the whole business of Americans messing up a classic. And so I said, what I want to ask your father to do, if he will, and that is to just send me the corrections and I'll pass them on, as though they were my corrections. And he thought it was a great idea and so that's exactly what we did. And it really is literally true that the tone of the letters from Cambridge Press changed considerably.

And the whole idea of describing shapes mathematically, and the physics of shapes, too, was really sort of new. And the interesting thing about it is that it's not just biologists who like the book, but architects, artists, sculptors, all sorts of things. And my abridged edition crashed the Whole Earth Catalog. I don't know if you remember the Whole Earth Catalog, something that was definitely of the past.

Woollcott was a close family friend and in fact, I think he was really quite fond of my mother. And at the same time though, I don't think he was really a very passionate person, but he used to joke about thinking of ways of murdering my father, so he could walk off with my mother. He also was really a very amusing man, and a good stylist, as far as prose went.
And he used to - he lived near us at one point - and he used to, once a week, we went down, and he read these dog stories, one of them was dog, but mostly these animal stories, and people stories, which were very sentimental. And he read them in a wonderful voice and it was fun.
And he was always… I think I made him nervous, which always bothered me because I liked him. And so we had this sort of strange relationship. But then, I had a birthday and he sent me a pair of cufflinks which were Roy Chapman Andrews' discovery in the Gobi Desert. And they were the first dinosaur eggs that had ever been discovered and he or Roy Chapman Andrews, I don't remember which, set them into cufflinks, and they weren't pretty, but they were really interesting.

My older brother, he took an art course at Harvard with a man named [Langdon] Warner who also did looking for art treasures in the Gobi Desert and he ran across the caravan of Roy Chapman Andrews. Roy Chapman Andrews was the prototype for Indiana Jones. And so he went up to Andrews on his camel and he said, 'Dr Livingston, I presume?' And Andrews said, 'No, my name is Roy Chapman Andrews', so quite irritated. And a few years later, he went to a talk by Andrews of his trip and he said, 'On this day we met a caravan from Harvard and he mistook me for someone named Livingston'.
He [Alexander Wolcott] sent me a very nice letter on my 16th birthday. 'I think it will be justified in regarding your cufflinks as antiques. Roy Chapman Andrews, who headed the aforesaid expedition and who gave the shell fragments to me in Peking some years ago, airily fixed their age as 90,000,000 years but I seem to be detecting Mr Wells (HG Wells in the Science of Life) a tendency to fix their age nearer 50,000,000 years. I am myself a conservative nature so that when I had to declare them at the custom's authorities at the port of San Francisco, I contended myself that they were “more than 100 years old”. Dr Andrews told me that the only other person to whom he had given similar pieces of the dinosaur shell was Jack Barrymore. Barrymore said that anyone who had been an actor as long as he had was accustomed to having old eggs thrown at him. All of which leaves me time and space only to wish you many happy returns of last Tuesday'.

Charles Easterday Renn was my tutor. And he likes applied biology and he felt like that was my career, which he was wrong. And he had himself discovered the wasting disease of eel grass as a peculiar, interesting organism. And in his desire to make an applied biologist of me, he got me in touch with people in the Tennessee Valley Mosquito Control. And all it did was it absolutely convinced me that that's not what I wanted to do because it seemed to me there we spent all day long in swamps up to the waist, collecting mosquito larvae. And then, sometimes, we'd be in villages collecting adult mosquitoes. And that's about all there was to it, except it was my first exposure to the South which was not really very pleasant. There was some people I was very fond of, but on the whole, all the prejudices were out front everywhere.

In the village, you would walk through and it was very decrepit. You would see small infants, with diapers, that's true, but they were dirty, they were filled. And there was a sign in front of one of the stores, which said, 'Be respectful to the women', which didn't sound to me like paradise, and it wasn't. And I went to a Saturday dance and I didn't dance the way she did, and so she just turned around and walked off in the middle of the dance floor! It was definitely a revelation to me, to understand a different part of America. It was very different.

I went to a party and she was there. And it was sort of a cocktail party, a sitting down cocktail party. And I sat by chance, in the chair next to her and we started talking. And you know the way those things work: you immediately mesh or you immediately don't mesh. And we meshed. And so it was really wonderful in a way because we were away from my parents, who were in New Hampshire, and we were away from her parents, who were in New Jersey. And so we were just ourselves and it really turned out to be a very happy marriage and she was very keen on the idea of having kids, so we had four kids, which have been enormously successful. And my only real regret in life, and it bothers me every day, and that is that she's no longer with me. She had Alzheimer's. And the strange thing is that I dream a lot about her now and I don't know why, but when I wake up I feel tremendously happy. And this is a completely non-thought out, irrational kind of happiness, but so she lives on.

It was one of the greatest things that happened to me, and I endured. I think maybe, I don't think I've told you before, but when she first started, and she was half-gone, we were in Nova Scotia. And suddenly she came - I was in bed reading - and she suddenly came to the side of the bed and she said to me, 'What's your name?' And I said, 'John', and she said, 'Oh, good', and climbed up. So it went on to more and more of that, until finally she no longer could speak, really, just noises. Dreadful disease.

The initial experiment, which was essentially done by my senior student, he was doing the work - I was sitting behind the desk - and what he was doing is he was looking at a bunch of light filters to see whether or not they responded to blue light, or red light, or what. And these were very fancy light filters so they gave you a very narrow band of colour. And he found that all of them attracted slugs, these migrating slugs. And then, he did something that I still to this day don't think ever would have occurred to me, and that is he put the little wooden boxes holding the filters in backwards, so that there was a black and… well, they couldn't possibly see the light, that's the thing. And they still went towards the light. And so he came in one morning into the lab and I was sitting at my desk and I remember this so well, he said, 'It's not light, it's heat!' And of course, there were other possibilities, too, but we soon definitely nailed it. And to me, it was always a wonderful thing to see a young student have his Eureka moment.

[Q] Tell me about the time when you went to work in Paris and why, and sort of…
Well, I was quite early in my slime mold years, which there have been a great many, I decided that if I just worked on slime molds all my life, I'd have a distorted view of biology, and that I ought to spread out. And so I greatly admired the work of Fauré-Fremiet. And Fauré-Fremiet was a perfectly remarkable man. He was the son of the composer Fauré and the grandson of Frémiet, who is a sculptor who did the Jeanne d'Arc in the Place des Pyramides. And then, he was the nephew, I guess it was, of Sully Prudhomme, a philosopher. So there was a lot of genes wrapped up. And he was a wonderful person, just wonderful. And he sort of took me in hand, and taught me really how to do research on ciliate protozoa. And it was a terrific time for me.
I also got involved during the birth of molecular biology because there was a group that met once every two weeks, or something like that, in the late afternoon and then, would have dinner. The meetings were always some place that you could eat well. And it had François Jacob, it had Jacques Monod and a number of other people who were really right there at the beginning of molecular biology, and who were very sharp, very sharp. And I used to enjoy that tremendously. Boris Ephrussi was another one. And so I went to those and sort of have this feeling that I learned molecular biology from the roots. Why didn't I stick with it? I was very glad that other people were doing it.

[Q] Do you remember how you felt or what you thought when you first heard about Crick and Watson?
Oh, I just immediately saw that they had their Eureka moment in a big, big, big way. Because the implications were so enormous. And it seemed to me, obviously the case is that was so. And I must confess that I'm one of those people who love the novel that came out - actually, not the novel, but the writing up of it. What was it called?
[Q] The Double Helix.
The Double Helix, I loved it. A lot of people didn't like it because they felt it demeaned great science. But I didn't think so at all. I thought it was just human and nothing could shake down their discovery.
[Q] I thought it was a wonderful book, a really brilliant book, yes.
I knew Naomi Mitchison quite well.
[Q] Who?
Naomi Mitchison.
[Q] Oh, did you, oh, yes, yes. Yes, do you… you stayed…
Excuse me?
[Q] You stayed with them.
Oh yes, a number of times.
[Q] Talk about that.
Well, going there was always a great…
[Q] Can you say where?
Yes, it's on the West Coast of Scotland, on Kintyre. And it's very remarkably wild, and not only the weather, but the scenery is so. And the Mitchisons bought, way back, a Victorian mansion. And one doesn't think of that as being necessarily nice. But it was lovely. And they're very keen on gardening and so their gardens were just fantastic. And they always had interesting people there. So the first time we went, when Dick, who's a Member of Parliament was there, and Naomi, we had about 20 people. And no servants, or anything of that sort. Everybody pitched in. I don't think I pitched in enough, but however. And it was really quite extraordinary, and Murdoch, and in fact, the whole family would come up. So Av would come up, and Laura, his wife, and it was a big, big family and there was a big, big house. And it was very, very nice
[Q] Did you talk about science?
Well, I did primarily with Murdoch, actually, more than anybody else partly because, Av was never there very long. But Av was good to talk about science because he would pick at what you were doing in a way, which made you a little nervous because he's so, perhaps, in it more than you could say, extraordinary mind.

I was asked to come to University College to give some lectures and very excited about it because I was quite a young man. And so I went to there, and was taken care of by all sorts of people who were to me, were only names of wonder that were… people like the person who works with octopuses.
[Q] JZ Young.
Yes, that's right, and many others. And I just had a most wonderful time visiting with them all in the lab and so forth. And all of them came to my lectures, which was somewhat frightening. And after the first… in the first lecture, no, right after it where we were all going to the men's room, suddenly as I was by the urinal, there was this great shadow behind me and a voice came with it and he said, 'Bonner', he said, 'we don't make jokes in lectures in this country'. And I knew the style of putdown. So I said, 'Those weren't jokes. I was just nervous'. And as a result of that, I don't know if that's true, but we got along famously from then on.
And they wanted to take me to dinner at a restaurant and so Bill Billingham, who's there with Medawar said, 'Let me give you some information about what that dinner's going to be like'. He said, 'You'll go to a place with very good food, a small restaurant in Soho somewhere'. And he said, 'And it will get into an argument. It will probably be about something like sex', which it was. All of this turned out to be true. 'And their voices will get louder and louder and you'll notice finally everybody in the room looking at your table'. And he said, 'But don't let it bother you. Just keep eating as though everything were normal'. Turned out to be very good advice. I might have been somewhat shaken if I hadn't had it.

[Q] Was [JBS] Haldane clearly brilliant, would you say?
Oh, yes.
[Q] How would you conjure him us, as it were, you know?
Well, I think he really was brilliant. In the first place, he was a very good mathematician. He also had a very deep understanding of anything connected with genetics. In fact, I suspect deeper than anybody else. And he also of course, this is what he's famous for, loved to say difficult things, be difficult for people, and keep the pot stirred which he was very good at. And I don't know if you read in the book there, his letters to me about my book I sent him. He says, 'You wrote clearly enough, so people will be able to disagree with you', which is perfect form for him.

Theo Konijn, who was from, then from Utrecht, and later Leiden, had been working with slime molds for years. And he was younger than I was, so it still… he had been an old hand. And he and I were chasing after the same thing so I suggested to him that he take a sabbatical and come to Princeton for the year, which he did and it was great. We really did a lot of things.
I came up here in June, not here, but Nova Scotia, and after I'd been there for about three or four weeks, suddenly the phone rang and it was two people on two extensions in Princeton. They were both so excited that I had to make them tell everything three times before I could understand what the hell they were saying. And what had happened is that the graduate student had been taking a course in biochemistry and there was a new substance that had just been discovered by Earl Sutherland, named cyclic AMP. And in this biochemistry course, the professor had outlined its properties and so David said, as they were eating ice cream, David said, 'You know, it exactly seems to fit what we do know about cyclic AMP'. And so they went over that. And they said, 'Well, let's buy some on John's grant', which they did and they tested it as soon as it came and it was active at extremely dilute solutions. So it was solved immediately. Well, we had a lot of fun from then on, of course, then we had to do things like, is it really cyclic AMP that it makes? And is the enzyme which destroys acrasin and acrasinase? Does it destroy cyclic AMP, and so forth and so on? So we did all sort of standard things you do to clean up, as it were. And it stood the test of time. And it was an interesting period for me because I was invited suddenly to medical schools because cyclic AMP had been a very important substance for which Sutherland got the Nobel Prize. And why it was important, it was a substance that seemed to release hormones. So it was a messenger, which told hormones to get going and do something. And it really, I mean, I don't know how many papers have been published on slime mold's cyclic AMP since then. It's just a factory. And I didn't have anything to do with it.

[Q] It's all so different what we see in television, the way biological experiments are done now. Just what was it all like, you know, in your…
Of course, it seemed like the latest, hottest thing. And one doesn't think of it as not knowing what was coming next. And the speed with which new ways of doing things came was fantastic. In fact, I often wonder whether or not the progress in experimental biology can't be to some extent measured in terms of the techniques, the machinery. The electron microscope was a big leap forward and there are many others, perhaps not quite as big a boom as that had, but pretty big. And I mean, there are things like, techniques. Techniques, for instance, of labelling proteins with a fluorescent label. So what we could do, and did, and that is we took cells which are aggregated and then put them under one of these fantastic microscopes which would look for the fluorescence. And not only that, but it could actually look at different layers so that you can sort of make a dissection of where your fluorescence there is. And what we could do, and I mean, once the technique is there, it's easy to do. Once you were ready, you can put all these cells in a bunch or natural or artificial gathering.
And then, put in let's say, a spore protein, which is labelled. And then, you can actually see that these labelled spore proteins will go to one end or the other end, depending whether they're stalk or spore. And it's mind boggling. That was not even accessible to do in the old days.
[Q] What sort of person did you have to be in the old days to do experiments well?
Well, I think you just had to be reasonably intelligent, not drop everything, and it didn't require fancy skills. But now, when I did these experiments with fluorescent things, I always did it with someone who knew what he was doing. And that didn't have to occur when I first started out. I could do it even though I didn't know what I was doing.

I think basically, I'm an 18th century biologist, 19th, maybe 19th – 19th, coming up one. And I find myself thinking, it got to be 20th and 21st century biology after me. And there are lots and lots of wonderful things one can do with 19th century biology, and still can do, even though molecular methods are fantastic, but however, one can meld the molecular techniques with the old-fashioned ones. And I think it's a mistake to just throw away all the old ones because of the fact that for the most part, they are guiding, still, where to look for different kinds of molecules and molecular interactions. You know, when molecular biology first became the thing in places like Princeton and Harvard, there was this tremendous struggle between the molecular biologists who were saying, okay, now we'll take over. We'll do everything, you can go home. And it's, to me, fascinating, the fact that they actually believed that; my kind of biology was dead wood. And they wouldn't even pay attention to anybody who was working with evolution or something of that sort. It was dead wood. But now, we've come back completely to a middle, sensible road, where everything can give you information that you need.

The questions that I ask are very similar to what the questions of the people who are doing developmental molecular biology. And the two go together. So I'm just saying, don't kick me out, yet. I've got a few years to go.
[Q] If you had, just supposing you know, that you could now have another 50 years as a working scientist, would you carry on working in slime molds? Or is there some other…
I don't think so. I think that what possesses me right now, and I think this would be the direction I'd go in. What possesses me right now are problems in evolution because it's such an all-encompassing idea and subject that I find myself infinitely attracted to that.

What possesses me now is sort of fairly big questions that are connected with evolution. And one of the things that I've been working on, and in fact just published, is something to do with the natural selection being different for small organisms, unicellular organisms and similar small ones. And they respond differently to natural selection. And I have lots of evidence for this and not very much interest in it among others, but that's okay. It's the idea that if you have an elephant or a horse or anything big, ourselves, or a tree that natural selection can work on all aspects of it, so it's a big canvas that it has to work with. But if you have amoebae in the soil, then that's not the case where you either can exist or can't exist, that's what it amounts to. And I think that that has big consequences, in terms of the whole evolution of bigger forms. But I'm a voice in the wilderness.

[Q] If I was a visitor from another planet, and you said, 'I work on these things called slime molds'. Just tell me as vividly as you can what a slime mold is and what's special about it?
First place, there are two kinds of slime molds. There are the myxomycetes, which are quite different, they're not totally different, but quite different. And I work on the cellular slime molds. And in the case of cellular slime molds, you can find free-living amoebae in the soil, and you find that they periodically come together to form fruiting bodies, and that's it. Then you have cellular slime molds, and that's very different from going from an egg to an elephant. And it's not only internally, but its relationship to the environment is much more complex. A slime mold may be if there's bacteria around, they eat and if they're not, they don't eat. They don't die. They can exist and form spores.
[Q] Do you ever dream about slime molds?
I haven't in a long, long time. Dancing girls! No, I haven't actually. That's interesting, so odd. Maybe I ought to promote a dream.
