john.maynard.smith

The late British biologist John Maynard Smith (1920-2004) is famous for applying game theory to the study of natural selection. At Eton College, inspired by the work of old Etonian JBS Haldane, Maynard Smith developed an interest in Darwinian evolutionary theory and mathematics. Then he entered University College London (UCL) to study fruit fly genetics under Haldane. In 1973 Maynard Smith formalised a central concept in game theory called the evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS). His ideas, presented in books such as 'Evolution and the Theory of Games', were enormously influential and led to a more rigorous scientific analysis and understanding of interactions between living things.

I was basically brought up by my mother and her family because my father - who was a poor boy made good who became a successful surgeon, house in Wimpole Street and that kind of thing - he died when I was only eight years old. Up to that time - I was born in London and we lived in London - I hardly knew him and we saw him sort of Sunday lunch, literally. I guess he may have provided some genes which are relevant to my subsequent life but certainly no cultural input. My mother's family were sort of landed gentry, hunting and shooting and that kind of thing. I never heard of an idea, either scientific or political or literary, discussed in my family. So it's not obvious where it came from. Certainly my passion for natural history was very early. I can remember even when we still were in London, insisting, when I was given a treat, being taken to the Natural History Museum to look at dinosaurs, or to the zoo to look at animals there. I had picture books about animals. I read stories about animals. And when we moved... when my father died, when I was eight, we moved to the country, mostly on Exmoor, where my grandfather had a house. And I watched birds, I collected beetles, I kept, you know, any animal that I could keep. So I had this passion for natural history which I cannot explain, it was not something I got from an adult. Indeed, I remember vividly, it had quite an impact on me later, as a matter of fact.  When we went to live in the country, it was in the winter, and we put out food for the birds, and the birds came to feed at a bird table. And I suppose something like a dozen species were coming. And I identified these by... not by name, because I didn't know their names, and I made some mistakes. For example, the blackbird, which is black with a yellow beak, and the dark brown female, were different kinds, because how would I know otherwise? And it was really... I think it was six months or so before some adult had the sense to give me a bird book. And the excitement of going through the bird book and finding out that the birds that I had identified were in the book, was very great. And it did, as a matter of fact, convince me later on that as least as far as birds are concerned, species are real things, and they're not just in... in the mind of... of the scientists, they really are out there. But I illustrate it to say that I was fascinated by natural history but there was really no adult input that I can discover.

There are two... routes, which I think you'll find in most evolutionary biologists, not all of them. One is this route of a fascination in animals and plants. And I was even fascinated by plants, I collected plants and so on, picked them and tried to find out what they were. And the other is this sort of philosophical thing, hard to describe. I mean, I've always been interested in where did we come from, how did we get here, a kind of searching about origins. But I don't think these two threads of my life, the philosophical fascination in where did we come from and the natural history fascination in animals, really came together, I guess, until - actually, I exaggerate - I think it was probably I was 15 before those two threads came together and made me interested in evolution, in... in adaptation, in explanations about animals.

I went... I was sent to a boys' boarding school at the age of eight. From the age of eight to 18 I spent most of my time at... first at a prep school and then at Eton. And something I ought to say, I suppose, if I'm going to be honest, something that's always puzzled me, and still puzzles me, is why I did not fit in either at my prep school or at my... at Eton. Because ever since I left Eton I have never found the very least difficulty in fitting in to any society I've been part of, including working at the bench in a factory in Coventry, I mean, you know, I don't find it difficult to... to make relations with people happy. But there was something about my prep school and my... and Eton, Eton in particular, which I loathed, I couldn't make terms with it. But apart from that, they taught me - well, it's not true they taught me nothing, they did teach me something - they taught me mathematics. And Eton taught me mathematics incredibly well, and I have to be grateful to them for that. But there was no science teaching at either, absolutely none, I mean, I just learnt no science, formally, at school. I mean, I learnt some science, but I learnt it because there was a good school library, that is to their credit. And I read Jeans and Eddington and Sherrington and... and Haldane and... I read Darwin, and I read a whole mass of stuff.
[Q] You went into the school library and found these books yourself without any encouragement?
Yes, yes, essentially. Why, I don't know. I just wanted to... I found science fascinating. But nobody... I can't put my finger on anybody who stimulated that interest, any adult who stimulated that interest. They didn't inhibit it, they didn't prevent it, but they didn't encourage it. I mean, they didn't understand science, they didn't know about it. My school master thought that Latin and Greek were what mattered.

I had the good fortune, in some ways, I suppose, of being regarded as rather a stupid boy at school, because I'm very bad at languages, I couldn't do Latin and Greek. I remember... I suppose one of the ultimate human futilities at Eton, you were given - somebody had gone to the trouble to translate Virgil from the Latin 'Down in the deep dark dale, sat an old cow munching a bean stalk' scansion, into English. And we were then told to translate it back into Latin. At the time it struck me as deeply futile, they'd got the Latin, why did we have to do it for them. But I remember that my method was to look up three or four alternatives of each word and then just do permutations and combinations. There had to be some way in which you could fit these words together in any old order, and as far as I could see, it didn't matter in Latin what order things were in, until you got the right scansion. But it was an incredibly futile activity, and I think I knew at the time it was futile. The one thing, as I say, they taught incredibly well, was mathematics, and I've... I have to be grateful to them for that.

Each week, the few of us who were good at mathematics were given a set of problems, 10 problems to solve. And they were not on the maths we'd learnt that week, they were any old mathematics, any old problems. And I would spend anything up to 10 hours in a week trying to solve these problems, partly with a sort of needle between me and two other guys as to who could solve which ones, and so on; partly I just really enjoyed doing it. And I became a very good puzzle solver, and basically my scientific career has been built on solving puzzles, I guess.
[Q] Yes, but you also learned to write English and speak English with the sort of confidence that somewhere like Eton gives you.
I suppose that's true. I certainly was expected to write a lot of essays, and I suppose it's not something I'm conscious of having learned but I guess I did, give them their due.

I read Haldane for a very special reason, that I had come to hate the place and knew I hated the place, and the one person that my teachers really hated was Haldane. It wasn't merely that he was an atheist and a republican and a socialist and all those things, but he was one of them, who'd gone over to the other side, he was an apostate. And I do remember thinking, you know, this guy they're being unpleasant about, anyone they hate this much can't be all bad; and going to the school library - I will say this for the school library, it had the books - and I can remember to this day reading Possible Worlds, and there's an essay in Possible World about these intelligent barnacles. It's a gorgeous essay. The barnacles can only reach what their arms, sweeping like this, can reach. They can't get right out. But they can... they're supposed to have eyes in this story. And they classify objects in the world as real and unreal. And real objects are things that they can reach with their sweepers and unreal are the things that they can't reach, but can see. And then some mathematical barnacle points out that if you... if two different barnacles look at an unreal object and compare notes and do some geometry, they can predict when an unreal object is going to turn real. And they build up a whole, sort of, structure of, you know... that really the unreal things are real after all, and they become good solid materialists. And then someone points out that, as a matter of fact, if you put the right parameters into the equations, some unreal objects are actually underneath the rock, and everybody knows that nothing could be underneath the rock, so they go back to being religious guys again. And I can remember, as a boy of 15, sitting there reading, I'd never come across stuff like this. And I thought: My God, there are people out there who think like that. And it was deeply moving, that it was a mixture of reason, of mathematics, of atheism, all sort of mixed up together. That... it was very moving to find out that I wasn't alone in the world, you know, there were other people out there, who were like me, but I was trying to be like them.

The other big influence in my childhood before I became a scientist, but obviously made me a scientist in the end, was science fiction. I read Wells, I read a man called Stapledon, who people don't read nowadays... wrote an extraordinary book called Last and First Men, in about 1932 or something, which has an atom bomb, it has a... the oil crisis destroying civilisation, it has giant brains, it has the breeding of new human beings who will be able to build civilisation and so on. And I remember reading this book and getting fascinated by genetics, because it's full of the idea of how do you change human nature by genetic means. And I guess, ultimately, that's why I became a geneticist.  But there's a twist to the story, which I feel I ought to get on record, that I... much later, oh, quite recently, I was reading a set of short stories by Arthur C Clarke. And in this... there's an introduction by Clarke about his own childhood, and he describes how he read this book... this same book and how it blew his mind - he's a couple of years older than me, by the way - and how he... it made him a science fiction writer. But the fascinating thing is that he got it out of the local public library, and so did I. We got it out of the same public library, we got it out of the local public library in Minehead, in Somerset. And I thought, now, whichever librarian put that book on the shelf, you know, he's got a lot to answer for. But science fiction had a big influence of introducing me to science.

I took engineering at Cambridge. It... I went up in 1938 to Cambridge. Engineering was a bit of an accident. This is a sort of anecdote about how it came about, which is, sort of, entertaining in a way, I suppose. My grandfather was the head of a successful stockbroking company in the City and making quite a lot of money, and he had three daughters, none of whom could become stockbrokers, I mean in those days you had to be a male to be a stockbroker. And then he had this numerate grandson whom he supposed was going to join the firm and become very, very rich. And I can remember at the age - I think I must have been 16 or so - realising that whatever else I became it wasn't going to be a stockbroker. You've got to want to make money, you've got to be interested in money, and as far as I'm concerned, so long as you've got it, it's not interesting. I can remember, there was a big Sunday lunch, my grandfather at the head of the table and the rest of the family sitting around. And I remember foolishly announcing, at Sunday lunch, one Sunday, that I'd decided not to become a stockbroker. I should have been prepared. My grandfather was a nice old boy, I mean, he was a sweet guy. He said, 'Oh, well, boy, oh, well, what are you going to do then? Eh? What are you going to do?' And I hadn't thought about this, you understand, it never occurred to me to wonder. But I... the week before, at school, I'd been to a lecture by a chap, an engineer, who'd been in charge of the erection of the Sydney Harbour Bridge. Very exciting, he said they'd built it from both sides, and it has what engineers call a male and female fitting, and they go, plunk, like that, when they meet, and so on. And this was very exciting, so I said, 'I'm going to be an engineer.' Of course, what else could I... I had to say something.  And once you'd said something with my grandfather, you couldn't sort of shilly-shally and back down. And in any case, I had no idea you could earn your living being a biologist, it had simply never occurred to me as an option. I mean, Darwin hadn't earned his living as a biologist. I didn't know it was a profession you could pursue. So I said I was going to be an engineer, and then, I went to Cambridge to start engineering. I think, in normal times, I might have realised, when I got there, that perhaps something else was better, for me. But the war broke out.
[Q] The war broke out while you were in Cambridge.
Yes, the war broke out at the end of my first year.
[Q] Did that cut short the length of the degree course?
No, no, it was still a three year degree course, but it was very clear, if you were taking an engineering degree, you went on and finished it. And so I... I completed an engineering degree and then I went and designed aeroplanes between, what,  '41 and '47 or so.

Between the moment when you start designing an aeroplane and the moment when it starts firing, you know, bom-bom-bom in the air, is going to be three years or so; so towards the end of the war we were actually designing civil aeroplanes. It was quite clear that nothing we started designing then was going to be flying in time to be any use in the war. So, in fact, I spent three or four years designing civil stuff at the end, which was rather frustrating actually, but there it is.
[Q] And you were using your mathematical skills then?
Yes, I was not only using mathematical skills - I don't regret the engineering training, in a way, in fact, I don't regret it at all really. It teaches you that mathematics... how to use mathematics. I mean, how to... it first of all teaches you a great faith in mathematical models. I mean, I don't know whether you realise this but up till the 1950s, certainly all the time when I was designing aeroplanes, we designed aeroplanes very successfully, on... one of the assumptions we made was that air is incompressible. Everybody who's pumped up a bicycle tyre knows that air is compressible, but the assumption was that air was incompressible, and it's a perfectly safe assumption to make when designing an aeroplane so long as it doesn't go close to the speed of sound, which in those days, we didn't. In other words, I learnt that you make models, making assumptions that air is incompressible, that metals obey Hooke's Law, which are safe enough to trust your life to. You know, you can go in up in the aeroplanes and they don't crash. And... so I learned how to make models and to put faith in models. Which is not... I don't think I learned any new mathematical techniques as an engineer - the one thing I'll say for Eton is they taught me a lot of straight mathematics - but it did teach me how you apply mathematics to the real world, and to put faith in models of the real world.

[Q] Nowadays, I suppose aircraft designers do their modelling on digital computers, you were doing this long before they were available, so did you do it with pencil or paper or did you have some kind of analogue models that you used?
Well, no, basically you did it with pencil and paper. You had one... computing aid, the slide rule. I would never move anywhere without a slide rule, I mean, I couldn't imagine how a man could live without a slide rule for a time, you know, everything depended upon it. I don't have one anymore, obviously. They were great machines, quiet and clean and obedient, you know, nice things, actually, slide rules. It did... I don't think it was altogether wasted. I mean it is true that one could spend one or two days doing a single numerical computation, who... on the answer of which might depend somebody's life. And it does concentrate the mind. I am very good, still, at doing numerical computations and not making mistakes. And when computers came in, the experience I'd had as a hand calculator was really helpful in... in setting up computations. But you asked about analogue computers. We did and we didn't, it's curious, this. We didn't have any digital computers around, but one of the things you had to know before an aeroplane flew was you had to know what we called it's Natural Modes of Vibration, how it would shake, how it would vibrate, because you needed to know that in order to calculate what speed it would actually vibrate itself to pieces, the so-called Flutter Speed. And it's very difficult to work out the natural modes of vibration of a complicated structure. So what we used to do, before the aeroplane was built, was to build what was actually an electrical analogue of the mechanical system, in which the masses were replaced by inductances, and the... the stiffnesses were replaced by capacitances in the thing and so on. And we would then shake, electrically, the electrical analogue, and deduce from that how the structure was going to...
[Q] How could you be confident that the analogue that you... the electronic analogue obeyed the same mathematical laws, presumably you knew it did up to a point, but how could you be confident that it would... for all cases?
Well, it's something that... how shall I put it...?
[See next video]

The notion of analogue in science I think is absolutely fundamental. Two systems are analogous if, indeed, they do obey the same equations. Now, how did I know that the mechanical and the electrical system obeyed the same equations? Essentially because one knew enough about electricity to... to know how electric circuits behaved. I mean, let's face it, the... the behaviour of a tuning circuit in your radio or in the television, the mathematical equations describing it are identical to a weight bumping about on the end of a spring. And they are identical because we know the... the physics of electrical circuits, we know the physics of springs and weights, and when you write down the equations, they turn out to be the same. So you can... you can draw... and what mathematics does for you is to enable you to recognise the analogy between different systems. I think there's almost nothing a scientist can know which is more important than that; to know, you know, that it's really... once you know the mathematics, you get the behaviour, and you can use one system to tell you how another system will behave. I remember being so cross - this was years later after I was in London working in biology - I learnt about Cybernetics and what they'd done at MIT during the war, who had formalised all this, and that what cybernetics is, is a mathematical formulisation of the analogies between machines. And I said, 'Christ, I know that.' But I only knew it in the particular, you see. It's different because I knew there was an analogy between mechanical behaviour and electrical behaviour, but I'd not make the generalisation to the fact that you can draw an analogy to genetical behaviour, or you can have an analogue of psychological behaviour, I just knew it in one particular case. And what the people at MIT had done is to generalise and say: Analogues can be made between any two systems provided you know the equations are the same. But it's a very important idea, and I was so cross I hadn't thought of it.

It started during the war, when I was working as an aircraft engineer. When I realised that it would actually pay, if you could do it, to design an unstable aeroplane. I should explain that aeroplanes have tailplanes and fins on the back for the same reason that darts have feathers on the back. If you throw a dart and it sort of goes off course a bit, the wind on the feathers bring it back straight, and if an aeroplane sort of slightly goes up or down, then the wind on its tailplane brings it straight again. If you took it off... if you took the tailplane and the fins off, then the aeroplane wouldn't be stable and the pilot couldn't fly it, because as soon as it started veering off, he wouldn't be quick enough to bring it back on. But for reasons, sort of... some of them are obvious and some of them aren't, if you could somehow design an automatic pilot to design the unstable... to fly the unstable aeroplane, it would be a good thing, at least in military aeroplanes, it would turn round corners quicker, it... it would find it easier, you see, to turn corners, and it would have other advantages. And I thought about this quite hard in, oh I suppose '44 or so, '43 or '44, but it was clear at that time that the electronics weren't up to it, we just couldn't make the electronic machinery to work. I'm told, by my young friends, that there are aeroplanes out there today, military aeroplanes, which rely on this principle, there are much better electronics nowadays.

As an engineer, I learnt that you could, in principle, have a flying machine which was unstable and was stabilised by having - if you like - sense organs or sensors which told it what was happening, and a very quick built-in response to those sensors. And I didn't think any more about it until years later, when I was an undergraduate at University College, studying zoology, I realised that flying animals are probably unstable. I knew that... it was clear that birds are, it's rather obvious. In the moulting season, you'll occasionally see a sparrow with no tail, and it flies fine. No aeroplane would fly without a tail. Then, there were much more elegant experiments by a guy called Pringle, who later become Professor at Zoology at Oxford, who showed that two winged flies, Diptera, are unstable, but... in a static sense. And yet they have these little sense organs, the halteres, which are their modified hind wings, which give them information about how they're moving, and they have reflexes to this which enables them to fly. And it's kind of amusing, if you cut the halteres off, the fly can't fly, it just fizzes to the ground. But then, you can make it stable again by giving it a fin. The easiest sort of fin to give it is the tip of a cock's hackle feather, I had them because I used to tie trout flies. And you stick one of these little feathers on the back of the fly and it can fly again. It doesn't fly very well, it zzzzzz, like this, but it can fly. And so I realised that what was true of aeroplanes was true of animals. But interestingly, the most primitive flying animals were... were stable, they didn't have this sensory device, they had great long tails.
[Q] Pterosaurs?
The first Pterosaurs have long tails, Rhamphorhynchus has a great big long tail.
[Q] A great ping-pong bat on the end.
Yes, that's right. What's it called... Archaeopteryx has a great long tail. I don't have any primitive bat with a long tail, but we don't have any.
[Q] There were some late Pterosaurs that didn't have any tail at all, they must have been computationally controlled.
They were computationally controlled, yes. The later ones are fine, but the first insects, the first birds and the first Pterosaurs all had long tails, the one group we don't know about are the bats. They're clearly unstable now, but were they primitively stable? I'd love somebody to find a bat with a long tail.

I had great difficulty in publishing papers about animal locomotion in the '50s. I... I would never have been able to publish this story about the stability of flight if Haldane hadn't bullied the editor of Evolution into publishing it. It was rejected when I submitted it, on the grounds that the author clearly didn't know anything about aerodynamics, which did slightly annoy me, I have to say. If they'd written and said the author clearly doesn't know anything about birds, I would have thought, well, fair enough, but damn it. Then I tried to publish a paper about... about Animal Gaits. It was one of the first optimisation papers every written, I think, in which I showed that the gaits of animals optimised their expenditure of energy at a given speed. And to prove this, I actually differentiated something, and I had an equation, d2w by dj2 = 0, or something. And the referee actually said, 'Why doesn't the author cancel the ds?' I mean, in those days, it was just impossible. And there was a deep anti-theoretic... anti-theoretical sort of culture in... in biology. You were not allowed to have theoretical ideas, except, perhaps in population and genetics, because Haldane and Fisher had made it respectable in population genetics. But in morphology, which I was tampering with, you know, why are animals the shapes they are, you just couldn't do it. It'd be different now.

I went up to Cambridge in a pretty confused state, politically. I mean, you must remember, we're talking about the... the period when the World War was about to break out. I had, between leaving school and going to university, I had spent a holiday for a month with an uncle of mine who, at that time, was British military attache in Berlin. I had seen what was happening in Germany. I've actually heard Hitler make a speech in... in the flesh, a terrifying experience, dark, torches - Zieg Heil, Zieg Heil everywhere. And people are wrong about Hitler in some ways, he didn't scream all the time. Much of the time it was a rather warm, reassuring voice. And then every now and then it would go off into this sort of screaming hysteria. I came back really very frightened, because I sort of knew there was going to be a war. And yet I had been a pacifist, I had this belief that, you know, if people refused to fight there couldn't be wars, which is logically true. But I also sort of knew that pacifism wasn't going to stop Hitler. And I went up to Cambridge, and I think, within a couple of months of going to Cambridge, I joined the Communist Party. They seemed to be the one organisation who did know there was going to be a war. Who... we were very involved in... in the Spanish Civil War, which was raging at the time. But they also were... had what to me were admirable policies on a number of other questions. I mean, I... I made a number of Indian friends when I went up to Cambridge who were determined that India should become independent, which it, of course, later did. And some of these friends of mine became important members in the Congress Party and so on.

The Communist Party did seem to be the one political party at that time that was really determined to... in opposition to the Fascists and the Nazis, but also they knew that, and proposed that, the British Empire should be broken up and given independence. And I had a number of young Indian friends who later became active in the... in Congress and so on, in India, from whom I learnt about conditions in India and the need for independence in India. So, it was... colonial liberation was an important part of one's sympathy with the Communist Party, and then, much more generally, there were gross inequalities of wealth and income in Britain at that time, which the Communist Party were in favour of altering. So, on a number of immediate issues, I felt sympathetic to the Communist Party. And it was... I mean, I wasn't the only one, many of my generation who minded about what was happening in the world, joined the party. And, I didn't do much work at Cambridge, to be honest. I got a second class honours degree at Cambridge on the strength of the mathematics I'd learned at Eton, essentially, and I spent the rest of my time working and organising the Communist Party, and getting married, which was quite a good thing to do. But... I really didn't do any academic work at Cambridge at all, I'd say.

Just as Freudians have a sort of built-in defence against any criticism, if you disagree with a Freudian he says, 'Oh, that's all because you saw something nasty in the woodshed when you were a child,' and it dismisses your arguments as being irrational. The Marxists dismissed evidence against their beliefs on the grounds that this was all capitalist propaganda. I know this, to you, will sound absurd, and to me, it sounds absurd today, but we, my contemporaries, knew of the stories about the purges, about the excesses of Stalinism, not what is known now but we knew that such stories existed, but we dismissed them on the grounds that that's the kind of thing you'd expect the capitalist press to say. We didn't believe them. And we were wrong not to believe them, but we didn't. We had a coherent world view, which fitted together, which explained things, and which was... enabled us to ignore those facts which didn't fit. And... let me go on about the Communist thing a bit further because it was important in my earlier days as a scientist, also. When I... I... I mean I was active in the Communist Party during my period as an engineer, although I was also working very hard as an aircraft engineer and I was also being a Communist. But the thing that ultimately undermined my... my faith, if you like, and in a sense it was like being a member of a religious movement I think, if I'm honest, really it was the Lysenko Affair. And people have sometimes said to me, 'For goodness sake, why swallow the Gulags and start getting fussed about a few geneticists being put in prison and some errors in science?' The difference was, that what I knew about the Lysenko business was said by the Russians themselves, it wasn't something I could dismiss as capitalist propaganda, it was something that the Russians were publishing. I can remember to this day reading the 1948 book about the proceedings of the Lenin Academy of Agricultural Sciences or something, and being absolutely horrified.
[Q] The Situation in Biological Science Today.
That's right, yes. I mean, I couldn't dismiss that as capitalist propaganda, it was socialist propaganda, if you like. And this forced me to reconsider my position on all sorts of other questions. If they're as wrong as they are about that, how many other things are they wrong about? I didn't actually leave the Communist Party until 1956, when the... during the Hungary business. But I had really lost all conviction in my Communist faith by '48, '49. But there is a sort of loyalty. It's difficult to know whether to call it a reluctance to admit one has been that wrong, which is a not very honourable attitude. And... but there was an element of loyalty about it. It's very easy to... well, no, let me say that again. It is very hard to leave a beleaguered group of people. I mean, the Communist Party was increasingly beleaguered - attacked - an increasingly... a minority despised by society during that period. It's very hard to leave, you feel you're like a rat leaving a sinking ship, you know, leaving your friends. And so I just sort of sat there, not doing anything for the Communist Party, not really believing in what it was saying a lot of the time, but reluctant actually to leave.

I took Marxist philosophy very seriously, as we all did. And Marxist philosophy should not be rejected as stupid, I mean, Marx was not a stupid man. It was a... a well articulated, reasoned, philosophical view about the world, it is. And there's no question that... that classical Mendelian genetics was damned undialectical. I speak of dialectical materialism as a philosophy of Marxism. What it says, if you think about it, is that genes determine development in an embryo, but development has no influence on genes. And, I mean, you and I actually believe that to be true, essentially. But this is pre Watson and Crick, remember, we had no molecular understanding of how it could be that a gene could influence development but not be influenced by it. And I was... even after I'd lost my faith in what the Soviet Union was doing and was highly critical of it, I was still enough of a Marxist to feel that... that there was something very suspect about the classical Mendelian attitude in genetics. And indeed, I spent a substantial amount of time doing an experiment which was not, so to speak, intended to demonstrate the falsity of the inheritance acquired characters, but was deliberately looking for a situation in which an acquired character would be inherited. And I thought to myself, what I need is a trait which affects every cell of the body, not just, you know, some external organ, something which is clearly adaptive, it's not the result of damage, and something which I can find in Drosophila where I can do decent genetics. And I looked, in fact, to temperature acclimatisation. I did quite a bit of work on the acclimatisation of fruit flies to a change of temperatures. I showed that they can acclimatise during their lifetime. And then I bred from flies that I'd acclimatised, and compared them with flies that I'd not acclimatised. And it will not surprise you to learn that there was no difference, in other words, the acquired character was not inherited. Curiously, I never published it, because, in a sense, a negative was of no interest except to me, and the rest of the world knew that the negative was to be expected, so I doubt if I could have published it, even actually. But I did take it seriously enough to design an experiment which, if there was any sense in the Lamarckian position, ought to have worked, and it didn't.

There's a curious and quite deep disagreement among biologists, and actually scientists outside biology, on the issue of how far the world could be explained, in very mechanistic, reductionist, you know everything must be explained by dividing it into its parts and A pushes B which pushes C; the world is made of clockwork, you know. It's a view that I hold and I think that you hold. And a view which I might call a sort of holistic view, a view that you've got to look at the whole system, that there's a complex inter-penetration of parts, that nothing is simple, that any attempt to reduce it to its component parts destroys the essence of the structure you're trying to understand. And that... that life is, so to speak, irreversible and irreducibly complicated. And what is odd about this debate is that I actually think that there's a sort of ideological component to it in the sense that in biology, at least, people who hold the holistic, you cannot come up with a simple explanation, everything has to be considered in... as part of a complex interacting system, in biology, I think that people who hold those views tend either to be politically of the left or they tend to be active feminists. I mean, Evelyn Fox Keller, for example, is an example of somebody who holds that view, very sincerely and very rationally - I'm not accusing her of being wrong, I'm just saying, that's the view she holds - and she's also an active ideological feminist. Now, what is curious about this is that if you think about the social sciences, the sides have changed. The classical Self-organisation Model in the social sciences, the model which says, complex structure emerges not by any kind of gene control or anybody telling it what to do, but by some kind of process of self-organisation, is the ideology we associate with everybody from Adam Smith to Mrs Thatcher. It's a belief that an economy left to individual action, without any central control, produces a desirable structure. And the notion which is the opposite notion, the notion of genetic control of things, everything being very centrally controlled, in analogue, is central planning and Socialism. And so, it's very curious, the ideology has changed sides, when you go from biology to sociology, which leads me to suspecting ideology's a jolly bad guide to what is right in either field. But... in my own biolo... biography, I was clearly, in the period between about 1945 and 1955, because of my philosophical influences from Marxism, on the whole I was anti-mechanist, I was looking for holistic explanations rather than the mechanistic ones, which you may find very odd in view of my present views. But I've been there, you see, I know what it's like. I took holistic views seriously.

By '46,'47 or so, I had decided that I did not want to spend the rest of my life being an engineer. It was partly that I suffer quite severely from myopia and astigmatism... there was no way I was ever going to be able to fly an aeroplane. And to spend your life designing things you can't fly is a bit impotent, you know, and I never really liked aeroplanes, in consequence. And I knew... although I'd enjoyed being an engineer, I don't want to get... get you... get me wrong here, I genuinely enjoyed the skills of designing things. I didn't want to do it for the rest of my life. And I hesitated between physics and biology. I knew I wanted to get into academic science, in other words. I thought physics - I think, rightly - I thought physics was too difficult. I'd never make an experimental physicist, any piece of apparatus I touch, breaks, on... there are people like that, and I'm one of them. I simply am not technically good enough to be a theoretical physicist, it's just terribly, terribly hard. I mean, you know, I knew some theoretical physics, I knew what Schrödinger had done, I knew what Einstein had done, so the idea that I could ever do anything like that - no way, just too hard. Whereas biology looked rather easy, and as a matter of fact, as you know, it is, I mean, any idiot can be a biologist, roughly. So I had to... I had to decide to go for biology. And I decided to go back to college. I'm not sure that was necessary. Maybe I could have got straight into post-graduate biology, I don't know, but I think it wasn't a bad idea really. And I... I just enrolled as an undergraduate.
[Q] How old were you when you re-enrolled?
27. It wasn't difficult then, remember, so many of contemporaries who'd spent the war, not designing aeroplanes but being shot at in the Army or the Navy, were also coming... leaving the services and going back to college. So, when I was an undergraduate at University College, you could tell the students from the staff because we were older and more sensible and so on, you know. It was rather a nice time to be a student, actually. So it wasn't that I was... we were a mixture of kids straight out from school, and people who were in their late 20s who'd been through the war. And we made a nice community, actually, a very nice community. And I went to University College essentially because I knew Haldane was there, and I'd been, as I think I said earlier, greatly influenced by his writings. He also shared with me being an old Etonian, he shared with me being an ex-Marxist, or actually, at that time, sort of still formally a Marxist, though like me he was going through the same kind of turmoil over Lysenko and so on, that I went through. And I thought: Well, you know, I would like to learn under this guy. And I mean, whether I... I didn't know just how difficult a person he was but intellectually, I couldn't have done better. I mean, he was marvellous.

What I hadn't realised when I went was how much of the zoology degree was going to consist of comparative anatomy, is the Parasphenoid homologous to the Vomer, I mean, this kind of crap. I... it took me a bit of time to realise what rubbish it all was. I can remember quite well, actually, the moment, and it must have been towards the end of my second year, when I finally decided that comparative anatomy is nonsense. And I was sitting in the... in the library revising for an examination, reading a great big fat book by a lady called Libbie Hyman, called - it was all about the invertebrates, and you... you know, if you were a really good student you had to know Libbie Hyman. And I was reading about the coelenterates, you know, hydra and those guys. And at the beginning, there was this definition of what, morphologically, the coelenterates have to have, and they have to have a mouth but no anus. Well, that's clear enough, food goes in one end, comes out the same hole, can't go out the back, everybody knows what that means. And I thought: Well that's understandable. And then I came to some group which were classified as coelenterates, which actually, the food went right through and came out at a hole in the back. And then it said, 'But this is not a real anus.' I remember sitting there saying, 'This is a dishonest branch of science, if they come across a fact that doesn't fit their classification, they just tell lies about it.' So, I think the comparative anatomy part of it was rather a waste of time, though DMS Watson's lectures were marvellous, actually. He was one of those people who could talk without notes, in perfect prose, elegantly, intelligently. He was lovely to listen to, a lovely man. But most of the course was a waste of time except for... for Haldane and Helen Spurway, his wife, who taught genetics and a bit of behaviour and so on, which, you know, I've lived on ever since.

Medawar was actually... he was a new boy at the same time as me. I mean, Watson retired the year I graduated and became a graduate student, and Medawar became Professor of Zoology the year I became a graduate student. He was an immunologist. And to be honest, I'd never heard of him when he was appointed. I remember learning that this person called PB Medawar was going to be our new Professor of Zoology, and I was a first year graduate student with Haldane at that stage. And I remember asking Haldane one evening about, you know, what sort of chap is this Medawar.  To which Haldane replied, 'He smiles and smiles and is a villain.' And if you knew Peter Medawar, it was a perfect description, except, of course, that Peter was a great scientist with a passion for the truth. But he... it wasn't fair really, he was not only incredibly intelligent and skilful manually, all the gifts you need to be a great scientist. He was also extraordinarily handsome, I mean, he really was very handsome indeed. He had a beautiful wife, charming children, one just really felt that, you know, too much had been given to one man.
[Q] Niko Tinbergen described him as touched by the gods.
Yes, there was an element, and, of course, as you know, the gods got him, he had a terrible stroke. But Peter was, this curious amalgam, of on the one hand, a man so charming. Another - I've quoted one piece of Shakespeare, let me quote another one: 'He would have men about him that are fat, sleek-headed men, and such that sleep at nights.' He didn't like rows, he liked courtesy, he liked comfort around him. But this is giving a totally false impression of the real Medawar. The real Medawar was a man passionate for the truth... and deeply critical of fudge, of obscurantism, of muddle. He was a lovely man, I mean, I... I want to make it clear that I loved him, and yet, there was a part of Peter, this smoothness, this charm, which one felt was unfair, almost, you know.
I can remember him - my wife and I used to play bridge with Peter every Saturday night, not with Peter and his wife, because his wife didn't like bridge, but with Peter and his mother, and you only had to meet his mother to know where the IQ had come from, she was a very smart old lady. Anyway, not that this has got anything to do with science, but I remember Peter ringing me up one Friday, just checking that Sheila and I were OK for the bridge. I'd just been reading The Times, which we took in those days, and on the front page of The Times was a new honours list. Peter was going to become Sir Peter Medawar. It was breakfast time, I wasn't really awake, and the phone rang and Peter's voice was there, and I said, 'Peter, there's dreadful news in The Times this morning, have you seen it?' To which he replied, 'John, I knew you'd feel like that.' So, you know, there was... Peter wanted to become Sir Peter Medawar. It's ridiculous, how can the crew that give out honours honour a man like that? I mean, it's absurd. I mean, he had honour, but he didn't have to be honoured by that crew. I felt sad about it, and he knew I'd feel sad about it, but we were... the thing I learned from Medawar, scientifically, apart from the importance of clarity and rigour, was that scientific issues ultimately have to be settled by observation or experiment. If there is no observation or experiment that can settle a scientific question, it's not a scientific question. I mean, leave it to the philosophers and let them waste time on it. Ultimately, there has to be a scientific... there has to be an experimental or observational way of doing it. And Peter was very happy, he'd argue for hours, but once one had narrowed a question down to some question of fact that could in principle be done, he didn't really want to discuss it anymore until somebody had done it. And he, of course, had a genius for deciding and designing the experiment that would settle it.

I knew him well, obviously, I worked with him, I loved him. I was, I think, close to him. But I never quite understood him, and why should one? Why should one expect to understand one's friends? I mean, he was staggeringly intelligent, I mean, there's no question about that. He... he had this cast of mind, it was not like Medawar's. Medawar's cast of mind ultimately was to reduce it to an experiment and then try and do the experiment. Haldane, confronted with anything from air raid precautions to how genes work, his instinct was to try make... to reduce it to a mathematical model, and the simpler the model the better. And he... he had a real genius for making simple, formal, mathematical models of the world, from which you could deduce what was going to happen. I don't think he was a particularly good mathematician.
[Q] Was he self-taught as a mathematician?
Oh no, no. He'd taken a double first at Oxford in mathematics and classics. He was self-taught as a biologist. He was... he was not a naturalist, I mean his skills were not from natural history, they were essentially from mathematics. And he knew a lot of chemistry, actually, which he'd learnt from his father. He told me once the chemical explanations were much more important than morphological ones, a view that I actually share.

The major thing that Haldane did scientifically, I suppose, has to be the work that he did, as well as, rather independently, RA Fisher and Sewell Wright, which was to show that genetics is compatible with Darwinism. It's very odd that in the period between 1900 and the 1920s, it really was felt that you either had to be a Mendelian geneticist or a Darwinian and you couldn't be both, which is absurd. But I think it required the work of people like Haldane to show that that wasn't true. And it involved elegant and simple mathematical modelling, essentially. But he went on making mathematical models through his life. And... I find it awfully difficult, you see talking about Haldane, to know which of the things I think - I thought of myself and which of the things I think and do, I am just imitating Haldane. Because when you live with somebody of that degree of intellect, it really is hard to know what is your own ideas and what is his. But he was also a very difficult person to work with. He was one of those people who liked the feeling of adrenaline circulating, I think. He enjoyed being either angry or afraid. He admits, for example, that he genuinely enjoyed being in the trenches in the First World War, because he was frightened the whole time, and somehow or other, that made him feel more alive. There are people who actually enjoy adrenaline, and Haldane was one of them, but it did make him awkward to live with. It was like living with an unexploded bomb, you never knew when it was going to go off.

He and his wife, Helen, had the rather nice habit that on the night when we'd all finished our finals examination - and by all I mean there was a dozen or so students of zoology - he had the habit of taking the class after the last exam, to The Marlborough, which is the pub just down the other side of the road, and buying us all a drink until closing time. It was very pleasant. And I went there the night I took finals. And when the pub shut, he said to me and to Pamela Robinson, who was also going to become a graduate student in, in fact, in palaeontology, would we like to go back to his flat and continue drinking, because we clearly hadn't had enough, and rather foolishly we said we would. So we went back to Prof's flat and we continued to drink and talk about the world, until about two o'clock in the morning. Pamela said, 'Look, Prof, John and I really have to go home, but the tubes have stopped running and you're going to have to drive us home.' So Haldane said, 'All right, I'll drive you home.' So we piled into Prof's... Prof lived at the bottom of Parliament Hill. So we got into this car at the bottom of Parliament Hill. It was a typical Haldane possession, it was extremely old and ramshackled and decrepit. And we started driving up the hill. And about halfway up the hill, the car started filling with smoke. And I didn't like to say anything, I thought this was normal. But Pamela said, 'Prof, I think the car's on fire.' 'Oh, oh well.' So we drew up beside... piled out. And, as an engineer, I was told to find out what was wrong. And it was clear nothing very serious was wrong, what had happened was that the carpeting had fallen down on the transmission and was burning underneath the front seat. So, we looked at this for a bit. And Haldane said, 'The ladies will go and stand behind yonder lamp post.' And I thought: What next? And he then turned to me and said, 'Smith, the method of Pantagruel. You have had more beer than I have, put it out.' Now, part of this is, of course, you had to know the classical quotation, you had to know that Pantagruel had, in fact, put out Paris on fire by peeing on it. So I did. And I don't know, you know, if you've had a lot of beer and you start peeing, it's kind of hard of stop. He said, 'That's enough, boy, that's enough.' But my point is that if you were going to work and live with Haldane, you had to be prepared to live in this slightly unpredictable environment, and I... I was. And Helen was, his wife, I mean she... the other thing about Haldane was that if he said something you disagreed with, you could tell him to shut up and stop being such a silly old fart, he didn't mind, I mean. But you had to treat him like that, it was no good being polite, you had to fight back if he said things you didn't agree with.

Jean Clark, whom I worked with for many years and we published many papers together, started... when I went into the lab she was the technician in the lab, but she took a part-time degree at Birkbeck and became a graduate student of Haldane's. She could say anything she liked to Prof and he'd take it. It wasn't that Haldane minded, it was just that most graduate students never cottoned on that that's what you were meant to do, they found him so frightening. So he didn't find it easy to make friends. I'd like to tell you a story about Sheila if I may, my wife. Since she's not here. When Haldane, this was many years later, when he... he had a major operation for cancer in... in University College Hospital, and when he came out to convalesce, he stayed with us for a couple of months 'cause, his wife, Helen, was still in India. And Helen... Sheila, you know, looked after him, cooked his porridge for breakfast, and he was very sweet with the kids and so on. And then he was due to... he was better, he was due to fly back to India, I drove him to the airport. And I can remember it vividly, it was snowing, beautiful. This was... I remember we had to drive up over Hampstead Heath. And without saying anything, I stopped the car and we got out, and we looked at the snow, and he said, 'I'm never going to see this again.' Of course, he was going to the plains of India, he probably wasn't. And then, it tells you something about him, he said, 'I want you to say good-bye to Sheila for me.' Sorry. He said, 'I don't think she knows how much I love her.' Well, for God's sake, why couldn't you tell her? But he didn't find personal relationships easy, and Sheila is not somebody who can shout back, like I can, she's a gentler person than I am. And he just couldn't tell her. So I think he did have real difficulties with personal relationships. I don't why, I think it had something to do with Eton, which can ruin anybody's life. I think it had something to do with his parents. His mother wanted him to become prime minister, his father wanted him to become a great scientist. I think he could have done either, but he could not do both, and I think they fought over him. And I think a combination of his parents fighting over him, having this really rather ghastly public school education, just made it hard for him to form easy personal relationships.
[Q] Because he'd had statesmen in his ancestry as well as...
Oh yes, indeed, the Haldanes were both politicians and scientists. And I think, in some ways, it's a great pity, because he never was able to build up a kind of big department or a school of followers, you know. On the other hand, of course, it did mean that he continued to do his own thing, which was science, right up to the end of his life. And always, he had a few young colleagues whom he liked and was kind to and with whom he could work. I mean, it wasn't just me and Jean; all through his life he'd had young people that he could work with - Helen was one of them. But they did have to have certain qualities, they not only had to be fairly bright, or he... he couldn't suffer fools, but they also had to be sort of, rather aggressive people, people willing to, sort of, argue.

Helen, I have to say, I probably learned as much from her as I did from him. I learnt from Helen the absolute importance of writing down what you see as a scientist, not what you'd like to see or what you hoped to see, but what actually happened, and to write it down at the time and so on. I mean she was a meticulous observer, Helen. Give her an animal and she'd keep it and it would be breeding if you could give her one of each sex, I mean, she was marvellous with animals, she was a marvellous observer. I don't think she was a great theoretician, I mean, in fact, I know she was not. But she was... she was a damned good geneticist, because to be a good geneticist you've got to have the animals, they've got to be alive, they've got to breed, and you've got to write down precisely what happened. And that kind of honesty about the facts is what I learned from Helen, I think. We used to have great arguments. I used to say, 'Look, the way to do science is to think of an important problem and then find the right organism upon which to solve this problem.' And Helen would say, 'No, you must allow the organisms to lead you, keep the animal, keep the plant, and it will tell you what is interesting. And you must observe what it does, you must write down what it does and let the organism decide for you.' I still think I was right and she was wrong, but her way of doing science is a way of doing science.

Immediately after the war, well a few years after the war, the work of Tinbergen and Lorenz were very exciting among animal behaviourists. In the main courses I was taught as an undergraduate, I did not hear their names. Animal behaviour was treated... the classic textbook was a book by Fraenkel and Gunn which was all about really very mechanistic analyses of how animals behaved, how they went towards lights and away from heat and so on. But it was all very, very much robotic sort of behavioural stuff. And we never heard of Lorenz and Tinbergen from our main teachers, for example, GP Wells, HG's [Wells] son, never mentioned them. I learned them first not from Helen Spurway but from two of my fellow undergraduates who'd just come up from school, one of whom was Aubrey Manning and the other whom was David Blest. And they had both been introduced to the writings of the ethologists by bright school masters, I think, and they were busy talking about them. And at first, I was rather unsympathetic, because I was an engineer and I really rather liked these very mechanistic accounts that I found in Fraenkel and Gunn, but they gradually converted me. But Helen did...  Helen Spurway did talk about the ethologists in her lectures. She wasn't meant to be talking about behaviour, she was meant to be talking about genetics, but she did talk about the ethologists. And I read both Tinbergen and Lorenz when I was an undergraduate, but really not because it was part of the course, it was outside
[Q] Tinbergen was not unmechanist, he was nothing like Fraenkel and Gunn, but he did have a sort of mechanistic view as well.
Oh yeah, but he did hold that there was something inside an animal's head. And for Fraenkel and Gunn, there really wasn't, except a few simple relays. Made a big difference. I did wonder for a time, I have to admit, whether I wanted, after graduating, to go to Oxford and work with Tinbergen, or Lack... perhaps Lack, as a man I had great affection for, he was very kind to me. But I decided not to on what turned out to be, I think, very sensible grounds that I didn't think I'd be good at fieldwork. It's not that I wouldn't have enjoyed doing fieldwork, but I had very poor eyesight, and I do think fieldwork, at least on birds, requires you to be able to see, which I can't. On the other hand, I am quite good at mathematics and I thought, you know, doing something genetical, experimental, will be more what I'm good at. So I was quite right. I stayed and did what I'm good at rather than went and did something I'm not good at. But I had close contacts, not with much with Tinbergen at first, of course, but with his students. Both Aubrey Manning and David Blest went to Oxford and worked with Tinbergen, and I got to know some of the other students there as well, so that I was quite close to the people in Oxford in the years immediately after I graduated.

I didn't mean to work on courtship behaviour and Drosophila, it was not planned in any way. What I was working on, which was really a project that I'd chosen myself, was the effects of inbreeding in general, but particularly, I mean,  using Drosophila as an experimental animal, and I was looking at the effects of inbreeding on fertility and rate of development and size and longevity and so on. And one of the things I discovered was that in an inbred line of Drosophila subobscura, this was, something like anything from 50 to 90% of the eggs failed to hatch. And I was puzzled by this. And one possible explanation was that they'd never actually been fertilised. And the first thing to do, the simple way, was just simply to make sure that the females had been mated, because obviously, if they hadn't been mated, the eggs wouldn't be fertilised. So, I can remember one morning setting up a large number of pairs, some of them an inbred male with an out-bred female, and some of them pairs of out-bred male and out-bred female, just to make sure the matings had taken place, so I was then going to collect eggs and count whether they hatched or not, and so on. And it was really quite astonishing that all the out-bred males mated with the female within five or ten minutes of putting them together, and almost none of the inbred males managed to mate with them. And I thought, well, there's something funny going on here, because it clearly wasn't the case that the inbred males were not trying, if one's allowed to use words like trying in animal behaviour. I mean, they were going through the whole courtship ritual, they were doing everything they ought to do, but the females were rejecting them. And so that led me to investigate courtship behaviour. But it wasn't, in other words, I wasn't led to this by the ethologists, I was led to it, as Helen would like me to be, I suppose, by the animals. The animals said, look, there's something funny going on here. And then I had a long, not debate, it was never printed, it was sort of long arguments in pubs and so on, really, particularly with Margaret Bastock, who was also working on courtship in Drosophila, and she was a student of Tinbergen's at the time.
[Q] And Mrs Manning.
Yes, she married Aubrey Manning, that's right. And I said, essentially, that the reason why the out-bred females are rejecting the inbred males is that when the out-bred female does her sideways dance, the inbred males can't keep up, and if they can't keep up, if they can't dance properly, the female rejects them. The out-bred males keep up fine and all's well. And the reason they don't keep up is that they can't, their eyesight's not good enough or their legs are not any good, or whatever, you know. And I could not persuade the young people in Oxford that this was the right interpretation. To me it was obvious, you know. But for them, at that time, if an animal didn't do something, it was because it wasn't motivated to do it. There was this notion of motivation. They had this internal sort of machinery, which was switched on by something called drive or motivation, and that what was wrong with my inbred males had to be they weren't motivated. And I said, 'Well, come on, now, they'll keep trying for an hour or so, and at the end of it, they'll get desperate and walk up behind the female and try jumping straight on. This doesn't look to me like a lack of motivation.' And I basically believe I was right. But it was quite interesting that, more generally, you see, the ethologists recognise what they called an instinct by the fact that it was a universal, all members of a species had to have it. And variation in behaviour had to be explained, therefore, by motivation... the differences. But they weren't really very interested in variation, they were interested in what was universal, whereas geneticists were interested in differences.

I still do not understand fully why it took so long. I mean, Darwin put forward the idea in his book in 1871, and I think it's fair to say that - I understand why it was rejected at the time, and it very largely was, people did not take sexual selection seriously, essentially, I believe, it wasn't that they didn't like sex or they didn't like the notion of choice. I mean, choice was unmechanistic, they were trying to reduce behaviour to a mechanism, and they couldn't fit choice into a machinery. But it is very odd that it was a hundred years from Darwin's publication before people did serious work on the subject. I've talked to Peter O'Donald about this. Peter, who was a student of RA Fisher's, did mathematical models of sexual selection, which were really the beginning of all theoretical modelling of sexual selection, I think, they were good models. You know, what led him to do it. Because, I think, in some ways, those models were the sort of beginning of something. But there's an interesting piece of history there that I don't fully understand, as to why the enormous delay. And then, nowadays, you can't open a journal of behaviour without reading about sexual selection. But it's all happened in the last twenty years.

It wasn't conscious, but when I actually look and think what topics have I really spent a long time thinking about in biology, they tend to have been topics which are not easy to explain in Darwinian terms. And ageing, obviously, I mean, senescence says you get more likely to die as you get older. Well, why would you want to die at all? I mean, Darwinism would suggest you ought to last forever, and so on. So there is a problem, and always has been, for a Darwinist in explaining senescence. And I think that's why I got interested in ageing. And similarly, the other things I've been interested in, like sex and ritualised behaviour, have exactly the same kind of motivation, there's something going on that isn't easy to explain in Darwinian terms.
[Q] Did you talk to Medawar about ageing?
I don't think I did. I do remember Medawar - Medawar's inaugural lecture, when he came to University College, which was certainly before I was working on ageing, was about ageing. And he had some, I think, very perceptive things to say about ageing. I knew he was interested in the problem. I mean, he hired Alex Comfort, for example, who was also working on ageing. But I don't actually think that that's why I worked on the problem.
[Q] He produced the first, sort of, Darwinian account of it. 
Yes, he did. No, no, Peter encouraged me a lot to work on ageing. But I think, curiously enough, again Helen comes out on top. I think I worked on ageing because the flies told me to, almost, you know. I mean, I was interested in the inbreeding phenomenon, and one of the things one couldn't help noticing, that the inbred animals didn't live very long. And that's when I started doing life table work. And then I got more and more chemical, it all got terribly technical towards the end. I mean we discovered a rather unexpected thing about flies, I mean this was much later, by the mid '60s, that fruit flies, or at least Drosophila subobscura, I don't think it's even been repeated on melanogaster, but most of the proteins in adult fruit flies are not replaced at all. None of the muscle protein, none of the mitochondrial protein is turned over at all in adult fruit flies. And by the time an adult fruit fly is a couple of months old, its mitochondria have become almost totally uncoupled. They will oxidise like crazy and not make any ATP, because they're made of proteins which have gradually come unwound and untangled and denatured and so on and they're just not working any more. And, in a sense, it was when we discovered that, which we didn't really finish until I came to Sussex, actually, that in a sense, I slightly lost interest in ageing. I mean, this seemed to me to be a sufficient explanation of why fruit flies age, why they become less and less capable of doing things as they get older; but it quite certainly isn't the explanation of why you and I age, because we do replace all our mitochondrial proteins. And I was forced to the conclusion that actually there's not one cause of ageing but many different causes of ageing, both independently in a single organism, many causes of ageing, and different causes in different organisms. And it sort of loses its universality somehow, you know. And anyway, it became too chemical for me, I wasn't going to start struggling with oxidative... phosphorylation in mitochondria, it's not my scene at all, so I got out.

It's all very well saying that genes control development, but you know, that can't be possibly be true in a way. How do they make shapes? And... as you know, that's an enormously active field of research right now. I was fascinated by it between 1950 and 1960s, '65 or so, and I still am interested. I tried to approach it by a sort of quantitative genetics approach of taking morphological patterns in fruit flies and seeing how far I could change them by selection. Could I cause the fly to have different patterns of bristles on its head and that sort of thing. The notion at the back of my mind was that if you can answer the question, what changes can happen and what changes can't happen, by genetic selection, it may give you a clue to what the machinery is. I don't think it was a silly idea but I'm not convinced it really led anywhere very much. I mean, I think what's led somewhere is the identification of specific genes with specific effects on adult morphology, which, as you know, is very exciting at the moment. I guess - I think, really to push that approach to the direction it's been pushed in the last 20, 30 years, one needed molecular techniques that simply weren't available in the 1950s. So even if I'd thought of it, I probably couldn't have done it.
[Q] But you had things like the observation that certain groups of mammals produce horns and others don't, getting clues, I suppose. 
Yes, there were clues around, but my feeling is that until one could do what one can do now, which is to not only identify genes but to sequence them, find out exactly in which tissue they first become active, find what happens if you knock them out, even find out what happens if you take them and transfer them into a different organism or a different tissue. When you can do all those things, you really can begin to sort of piece together a causal theory of ageing... of development.  We couldn't do any of those things in those days, we couldn't sequence genes, we couldn't move them around; all we could look at were the, sort of, the final results, the morphology. And although I was very devoted to the subject and thought about it a lot - well it's never a waste of time to think about something, but I'm not really sure that I got anywhere very much with it.

I tend to think his thoughts were very similar to my own, and the difficulties he went through were very similar to my own. But there was an important difference, he was a very public figure. We were in the middle of the Cold War. He was very reluctant to say anything which could be used in the Cold War as a sort of anti-Soviet, pro-American propaganda. And he was therefore saying quite different things inside the Communist Party about Lysenko to what he was saying in public. And when I heard him talk at a number of inner party meetings, in which he was saying to the Communists, essentially two things: first, it is not right that politicians should tell scientists how to do their science, which is what the Executive Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union had, in fact, done - that scientific questions have to be settled by scientists and not by politicians. And secondly, that it is not right that scientists who don't agree with the party line should be put in prison. And he was very explicit about that within the party, trying to persuade people. And the third thing he was saying, it is not necessary or desirable that the British Communist Party should have a policy supporting Lysenko. And he was very clear about that within the party. Those were not the things he was saying in public, outside the party, and I do understand why, you know, and indeed, I think he may be quite right to divide the things he said in public. The one other thing I remember, vividly, and I wish I knew more... in a way, this would have been, I guess, very soon after I graduated, in about '51, '52, the Russians sent to Western Europe a hatchet man of Lysenko's, called Glushenko, who called, among other people, on Haldane, to... he arrived with a couple of goons, it was awful, you know. He arrived in the department. And he and the goons, I try to remember, I think and the goons, were actually closeted in Haldane's office for about three hours, trying to persuade Haldane how right Lysenko was. And Haldane was absolutely unapproachable for two or three days afterwards. He was clearly pretty shaken by what I take to be Glushenko's ignorance. Now, I talked to somebody in Paris quite recently, and I'm sorry I've forgotten his name, who was also interviewed by Glushenko at the same time. He said, what Glushenko told him was the following argument, among others, that of course heredity of humans and mice are different. For example, glucose is different in humans and mice. And when this chap said, 'What do you mean, glucose is different?' He said, 'It's different.' And he said, 'Well, the formula of glucose is the same whether it's in mouse or...' And there was just no... I think that if that kind of ignorance and stupidity had been put to Haldane, I can understand just how disturbed and distressed he would have been. Because you must understand, we did believe this stuff, Richard, you know we were sincere Communists.
[Q] That '48 document which you referred to earlier, The Situation in Biological Science, that, to me, is chilling because of the bullying that was going on. I would have thought he would have somehow seen that and would have identified with these people who were being hounded. 
I think he did. I think he did. And yet, as I say there was... you can put it either way, depending on whether you want to be sympathetic or unsympathetic, and you can put it on me as well. You can say we were unwilling to admit we were wrong, and had been that wrong, or you can say well, we were trying to be loyal to comrades we had worked with for many years, we were trying to be loyal to an ideal that we had followed for many years. And the truth, I guess, is part one and part the other. I'm not trying to excuse it. I don't blame myself at all for joining the Communist Party in '38, I think I'd do the same again. I do blame myself for staying in as long as I did, and therefore, to some extent, I must be critical of Haldane for staying in as long as he did.

This was when he was in hospital. He came... It was after he'd gone to India but he'd come back to visit the West, and he'd been having bleeding from the bowel and he was due to have a major operation, a colostomy. And to understand the story you have to realise that a colostomy is an operation in which they give a new opening to your bowels, in the lower stomach. And I went to spend the last half hour with him before he was wheeled off. His wife was in India still, and I felt that he'd like to have a friend with him before he was taken away. And they take you away and they shave you around the private parts, and they wash you and so on. So he was taken away by this nice nurse and brought back in again. And there was a sort of slightly odd expression on his face, and I didn't what was on, but what had obviously happened, he'd decided that possibly, you know, he was an old man, he might die on the operating table. He was very vain, you must understand. It was quite important that he have some good last words, and who better to say them to than Smith, who'd remember them and repeat them. So, he looked me straight in the eye and he said, 'Well, Smith, just had me last shit.' And he wouldn't say another word. Unfortunately, in a sense, for him, they weren't his last words and I don't actually know what his last words were - though I have heard from Helen, that as he lay dying, in India, he had in his hand a stone which he had picked up in Israel, in the stream where David is said to have picked up his stone that he used to kill Goliath. And apparently he was holding this stone... I'm so sorry, I'm going to cry.
[Q] Take your time.
He was holding this stone as he lay dying, and Helen said, 'When he dropped it, I knew he'd died.' But I don't know what he last said. The world won't be the same without him, but we all have teachers.

I came here, in Sussex, in '65. It's clear that... It was Peter Medawar that got me the job, I think it's clear. He was one of the advisors... scientific advisors to the university, which was a new university, and I was given the job of being the first Dean of Biology here.  
[Q] That was big promotion for you, wasn't it?
Oh yes. But it did mean that I was going to have to spend at least some time administering and running things, and so on, which I'd never bothered to do before, and it did therefore mean some sort of interruption to my science. And I was a bit reluctant to do that, I'm not a good administrator, I hate running things. On the other hand, I was very impatient with the way that biology was being taught at University College, and indeed, in most British universities. It was still dominated by departments of zoology and botany and genetics and biochemistry who never talked to one another. And it seemed to me very nineteenth century stuff, a lot that we were teaching. And it did give me an opportunity of starting a department in which biology was a unified science and in which it was, sort of, taught in a modern way. So I couldn't easily refuse. But I think Peter suggested to them that they might offer me the job... I know he did.

Bill was a graduate student in the - I suppose it must have been right at the end of the '50s and the early '60s - jointly supervised by a man called [John] Hajnal at the London School of Economics, and Cedric Smith, who was in the Galton Laboratory. I have to say, I do not remember ever meeting him when he was a graduate student at University College. And... but it's clear that I did. Bill remembers being introduced to me by Cedric Smith, his supervisor, as being somebody working on altruism. I have to say, I don't recall it. I think the reason is that I did not have an enormously high respect for Cedric Smith as a biologist. I mean, I think Cedric Smith was and is a good statistician but I don't think he understood what biology was all about. If Bill was then anything like he is now, and he probably was more so, he was a deeply inarticulate young man. And I can just imagine myself being introduced to this inarticulate kid by an academic I didn't greatly respect, and not realising I was being introduced to a genius, how the hell do you know? I deeply regret this, it's one of the things in my life I do regret, that I didn't know that I was being introduced to a young man of real genius, working on a profoundly important problem. And I didn't help him. And I've always, as a teacher, liked to help young people, and I failed on that occasion. I think there are lots of excuses, and I can understand how it happened, but it did leave a scar. Bill felt that I had been unsympathetic, unappreciative, when he needed help. However, I have to say that his supervisor, Cedric Smith, worked in the Galton Laboratory, and my wife worked in the Galton Laboratory during that period, and she never remembers having seen him or met him. So he wasn't a very obvious figure, I mean, it was easy not to know he was there. I first knew about him, without realising he'd ever been at the college, when the '64 paper, The Genetic Evolution of Social Behaviour, or whatever it's called, was submitted to The Journal of Theoretical Biology, and it was sent to me by Danielli with a covering letter saying that this had been seen by two referees who say they don't understand it. 'All the same, I think there might be something in it, will you have a look?' And I can remember reading the paper, and struggling with it, and it was deeply obscure. It is a hard paper to read, I don't think many people have ever read it, to be honest. It was made more obscure by the trivial fact that his notation was one of indices which were either open circles or closed circles, but on his typewriter, all circles were closed, it was a messy typewriter. So the whole thing was... I can remember wading through this and saying, I understand why the other referees didn't understand it, I'm not understanding this. Fortunately, I went on just long enough before giving up, and came, about halfway through the paper, to this discussion of social insects, in which he describes how females are more closely related to their sisters than they are to their own daughters, because of the haplo-diploid system in social insects, and how this might have some relevance to the evolution of social behaviour. And I can vividly remember sitting there and thinking, as Huxley is said to have thought about Darwin, 'God, why didn't I think of that?' It's so simple, and I hadn't thought of it, and I remember feeling very cross. And I wrote to the JTB and said, 'I think this chap really is on to something, and I think it's important. But I think people will notice it if he divides the paper into two: one of which deals with the natural history and the social insect stuff, and the other one which deals with the mathematics.' And they persuaded him to do that. But I think he also - and I can understand it - felt resentful of that. Felt that he'd been... and I think he, to some extent, blamed me for having held him up for a long time. So he felt pretty bad about the role I played.

In '62, I think it was, Wynne-Edwards published his book in which he argued that the regulation of animal population numbers was brought about because animals limited their own population numbers behaviourally by displays revealing the density of the population. The idea being that if they could regulate their own numbers, it would be better for the survival of the species than if they all bred as fast as they could and there was kind of population disaster and starvation. So the notion was that in order to avoid starving you regulate your own population by display. And Wynne-Edward's great merit, of course, was that he realised that this is a Group Selection argument, it can only be true if Natural Selection operates by favouring some species at the expense of others rather than some individuals. And this book was really enormously influential. My friends and colleagues all swallowed it whole except the population of geneticists and a few people like David Lack at Oxford who were very hostile to it. And I tried to model mathematically Wynne-Edwards' argument and showed that, in fact, you can have selection operating between groups and it can be effective, but in order for that to be true, the groups have to be genetically very homogenous within the groups and different between groups, otherwise there's nothing selection can get hold of. And in order for that to be true, it has to be true of the groups founded by, in the model I made, one pregnant female, so that all the offspring are closely related. And I wrote this up and then, at about the same time, I can't remember the exact order, I'd come across this paper of Hamilton's. And also at about that time, David Lack rang me up and said that he and Tinbergen had been discussing this idea of Wynne-Edwards and would I like to come to Oxford and talk to them about it, not as a seminar, but just to sit around and talk about it one evening. And, in fact, four of us had a long talk in Oxford: Lack, Tinbergen and Arthur Cain and myself. And we all agreed that Wynne-Edwards' ideas, although interesting, were basically false, had to be, because some group structure was wrong. But I do remember saying at that time, 'Look, there's this paper by this chap, Hamilton, which isn't wrong, is not the same idea, it's an important idea.' And I remember we agreed that it was important to distinguish between what Hamilton was saying, which was right and interesting, and what Wynne-Edwards was saying, which was wrong, interesting but false, if you like. So when I wrote my paper about my Group Selection Model, the paper is actually published in Nature and it's actually Group Selection and Kin Selection. And we invented the term kin selection, and it emerged that evening, and I can't remember who first suggested it, I think it wasn't me, though I first used it in print. And the idea of the term kin selection was to distinguish it from group selection, so that the two idea... two notions would have different names that people... people can't keep things distinct in their minds unless they have different names, in my experience, you have to give a name to something. But I do think there were problems with Bill that he had the feeling that somehow or other I'd been trying to hold up his publication until I'd got in first. I can understand his feelings on this. He was a young man, he had no name, his ideas were not taken seriously. I think it's one of these horrid misunderstandings.
[Q] I don't think he thinks that anymore.
I don't think he does. No, I'll talk later if I may about how that... no I think Bill and I are fine now, I mean, I think we understand one another very well and admire one another. I admire him enormously and respect him. But no doubt, that from 1964 to the late 1970s, it was a problem. I think it is to our credit that we did not encourage our students to quarrel with one another, and we passed students from one to the other, and we didn't have public rows about it.
[Q] Unlike Fisher and Haldane.
Unlike Fisher and Haldane. I was very conscious of the fact that Fisher and Haldane had done a lot of damage by public rows, you know, and I wasn't going to do the same. And in any case, there was nothing intellectual to argue about. I didn't disagree with Bill intellectually, it was just that Bill felt, I think with some justification, that I had not been as helpful as I should have been, the justification being that I could have helped him when I was a student, and I didn't. And maybe I wasn't as generous to his ideas as I should have been, I don't know, it's hard to say. But I don't think, as far as the notion of inclusive fitness, kin selection, and so on, I have to say, I don't think I contributed anything significant to that idea. I think that idea is essentially Bill Hamilton's. I contributed to popularising it but not to having it. I mean, the idea is essentially his.

I had reported Haldane as saying, in a pub, that he had decided that he was prepared to lay down his life for two brothers or ten cousins, or eight cousins, I can't remember. And this was in '56, '57, '58, that sort of date. And it's hard to see how Haldane could possibly have said that unless he understood the principle of inclusive fitness. I said this in a lecture, or reported it somewhere, and I think Bill felt very resentful that I was trying to take the credit from him and give it to Haldane. I really was just using Haldane's aphorism as a particularly clear way of explaining the idea, and it is a very clear way of explaining the idea. But I do think it's interesting why... I think for a time Bill just didn't believe the story. I think he understands now, that it's true, other people have heard Haldane say the same thing, but more importantly than that, he actually wrote it.
[Q] It's in the New Biology.
It's in New Biology. He said exactly the same thing at the same time in New Biology, so I think there's no question that the idea was there. But what is striking is that Haldane did nothing with the idea. He didn't see it as the clue to understanding the evolution of social behaviour. He didn't develop it mathematically. He states it as being true for a rare gene, which is rather easy to prove. What he didn't do was to struggle with the hard part to show that it's true even if the gene isn't rare, which is what Bill did in his papers and so on. But most important, he didn't do anything with the idea, and nor did I. And yet I understood it perfectly clearly when he said it to me, but neither of us saw it as important.

Why is it that Hamilton, having had the sort of central notion, really ran with it, really made it an important part of our biological understanding. Whereas Haldane had the notion and did nothing with it, I understood the notion and did nothing with it. And I do think, I have to put it down, to some extent, to political and ideological commitment. Hamilton had the advantage over us, in a sense... a) that he was passionately interested in social insects and knew something about them and wanted to explain them. He saw them as a problem to be explained. And he had, clearly, no reluctance in his mind about the idea that notions about the evolution of altruism in social insects, might possibly have a relevance to humans. Neither Haldane nor I knew anything much about social insects at that time, though Haldane did become interested in them later. But more importantly, we, at that time, and we're now talking about '56, '57, I suppose when we were discussing this idea, if you look at it in the context of where Haldane publishes it, in an article in New Biology, it's very much in the context of trying to understand human behaviour and human altruism, and people going out and winning the VC or joining monasteries or what you will. And neither he nor I at that stage were at all willing to entertain the notion that such behaviour would be anything other than culturally determined and influenced. We were, I think, very reluctant, as Marxists would be, to admit that anything genetic might influence human behaviour. And I think that we didn't say consciously to ourselves that this would be un-Marxist so we won't do it, that's not the way that the mind works; but I think it was a path that our minds were not, so to speak, prepared to go down, in a quite almost unconscious sense, whereas Bill was very prepared to go down it. And he also had the natural history background and knowledge to enable him to go down it, which we both lacked. And so what I'm really try to say is that to make big breaks in science, which Hamilton did, it's not enough to have the technical understanding of some technical point, you've got to have the - it's got to fit in with your world view that you should pursue this road, and I don't think it did for Haldane and myself at that time. It would have done later.

There's a striking thing, at least about the '64 paper, is that he defines something which he calls inclusive fitness, which is an absolute swine to calculate, if you've ever tried it, in practice. It's awfully easy to get it wrong. But it's a measure that you can put on an individual organism, such that if you take group of - a population of organisms and ascribe to each one its inclusive fitness, or each kind, its inclusive fitness, it will correctly predict what will happen to the population. And with certain restrictions that he's very clear about and makes very explicit in his paper, he succeeds in this task. He does find a measure that you can ascribe to an individual which will then predict. But I think, certainly you from your writings, and others, have found it a very hard way to think about the problem. It's much easier to think about if I was a gene, what would I do? And I have to say, when I think about what I think of as a Hamilton-type problem, I do say to myself, if I was a gene, what would I do?
[Q] Oddly enough, that's what he did, in 1963, in a short paper in The American Naturalist which predates The Journal of Theoretical Biology papers you're talking about.
Yes, just so.
[Q] He says just that. 
So it's very strange. I don't understand why he, in a sense, drew back from the '63 model, and presents this very, very much more difficult model. I think his ideas would have been accepted much quicker, perhaps, it's hard to say. You must remember that prior to '63 and Hamilton's paper, all population genetics models had been based on the notion of ascribing a fitness to an individual or to a class of individuals. And indeed, one was taught that you must not ascribe fitness's to genes. Even Haldane, I can remember effectively, saying that in his lectures, one must ascribe fitness to genotypes but not to genes. So in his '63 paper, when he talked about the gene-centred way of looking at it, he was departing from an orthodoxy. But what I'm curious about is; did he draw back from the gene centred view because he thought his views would be more readily accepted if he cast them in an individual selection individual organism kind of model, or did he - I have a feeling, reading the paper, that it was a deeper reason than that. That he had been - I think he was actually a student of RA Fisher's, he certainly was much influenced by RA Fisher. He wanted to save Fisher's Fundamental Theorem of Natural Selection. Now, I regard Fisher's Fundamental Theorem of Natural Selection as either false or trivial, depending upon how you interpret it. But for anybody who's been a student of Fisher's, it's the holy grail. I mean it's very interesting how we divide on this one, I wouldn't care throwing the theorem away and forgetting it, I don't think it's fundamental at all. But I think Bill does or certainly did think it was important and fundamental and wished to save it, and the only way you could save it would be to find some new way of defining fitness so that it remained true. So I think he had a more important reason than just wanting his views to be readily acceptable... But it really would interesting to sit round a table with him and sort this one out, because there's this other thread which goes back to George Williams in 1966 and to your Selfish Gene book, which really has made the gene-centred view, I think, of seeing the world, the way we all do it now. I mean, is that the way you see it? I mean, that really is the way we see the world. And it's now led on to a whole world of intragenomic conflict, really a world which is looking at genes as the units of evolution and selection. And it's really very odd that he didn't immediately follow up the '63 formulation and, in a sense, stuck with what, to me, is a more old fashioned formulation. It's a very interesting problem.

One effect, partly moving to Sussex and partly Haldane going to India - which was earlier, of course - but these two events led me to become more and more of a theoretician and less and less of an experimentalist. I mean, if you have to spend your time sitting on planning committees, it doesn't fit terribly well with the day to day routine of looking after fruit flies, which I'd been doing up to then. And also, I didn't do a lot of theoretical work when Haldane was sitting in the office over the road. I mean, you don't keep a dog and bark yourself. He solved problems so much faster than I could, that I tended, if a theoretical problem came up, I'd tell him and he'd solve it. And if an experiment came up, he'd tell me, and I'd do it. I mean, that's the way he went. But when he was in India, I couldn't just ask him. And I pay more and more to develop my own theoretical work. And I guess that the thing which, if I'm remembered for anything, I hope I will be remembered for is, again, theory stuff, which developed soon after I came after to Sussex. Though - well, in that sense, it was five years, really, after I came to Sussex, that I really did that work, though the problem had been in my mind ever since I'd been an undergraduate. It goes really back to when I was an undergraduate, I think I mentioned earlier, that I read Konrad Lorenz, among others. And in Lorenz you get this account of so-called Ritualised Behaviour in animal fighting. Animals don't go for the jugular and fight flat out all the time, there's a lot of display and of signals, and quite often, a contest it actually settled without any physical fighting at all by the signals, decide one of them to back down and the other one not. And I didn't doubt Lorenz's accounts of this, who was I to doubt his observations, but I did doubt the explanation which was accepted at the time by both Lorenz and also, I remember, by Julian Huxley; that animals didn't fight in an escalated fashion because if they did it would be bad for the species. I mean, Julian Huxley actually uses the phrase, 'Would militate against the survival of the species.' Well, even as an undergraduate I'd been a student of Haldane's enough to know that that couldn't be right, animals don't do things for the good of the species, at the very most they do things for the good of themselves. So I knew there was a problem there, but somehow or other I'd never really got round to thinking about it.

After my first five years as being Dean here, and really pretty well been devoted to setting up a new school of biology, of filling it with apparatus and people and students and getting the courses going and so on, it's a pretty heavy job. They gave me a sabbatical term. Well, they didn't actually give it me because I got myself paid elsewhere, but they allowed me to go away for a term, let's leave it like that. And I went to what was called the Committee on Mathematical Biology, in Chicago, for three months, I think. And before I went, I decided that I would revisit this problem of ritualised animal behaviour, and that I would do so by seeing whether - I knew there existed a mathematical subject called Game Theory, the Theory of Games. I didn't know what it was about but I just knew it existed and I thought, well, I'll teach myself some game theory and I'll see whether it will help with this animal behaviour problem. I ought to mention at this stage, though I'll come back to it, that the thing that had brought this problem back to my mind was a curious manuscript by George Price. At that stage, all I knew was that about a year before I went to Chicago, I think, I'd been sent by Nature a manuscript by this person, George Price - I'd never heard of, on precisely this issue - arguing, correctly, as I believe, that the reason animals do not escalate is that if they did, their opponent might retaliate and there'd be a nasty punch up and they might get hurt. So the argument against attacking somebody is he might hit back. And this was sent by me by Nature to referee, and the only problem was that it was 50 pages long. And I seem to have this fate of getting ideas from other people's manuscripts when I referee them, but I suppose it's unavoidable. Anyway, I wrote to Nature and said, 'Look, I think this paper's really jolly interesting. Clearly, you can't publish this, it's too long, but persuade the author to send you an abstract which you can publish, and tell him that if he submits this to The Journal of Theoretical Biology, I feel pretty sure they'll publish it.' And I thought no more about it, I thought, you know, I'd done the job. But although George had argued this in a verbal way, he'd not made any kind of formal proof that this is what would happen. And I thought, well, what I'll do is take this notion of George Price's and see whether I can develop, using game theory, a mathematical model which will show that what he's suggesting actually works. And I went to Chicago, I spent three months there. And the only thing you can say for Chicago is that it's so awful, there's nothing to do there except work. I mean, it really is a frightful place to be. So I worked very hard for three months. And as a matter of fact, the problem turns out, once you think about it in the right terms, to be almost trivial.

I didn't have to read much game theory. I read the first chapter, I think, of a book by two guys called Luce and Raiffa or something, you didn't have to read much, just to get the notation, that's all you need. And the notion essentially was - what would you expect - well no, let me step back a bit - Classical Game Theory, which Luce and Raiffa, and it goes back to von Neumann and Morgenstern, what they're doing is saying, what would a reasonable man do in a contest situation if he can assume that his opponent is reasonable as well. So you and I are playing a game, I say, 'Dawkins is not only reasonable, he's pretty smart, so I can work out what he'll do, what had I better do?' And I must assume that he's being just like me, and can we find some kind of rational solution to the game, assuming - each of us assuming the other guy's pretty clever. In animals, you don't say, 'I think this animal's pretty clever,' it's probably as thick as two planks, there's no need to think it's clever. What you have to do is to look for what I call an Evolutionary Stable Strategy. An evolutionary stable strategy is simply a behaviour or a strategy, call it what you will, which has the property that if every member of the population does it, or almost every member of the population does it, then any mutant doing anything else possible doesn't do as well against the members of the population as the members of the population are doing against one another. And that can be formulated mathematically, very simply, it's not difficult, you don't have to be a mathematician. And you can then ask: will this, that or the other strategy satisfy this mathematical condition? And it turns out, actually, or it turned out later, to be really rather a powerful technique, probably because it just is so simple. And while I was in Chicago I worked out the formal conditions for something to be what we call an ESS nowadays, an evolutionary stable strategy. And I tried it out on George Price's problem, as I think of it, the problem of retaliation, and found that, in fact, George had been quite right, that you can make symbolic, symbolising, ritualised behaviour stable if you introduce retaliation as a possible alternative. And I invented a game which is now known as the Hawk-Dove Game, remember this was during the Vietnam War, in Chicago, Hawks and Doves, that's sort of popular. And at that stage, I thought, well, I suppose I'd better quote Price, because that's where the whole idea had started from. And I searched through the pages of Nature and the indexes and it didn't seem to have been published, and I couldn't find any record of it being published anywhere. And indeed, it hadn't been. And I had this problem of how do I get in touch with George Price, and found out what happened to it. And in the end I wrote to Nature and asked for his address. And they had an address in London, in Charlotte Street. And then I tried to contact him. And I can't remember, I think in the end I actually had to go and bang on the door, but that's from memory.

He turned out to be an unemployed American who had no formal training in biology at all, who had been working in computers, I think, and had come to live in England to do theoretical biology because that's what he wanted to do, and he decided that he could live longer in England on his savings than he could in America. And he was living all by himself in this pad in Charlotte Street. And I could go on talking about George for hours, because he's a very strange character. But we did, in the end, agree that we would write a joint paper, which we did, ultimately, in fact, publish. It took about three years, it's not published until, I think, '73, for various reasons. George was a perfectionist and he wanted me to do more mathematics to show that some of the things he claimed were correct, and I had to teach myself some computer programming, because it wasn't analytically solvable, and I had to solve some of it by computer simulation. We did in the end publish it together, in '73, both defining the conditions for something to be in ESS, showing that retaliation could be - could stabilise ritualised fighting, and applying it to a number of other problems as well. But that was, I think, in a sense, the origin of the whole sort of game theory industry in biology as opposed to in economics, I should perhaps tell you a bit more about George.
[Q] Yes, I think you were generous to him if I may say so. I hadn't appreciated before that the whole importation of game theory in ESS was entirely your contribution rather than his.
The idea of introducing game theory and the definition of an ESS was mine, yes. And I think had he published his paper, which was an argument that ritualised behaviour is stable because of the dangers of retaliation - using, I think, no algebra, entirely a verbal argument - had he published that, then I think I would not have made him a joint author and I would just have quoted the paper, but he hadn't published it. He was, to put it quite brutally, a guy in much greater need of publications at that time, than I was.

Price's theorem, which is a  theorem in population genetics, which he did partly as a result of interactions with Bill Hamilton. I'm not going to tell you what Price's theorem is because I don't actually understand it. And this is a curious thing about how scientists think, I believe. There are two kinds of - this is a digression, in a sense, but I think it's quite interesting - there are two kinds of mathematical or formal theory that one can make in science. One is a sort of microscopic theory, you try to explain the behaviour of something in terms of its components and the way they interact and so on. And there are what one might call phenomenological theories, which describe the behaviour of systems in terms of measures made on whole things. To make that perhaps clearer if I give an example. There's two kinds of thermodynamics. There's statistical thermodynamics, as developed by Boltzmann and Maxwell, in which you try to explain the behaviour of a gas, for example, in terms of the behaviour of the individual molecules and their collisions and so on. It's what I call a Microscopic Theory. Or there's classical thermodynamics, as developed by Gibbs, in which you ascribe properties like temperature and entropy and so on, to the system as a whole, and you write down relations about how those global properties will change. It seems to me that most scientists think in one of those modes but not both. I think if you're a genius, you may be able to think in both, but most of us either think in microscopic models or we think in global, descriptive sort of models. I'm a microscopic man. I cannot think - I never understood entropy, even when I was an engineer. That's not to say I couldn't use it, I could look it up in the tables and calculate what the heat was going to do. But it never meant anything to me at all. I'm a microscopic man, I had to do it by the statistical thermodynamics method. I think the trouble with Price's theorem, and a certain approach to population genetics, which is based on variances and covariances and so on, which is quite influential, I mean, George Price is not, by any means, the only person to do population genetics like that. I mean, even Fisher had a bad habit of doing it that way. And there's the sort of gene frequency, gene-centred approach of explaining Population Genetics in terms of the frequencies of individual genes. I'm a gene man, I can't do variances and covariances, I have to rethink every time what a covariance is, it's no good. It's not that I can't use the formulae if I have to, but it just isn't the way I think. So I was unable to follow George Price, later, into his move into statistical analysis. What George was trying to do was, in a sense, actually, to give a statistical formula justification for some of the ideas that Hamilton had had. And it's clear, looking at the correspondence between Bill and myself, and George, that George really felt that Hamilton had not proved his case and that you really had to do it this covariance way before it was proved. It's not a view that I share. I don't know where Bill stands on this, I mustn't put words into his mouth, you know. But it is very striking that there isn't just one way of modelling the world, there are often two ways of modelling the same phenomenon, and depending upon what kind of mind you have, you may find one or the other illuminating.

I developed these conditions for an evolutionary stable strategy, and then I applied it to various games. And one of the things that came out of the - at first, I have to say, I thought it was pretty trivial, any idiot could do it in an afternoon. I couldn't see it was important, didn't know that it was going to lead anywhere very much. But I did remember, I went through the following series of rather odd notions. I invented what's known as the War of Attrition Game. The idea is that you and I are going to play the war of attrition game. There is a prize of $10 - it was in America, you understand, it had to be $10 and not 10 ECUs - so we put down $10 between us. And we each of us - well, the way I initially saw it, we'll go on displaying at one another, saying, I want it, I want it, I want it, and you'll do the same. We go on doing this, and whoever gives up first, the other guy gets the $10. Well, obviously, we'd go on forever, except that it costs us. The longer we go on, the more it's costing us. So the question really comes, how much am I prepared to pay for $10? Well, obviously not more than $10, you'd think. But, you know, I've been doing this for a bit, do I stop now, or do I go on, or what do I do? What is, in my terms, evolutionary stable strategy playing this war of attrition game? It turns out, and this is a little trickier to prove, but it can be proved, that what we ought to do is, I should choose a length of time for which I'm to go on, time T, which must not be a fixed time, it must be a time drawn at random from a distribution, and the distribution is a negative exponential with mean $10, and you should do the same. And that's evolutionary stable strategy, that's what you have to do. But the result is, of course, on average you don't make any money, on average you pay $10 to get the $10 bill, it seems absurd. The average pay off to a player playing the war of attrition game is zero. I'm reasonably sure this is a correct mathematical solution, but it's also absurd. If you and I were actually confronted with this argument about the $10, what would we do? We would say, 'Well, let's toss a coin for it, for God's sake.' You know, we'll toss a coin, and if I win, I'll have the $10, if you win, you have the $10, it won't cost us anything and one of us will make $10 and the other one will make nothing, but on average, we'll make $5 a contest. And I thought, well, animals don't do this because they can't toss a coin. But actually, what's the coin doing? All the coin is doing is introducing an asymmetry between you and me. Up to then we're completely in the same situation, but now we're not, I'm heads, you're tails, we're different. Erm, it's a purely symbolic, conventional asymmetry, but it is an asymmetry. So I thought, well, perhaps animals could use a conventional asymmetry to settle contests, and the obvious one to use is who got there first. It's what became known as the Bourgeois Principle, for obvious reasons, that in a contest between two animals, the first animal to find the resource is the 'owner', the second guy is the 'intruder', and the owner gets it because it introduces an asymmetry, not because it's more valuable to him, not because he's better positioned to win the fight, but just because there is an asymmetry and the 'owner' gets it, 'intruder' backs down, it turns out to be an ESS. And I thought, well, this sounds all right, but it has to be nonsense. I mean, it sounds so simple, it can't be true. And anyway, animals haven't read Adam Smith, they don't know about ownership, that can't be right.

I went down to give a seminar at Austin, Texas, and I thought, well, I'll tell them about this game theory stuff. So I described to them what I'd been doing, and right at the end, I described this ownership game, and said, 'Of course, I don't believe animals actually do this, but, you know, if they'd read my paper I'm going to write, they should do, you see.' And when I sat down, a man I've loved ever since, tall, lank Texan, called Larry...
[Q]   Gilbert
Gilbert, that's right, my neurone for remembering names popped out about - several years ago now - got up and described how for his PhD, he'd worked on a butterfly called Papilio zelicaon, in California. And his story is that the males fly uphill, during the mating season, they fly uphill and they occupy hilltops. And a female who wants to mate flies uphill to get to the top of the hill, and she'll find a male at the top of every hill and she mates. The trouble is, there are more male butterflies than there are hilltops, so the guys who find the hilltops first are the... the 'owners', and any other butterfly that comes along, any other male who comes along, there's a brief spiral flight, and by marking them, he discovered that the intruder goes away and the owner of the hilltop stays there. And then he got two butterflies who believed they owned the same hilltop, by giving one of them the hilltop to occupy on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and the other one on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, and then on Sunday, they were both loosed on the same hilltop. And they went in for a great long fight, they both thought it was theirs, you see. And he described this, and I thought, he's right. It was the first time, I think, I actually thought I was on to something, that such an abstract piece of reasoning that I'd gone through actually seemed to be telling us what animals do. And since that time, the game theory thing has turned out to be relevant to everything from viruses to, you know, to plants growing to all sorts of things, they don't have to be animals. And it's now being very much involved in the whole communication thing. But it is odd that I - it wasn't one of those things where I thought I'd solved an important problem, it was some old thing where I thought I'd solved a really very trivial problem, and then gradually began to realise that the method could be used for solving a whole slew of problems, and as you know, probably is nowadays.

Geoff had done his PhD on these dung flies which - basically the story is, it's like the hilltops essentially - the female dung flies who want to mate go to cow-pats, and the males who want to catch females, hang around cow-pats waiting for females to turn up. And the problem was essentially to do with, if you're a male, how long should you stay at the cow-pat, and how long - perhaps the cow-pat's getting a bit stale, the females aren't turning up too quickly, should you go to another cow-pat and so on. And he spent hours with his nose within inches of cow-pats, recording how long males hung around and so on. And had worked out a strategy that the flies were actually adopting. It wasn't quite my war of attrition game but it jolly nearly was, actually. And when I read this thing, I got in touch with Geoff, and we started talking about games, because it was clear to me that he'd, in effect, applied the game theory arguments to his dung flies. And we revisited the asymmetric contest thing because we were interested in all sorts of questions to do with - well, one of the questions we were interested in, I mean, Geoff was a good Socialist in those days, you see; I don't know whether he still is, and he was worried about this bourgeois thing, because, after all, owner stays, intruder leaves, is an ESS, but so is intruder stays, owner leaves, and why shouldn't we do that? Much more sharing and so on. The trouble with it, of course, it leads to an infinite regress, because as soon as you own, then you've got to leave when somebody else turns up and nobody ever settles down to getting anything. But it was these kind of issues that Geoff and I got interested in when we met. And we wrote a paper in JTB about Asymmetrical Contests. And he was also interested in this problem that I mentioned earlier in relation to sexual selection, the difference between whether you fail to do something because you can't or you fail to do something because you don't want to, and we tried to formalise that and so on.

Larry Gilbert is a great non-publisher, and I'm not sure he's ever published his PhD work - has he? I've never seen it. I've always had to quote it as an anecdote. And indeed, for quite a time after I came back to Sussex and started talking about game theory, Larry Gilbert was known as John's imaginary biologist, they refused to believe that he existed until I actually produced him in the flesh and he said, 'No, no, it's all quite true.' I'll tell you one story about Nick, I think Nick Davis probably thought up his experiments on speckled wood butterflies without knowing about Larry Gilbert's work, but it was essentially a similar ownership game. But I do remember Nick once saying at a meeting that he'd like to tell the meeting, it was a small meeting, what John Maynard Smith had done for field workers, and it went as follows, he said: 'You know, that in the old days, what we had to do if we were a graduate student doing field work, we had to go and demonstrate that strategy A was fitter than strategy B, to show that selection was operating. And if you looked at a thousand cases and there was no significant difference, your supervisor told you to go out and measure another thousand until it was significant.' But what I'd done was to demonstrate that at an ESS the two strategies should be equally fit, and so frankly, the fewer you looked at, the more likely they were to fit the theory, so you didn't have to look at thousands, you just looked at a few. I don't think he meant this very seriously, because, as you know, he's a very meticulous experimenter. He was one of the first people in behaviour to really cotton on to game theory as being something he could use to explain what his beasts were doing.

I think that the point of Evolutionary Game Theory as distinct from Classical Game Theory is that it borrowed a notation from classical game theory, but it's whole logic is quite different. I mean, the logic is fairly easy to explain, I mean, the logic of classical game theory as meant to be applied to human behaviour, simply is to think what would rational human beings do when confronted with a conflict, and this just isn't present in evolutionary game theory at all. The logic of evolutionary game theory is you have a population of individuals adopting different strategies and playing contests against one another, and how successful they are determines how many kids they have, and they pass on to their children their properties. And you look for the dynamics of such a system, and what the evolutionary stable strategy is, is what a mathematician would call a stationary point, or a Stable Stationary Point of the Dynamics. It's what the dynamics will go to. So it's really a totally different notion. But interestingly, the - although the logic is different and so on, the notation has something in common. And the one thing that reading the sort of text books of classical game theory did for me, was to provide me with a notion of a pay-off matrix, which is a very simple notion, and anybody can write down a pay-off matrix once they know what it is. I mean, you just write down a list of the strategies on the bottom and a list of strategies across the top and you have a whole series of entries, and in each hole you put what would the pay-off be to me if I do this and he does that. That's really, I think, essentially all that I took from classical game theory, though I'm now amused to discover that the economists and so on are trying to borrow evolutionary game theory back and introduce it into economics. I'm very unconvinced that they're justified in doing this, because evolutionary game theory hinges on the notion of heredity, i.e. the essential notion being that your success in the game determines how many children you have, and your children are like you, and the whole thing hinges upon that essential assumption. And I can't see that that assumption really holds in economics.
[Q] No, the essential point would be that in an evolutionary world, if a strategy is going to stay successful, it's got to do well when it, itself, is in a majority, when it's playing against copies of itself. That's why ESS is so important. Yes, I can't really see how you would import that back into economics. 
Well, I think they're doing it because - I almost want to say something rude about theoretical economics, which is that it is theoretical. And I have nothing against theory, I've spent most of my life doing it, but I do think the function of theory in science is to explain observations. And if a theory's a bad theory it ought to be possible to point to observations that disprove it. But that just doesn't seem to be the tradition in theoretical economics, it's entirely theoretical, they never refer to a fact. Nobody ever says, oh, this particular economic theory has to be wrong because in the slump or something or other, something happened - I mean, they never refer to a fact. It's pure theory spinning. But I think they looked over the fence and saw that in biology, evolutionary game theory really is explaining a lot of things, from plant growth to virus behaviour to all sorts of things. And they thought, gosh, you know.
[Q] And co-operation.
And even co-operation, that's right. And they thought, well, maybe we can grab this stuff and steal it back. I'm not sure it's really justified.

Why are signals between animals believed? I mean, if I say (roars) like this, meaning, 'If you don't go away I'll hit you,' why do you believe me? I mean, maybe I'm bluffing, you know. There is a real problem about honesty in any symbolic communication, there are problems about honesty when we're talking to one another, why aren't I lying all the time? And the answer there is, you'll remember what I said, and if I lied last time, you won't believe me next time, and so on. But why do animals, on the whole, believe, if I can put it that way, in the truth of the signals they're receiving? And this is the problem that Zahavi addressed himself to. And he came up with an answer which still attracts a lot of interest, though I've always been rather cynical about it, less so now than I was, which is that signals - the honesty of signals are guaranteed if the signal is expensive. If I can do that and it's cost-free, then I'll lie. But if it's genuinely costly for me to do it, for some reason or another, I use a lot of energy doing it, or I have to spend hours beforehand developing my muscles in order to be able to do it, or something, then it, in some sense, guarantees the honesty of the signal. Now, this is an interesting sort of chapter in the history of science, in a way. Zahavi is not merely - well I was going to say he's - he's an in principle non-modeller. He really does not believe that formal mathematical models illuminate anything. And he believes that only verbal models, and very intuitive verbal models, are any use. My picture of the history, and it may be quite different from his, probably is, that he talked about the handicap principle at a number of meetings, and so on, and I felt rather strongly that it wasn't very satisfactory that one just have an idea which was going the round which had never been written down and published. So I persuaded him to write an account of it for The Journal of Theoretical Biology, because I felt it needed to be something we could get our teeth into. And he did that. And then...
[Q]  Could you just explain the relation between cost as you were talking about it just now, and handicap as he understood it?
Well, I would explain it if I understood it, but, you see, it's a purely verbal model and I don't understand the parallel.

The notion is that if you see an antelope stotting - that's when they do these great leaps into the air - and I think this may well be right, I'm not contradicting it - they... when a predator is around, instead of running away as fast as they can, they run along and then they leap in the air, it's a very dramatic sight, and leap up like this. Zahavi's interpretation of that would be that it's a real handicap, if you're trying to get away from a predator, to leap in the air and then run, I mean, it slows you down. So the fact that the antelope is, so to speak, able to do this, is saying to the predator, 'Look, I'm so good, I can actually handicap myself by leaping up in the air like this and slowing myself down, and still get away, so forget it and don't bother to chase me.' Whereas, if it's rather a feeble antelope, it's running like hell to get away because it daren't stott. That's the sort of verbal formulation of it. The question to me was always: Can you formalise it? It's very much as it was with George Price's notion of retaliation, can you make a formal model of this which will show that the thing will work, because, for me, I can't operate with verbal models. I have to have a... a formal mathematical model, essentially because if you make a mathematical model, you have to say what you mean. You have to define your terms. And even if you don't, anybody else looking at the model can see what you must have assumed in order for the thing to go the way you say it does. And then the point of a mathematical model is really to make it absolutely clear what is being said. And after Amotz had published his original handicap model, I tried to formalise it. And I... in the context of sexual selection, which is the context in which he'd first talked about it, and I made a formal model of it, which didn't work, did not lead to the conclusions that he claimed it did. And I sent it to him and said, 'Look, Amotz, I'm in real trouble here, I'm obviously not modelling what you say I ought to be modelling because I'm not getting the answer you get. You know, where am I going wrong, where are the assumptions that I put into this model not what you think they ought to be?' And actually, it's... it was one of the worse weekends of my life. Amotz and I sat in the chairs that you and I are sitting in now, for a whole weekend, really, trying to come to terms with this. And when he left, Sheila said to me, 'He is not to come again.' And this is not because he misbehaved, but because I was in such an impossible mood at the end of it. I had... I felt, at the end of two days conversation, he hadn't understood a single word I'd said. And I found this very frustrating, arrgggh, you know, I was really... but I'm sure he felt the same. I think at the end of two days conversation he felt I hadn't understood a word he'd said, and I think we were both right. You know, information had not flowed between us. And it wasn't personal dislike, it was just a complete inability to understand somebody who thinks totally intuitively and verbally, and somebody who has to have it all made easy with... with maths. And I was left persuaded that there probably wasn't much in this, you know. I mean, that I could forget the handicap thing, if it couldn't be made clear, I wasn't going to bother with it.

In the context of sexual selection, the male or the males want to persuade the females to mate, the females want to choose a good male. The males vary in what Alan calls quality, and that's what the female wants, she wants a male of high quality, for some reason, perhaps he'll look after the kids well, or something. But she can't detect quality, all she can detect is the signal the male makes. In the model, the male has to decide, in terms of his quality, how expensive a signal he'll make. It's like, you know, how much money will you spend buying the girl a big meal or a ring or something, it's really how much will I spend to try and persuade this female that I'm the chap. But the higher their quality, the more expensive a ring they can afford to buy without ruining themselves. So, by looking at the signal, which is costly, the female can actually deduce what the male's quality must be. And by choosing males with a more expensive signal, they get males with a higher quality. And what Alan showed, by some pretty filthy mathematics, if I may say so, it's well above my head, much of it, but it's OK, is that it could be evolutionarily stable for the higher quality males to make more expensive signals, and for females to choose the males which made the more expensive signals. It is, in other words, and I think Alan intended it to be, in fact he says he intended it to be, a model of the intuitive ideas that Amotz Zahavi was expressing, and it works. And I think it's an important paper. And it made me, and I think others, take it... take the original idea seriously, because now we have, you know, we can see what is actually being said, or the context in which it is being said.
[Q] Can you put your finger on where we went wrong before?
Yes, yes I can, though it's a little difficult to explain verbally. It's... it's... well I think there are two things, one which is quite explicit in Alan's paper and the other one of which is not. The thing that is explicit in Alan's paper is this, that he assumes that... supposing I hold... the signal consists of holding up a flag or something, and it's expensive to hold up this flag for some reason or other, the idea... what has to be true is that if I'm a high quality male, it doesn't cost me very much to hold up the flag, because I'm so strong I can hold it up without it costing me very much. If I'm a low quality male, it costs me more. It's as if when the young man goes in to buy the ring for the girl, if he's not very well off, they charge him more. It seems a bit unfair, but it's perfectly plausible, in a biological context, that a high quality male might be able to do something without it costing very much, whereas a low quality male, it costs him a lot more. And it's that cost... making cost dependent upon your quality which makes the model work. And in my model, I didn't attempt to model Amotz's thing, I didn't put that in because I don't think Amotz said it, and I was trying to model what he said. And unfortunately, Amotz was not able to put his finger on it and say, 'But look, John, you've assumed that, and I don't... I want you to assume something different'.
So the essence is that in Alan Grafen's model, the low quality male has to pay the cost, whereas in your interpretation of Zahavi's original model, the low quality male would have elected not to even try... to pay.
But also, I think a more important thing was that in my version, the cost would be the same for the low quality and the high quality male, whereas in Alan's version, the high quality male pays less, because he's so strong it doesn't cost him much. 
[Q] Yes.
And it turns out to make the crucial difference as to whether the thing works or not.

I came up with something called the Philip Sidney Game, which I'm rather proud of. The... the Philip Sidney game is all about Sir Philip Sidney, who, you'll remember is an English poet on a battlefield in Holland, and he's wounded and is lying wounded on the battlefield, and lying next door to him is a wounded soldier. And the story has it that he handed his water bottle to the soldier, saying, 'Thy necessity is yet greater than mine.' Now, this was after this... actually, I think they both died, so I can't see that it did them much good, but that's not in my model. My model is this, that Sir Philip Sidney can either give the water bottle to the soldier or not give it. Now, the soldier can either be really in a bad way, so that if he doesn't get the water bottle, he'll die, or he can be sort of thirsty, he'd like the water bottle, but not... it's not real serious, he'd got a decent chance of surviving if he doesn't get it. The question is, can there be an honest signalling between the soldier and Sir Philip Sidney, such that if the soldier is really in a bad way, he can make a signal saying, 'Look, I'm dying, give me the water bottle,' but he doesn't give that signal if he's not really in a bad way. And at first sight, you'd say, well, look, this whole thing is absurd because there's no way, in an evolutionary context, Sir Philip Sidney is going to give the water bottle, how is his fitness going to be increased by giving the water bottle? In a Darwinian context, there's got to be something in it for the... for the donor. And what I haven't... this is really borrowing an idea from Bill Hamilton, you see, what I didn't tell you was that the soldier is actually Sir Philip Sidney's brother, and Sir Philip Sidney has a stake in the survival of the soldier. And you can set this up all really quite simply, and it turns out to be, you know, quite simple to do the algebra. And it also turns out that in order... there are some contexts in which it turns out that before the signalling can be honest, so that only really soldiers in a really bad way make the signal, in order for that to be true, it has to be true that making the signal is expensive. It's costly, exactly in Zahavi's sense. So, you can make a model, which is... it's a much simplified version of what Alan [Grafen] is saying, and it works. However... and that was really not adding anything except providing a very, very simple model which didn't involve you having to be able to do hard calculus in order to be able to understand it. But something sort of fell out of the model which is sort of obvious, but I hadn't actually thought about it until I did the model; which is that there's a whole range of circumstances in which actually cost-free signals can be... can be reliable. It isn't always true that signals have to be expensive in order to be honest. And, in fact, there are lots of contexts in which there isn't a conflict of interest between the soldier and... and the... and Sir Philip Sidney, that in those contexts when it would pay Sir Philip Sidney to give the water bottle, it would pay the soldier to signal. If it doesn't pay the soldier to signal, it doesn't pay Sir Philip Sidney to give it. There's no conflict of interest between signaller and the receiver.

I think the world of animal behaviour, and of human behaviour, for that matter, is full of situations in which signals are cost-free because there's no conflict of interest between signaller and receiver. I'd like to give you an example, this is going back to my fruit fly days. In Drosophila subobscura, females do not mate twice. If they've been mated, they will not mate again, and there's no way a male can force a copulation on them or, he can mate... he can court till the cows come home, she won't mate. If you put a mated female with a male, the male approaches her and starts doing his stuff, and she turns... bends her abdomen towards him and extrudes the ovipositor, and that is a signal saying, 'Look, mate, I'm mated.' And he stops at once. Now, I think this is a cost-free signal. It doesn't pay the male to ignore it, because, you know, he's not getting anywhere. It costs the female practically nothing to extrude her ovipositor. She gains by it because she's not continuously harassed when she's trying to feed, and so on, he's not getting in her way. This is just an example of a context in which I think, if there's no conflict of interest between male and female or between signaller and receiver, then signals can be cost-free.

I think often, in science, it turns out that you find yourself arguing with somebody, and then you actually realise that the argument is only about what words you want to use for what things. No, I don't think that's trivial, by any means. I mean, it can be very important what words you use for... for what things, you know. But I think it's terribly important when you're doing science and you find yourself disagreeing with somebody, to realise what kind of a disagreement is it. Is it disagreement just about the use of words, which doesn't mean it's not important, but it's a different kind of argument than an argument about what you think the world is like. And indeed, there might even be a third kind of argument, which we've touched on when talking about Bill Hamilton and your different views of the way of imaging the evolution of social behaviour. It... it may not be an argument about either words or what the word is like, but what is the easiest way of looking at the world. What's the... the clearest imaging of the world. And there, you may never be able to decide. I mean, one person may say, 'I find it easier to look at it from this side,' and somebody may say, 'But no, I find it easier to look at it from that side.' And if so, I don't think there's any way of settling it rationally, you just have to encourage the students to learn both ways and choose whichever way they like.

Words have now got used in so many different senses. I think, oddly enough, the fault probably lies in the Atlantic Ocean, and there's not enough communication between American and European biologists.
[Q] Well, that's certainly true of the American usage of the word group selection.
Yeah, it means something quite different, and it makes life very difficult.
[Q] Very confusing.
I don't know what you do about it. You see, there isn't... It's not like, I don't know what it's called, the Committee on Zoological Nomenclature, who lay down rules about what animals are to be called, you know, and you can't cheat on these rules, you have to give them certain kinds of names and so on. And they... the Committee sits and decides that the proper name of this animal is so and so. Well, that's all right, but there's no way, I think, that scientists in general can have... we can't pass laws saying that the meaning of the word 'gene' shall from now on be so-and-so, I mean, there's no way you can do that. So, we are stuck with the fact that we're going to find ourselves using words in different senses. I suppose we  try... have to try to teach our students to watch out for it and don't get involved in a passionate row when actually you think the same thing, you're just using different words to say it. And it would be valuable if, you know, this was part of science education. I think it probably isn't, is it? Do you teach your students that? Perhaps you do.
[Q] No more than you do.
No, no. I do occasionally, by illustration, but it is worrying, the amount of confusion there is on these issues. The other thing, you've talked about as the Gestalts, which in relation to... I am interested in the fact that scientists do find it helpful to see the same problem from different points of view. And there, I think, the only thing one can say, well, look, try to train yourself to use both, and you know, whichever is useful, use. It's ridiculous to get into a passionate argument about... for example, I think it would be ridiculous to get into a passionate argument about whether the right way to think about the evolution of social behaviour was a gene-centred or an inclusive fitness calculation. It would be absurd, because there's no possible way of settling it. And yet, I keep on coming across philosophers who seem to get all uptight about just that sort of issue.

I do remember Wilson's book arriving on my desk. I think from the publisher. And I was very worried by the first and last chapter, for reasons I'll explain in a minute. But what I do remember is that, that Friday evening, in those days, every Friday, my group of people interested in evolution, the graduate students and so on, we used to get together somewhere and sit around and drink and talk about whatever. And they'd also got their hands on the book. And they were very enthusiastic, they thought, you know, here is a book which really puts a new way of looking at animal behaviour, it summarises it, it's going to really help to establish the discipline. And I think, in that sense, they were right. I was distressed by the first and last chapter. If you remember, it claimed things like that ethics was going to be 'biologicised'. Well, apart from it being an awful verb, I mean, it's nonsense. It commits what in England is called a naturalistic fallacy. But there was also the claim that the whole of the social sciences were going to sort of become part of biology. And I think that's also nonsense. I mean, if I can draw an analogy, I think that chemistry has been enormously important as an underpinning for biology. And a biologist who tried to ignore chemistry would do so at his own risk. But it doesn't mean that biology has therefore been taken over by chemistry. I mean, biology is still an autonomous science of its own. And in just the same way, I think that sociology has to remain an autonomous science of its own, but if it ignores genetics and evolution, then it's being as stupid as we would be if we ignored chemistry. But Wilson's claim, therefore, that they were just going to take over, that we biologists were going to take over sociology, seemed to me to be foolish. There was another thing that worried me, I think because of my Marxist past, I knew very well that this book was going to raise screams from every left-wing and Marxist biologist in America and in Britain, as indeed it did. And so we had quite an argument, and my students were thinking it was fine, I was saying, 'This is a disaster.' And not because I didn't think most of the book was excellent, which it is, but because of this sort of first and last chapter was going to... I foresaw, if you like, the whole sociobiology row that was going to blow up. However, in retrospect, I'm not sure that they weren't right and I wasn't wrong. I think possibly we had to have the row, not that I'm any more willing today than I was then to accept Wilson's claim that sociology can be taken over by biology, but I do think that the possibility of introducing evolutionary and genetic ideas into the social sciences, had to be discussed. And if it had to have this really rather antagonistic form of discussion, well, so be it. And the thing that makes me feel this particularly is that during the last few years really, there's been a rearousal of interest in applying Darwinian ideas in psychology, under the title of evolutionary psychology, in medicine, under the title of Darwinian medicine, and so on. And although there is... there is some opposition to this, although there are people complaining, no, no, you can't introduce biology, in general, the discussion is being carried out in a politically calm and rational and sensible way. I think if we hadn't had the whole row about sociobiology, we'd be having it today.

I think that the... the article in the Science of the People... sorry, by the Science for the People, people in, I think, the New York Review of Books, of which I think both [Richard] Lewontin and [Stephen Jay] Gould were signatures of this, was disgraceful, because it didn't... the point is, you can disagree with people, you can disagree with your colleagues as passionately as you like, but you can't go around calling them Fascists and enemies and so on. You have to treat it as an intellectual disagreement. And so I think that the whole of that business, leading up to pouring water over him at the... at the American Association for the Advancement of Science, I think all this was... was ridiculous. But it was predictable.

As a Marxist, I knew the row was going to happen. In... the young Marx wrote a series of sort of sentences, sort of programme, called a Theses on Feuerbach, which is sort of... almost a summary of his later philosophical development. And one of the slogans in his list is: 'Man's being determines his consciousness.' That is to say, what Man thinks is determined by the society he lives in, his upbringing, his class, and so on. So religious, scientific, etcetera, beliefs, are just simply a reflection of the social upbringing of the individual. And that allows no place for... for genetics. So it was because of that contradiction that I knew that Marxists were going to be deeply hostile to what Wilson was saying. But yes, I mean, I do think that sociologists have been seriously in error in the degree to which they wanted to ignore genetics.

Theses on Feuerbach


Let me tell you about the history at the University of Sussex, which I greatly regret. When we started, in 1965, it was agreed that every science student should have to do at least one course taught by a faculty in the arts, and every art student should have to take some course taught by a faculty in the sciences. And when we opened biology, as part of this, we offered a course in human genetics, which was taught entirely by seminar. And the people in... on the arts side strongly recommended all the social psychologists and sociologists to enrol for this seminar course. And about six or seven of us, sort of... on the biology school, each took a seminar of some 10 or so students. And I think it was thoroughly successful. And the students liked it, and they learned all sorts of things about genetics that they wouldn't otherwise have learnt.    And then I was just told that the sociology and the arts side had decided they no longer wanted their students to go to this course. And I said, 'Why not?' And they said, 'Well, genetics simply isn't relevant.' And it stopped. It wasn't our decision to stop it, it wasn't the students' decision they didn't want to go, it was just that the sociologists at the university decided that genetics was simply not relevant to their students. I think it's disgraceful, but that's what happened.

The problem presented itself to me, in the first instance, curiously enough, as a kind of follow-up of my criticisms of Wynne Edwards. You remember that Wynne Edwards had been arguing that certain kinds of behaviour were the result of group selection, and I had been very critical about the possibility that group selection could produce the kinds of results that he was claiming. And then I sort of stopped to think and realised that the conventional view, even within evolutionary genetics - you can even find it in RA Fisher - of sex, was that its presence was because it was good for the population. And the standard work on the subject, I suppose, in those days, was a book called The Evolution of Genetic Systems by Darlington. It's a fascinating book, I mean, full of really good biology and interesting problems, but essentially group selectionist. Sex is to be explained because it is good for the species. And I remember sort of thinking, well, now, it really isn't fair that I should go around bashing Wynne Edwards for his group selection views on behaviour if I'm accepting a group selection explanation for sex. I mean, it really doesn't seem... seem right. And that's what made me start thinking about the problem. And the problem can be... in its stark form can be explained very simply, and it's this; imagine a species in which... and think not of ourselves, where there's parental care, but I tend to think of something like a codfish or something, which doesn't look after its kids - and imagine a gene and mutation causing females to... not to mate, not to go through the process of meiosis and production of a reduced egg, but simply to produce eggs, diploid eggs, genetically identical to themselves, and lay them, without bothering with males, and that those eggs, being genetically identical to the female, would also develop as females. In other words, what we call ameiotic parthenogenesis.

Such a gene would be passed on to all the offspring instead of to only half the offspring, as happens in ordinary sexual reproduction, therefore such a gene would double in frequency in every generation, and really, in an extremely short space of time, the whole species will be taken over by ameiotic parthenogenesis. Now, this isn't an imaginary scenario, I mean, there are organisms out there that do exactly that, including quite complex organisms. The ones closest to ourselves are lizards. Some lizards are... the whole species consists of a set of genetically identical females, all producing offspring genetically  to themselves, no males. And you get these both in Europe and in America. So it's perfectly possible, the problem is, why doesn't it happen? It mean, it's really quite a severe problem that, in the short run, parthenogenesis has this very strong, twofold advantage, and yet the great majority of organisms still do it sexually rather than parthenogenetically. So I think it clearly did present a problem.
[Q] That, of course, presupposes that the parthenogenetic female is capable, economically, of having the same number of offspring as a sexual female would. If the sexual female got a lot of help from her mate and had twice as many offspring, the problem wouldn't arise, would it?
No, that's absolutely right, and that's why I wanted to talk about codfish and not humans, because humans, at least there's the idea that males help to look after their children, I'm not sure that it's really true. But in any species in which the male really contributes as much as the female to feeding and raising the young, then the argument wouldn't apply. It also, it's quite important that it did not apply to the time of the origin of sex, because the first organisms reproducing by producing gametes which then fuse, were what we call isogamous, i.e. equal gametes, there was no differentiation between eggs and sperm, it was just a fusion of two equal sized cells. And if you sit down with a pencil and paper and think about that, there isn't, any longer, a twofold advantage of abandoning sex. So it's really a problem that in the form I presented it, of the maintenance of sexual reproduction, rather than its origin, and it's a problem which applies only to organisms, as you say, in which males don't contribute very much.

I do think that the maintenance of sex is a context in which group selection, selection between species, has actually been important.    That's not for its origin or its early evolution, but just for maintaining it. My reason for believing that is that if you look at the taxonomic distribution of parthenogens, I mean, what kind of animals or plants are parthenogenetic, by and large, what you find is that the odd species or variety, or sometimes genus, is parthenogenetic. You tend not, in general, to find whole large groups of organisms which are parthenogenetic. There's a famous and rather embarrassing exception to this rule, the Bdelloid Rotifers, but by and large, you find parthenogens spotted about through the taxonomic distribution. Most organisms are sexual and then just a few parthenogens. Now, that is what you expect if what is happening is that parthenogenic mutants are arising, they're becoming established in a population, and the population is lasting for perhaps a few hundreds of thousands or millions of years, but it doesn't radiate out to produce a whole new big taxonomic group, but goes extinct, because of the disadvantage of being parthenogenetic. Could I say as a sort of interesting digression, I sometimes, almost as a parlour game, ask myself: Can I think of any other characteristics which are distributed taxonomically, like parthenogenesis, because if you could, then there would be good reason to think maybe they were being maintained by group selection, if you like, species selection. Now then you might ask, well, how can species selection work in relation to sex? And if it could work in relation to sex, why not everything else? The answer to that is, I think, first of all that, the advantages of sex - and I'll talk about those in a moment in more detail - the advantages of sex are, the most obvious one is that confers a greater capacity of a rapid evolution [to] the population, so sex is actually giving a characteristic to a species, it's not to the individual, the individual doesn't actually benefit from the sex, it's the population as a whole that does. The other thing is that normally, when one's thinking about the maintenance of something by group selection, the problem is that any variation within the population, you have some characteristic which is disadvantageous within the population but advantageous at the group level, selection acting on variation within the population will always win against selection between populations, just for simple mathematical reasons. But in sex, we very, very rarely come across a population in which both sexual and asexual organisms coexist.
[Q] Even if you did, the asexual part would have, in a sense, isolated themselves away from the rest of the game. They're no longer part of the free exchange of genes, and therefore... isn't it right that the rules of the game have sort of been changed?
Well, I see what you're saying, and it's quite a profound problem actually, because it's asking, all right, when you talk about selection going on within a population, what's the population you're talking about? I think the best way of thinking of the population you're talking about is that it's that group of individuals who are competing essentially for the same resources.
[Q] And even if they've separated themselves off genetically, they're still ecological competitors for exactly the same resource.
That's right. I mean, there were Poecilispsid fishes that people work on in North America, where they're a mixture of sexual and parthenogenetic individuals, and they are living in the same rivers competing with the same food and the same space and so on, so I think one can think of them all as a single population, even though some are exchanging genes and others aren't. But it is very striking that it's clear that the origin of a new parthenogenetic variety is not something that happens very often, it probably happens exceedingly rarely. So you tend not to find mixed populations, you tend to find sexual populations or occasionally you find a population that's been taken over by parthenogenesis, but you only rather rarely find them competing with one another, you do sometimes, but it's... and it's those cases that we ought to really concentrate on, of course, in trying to understand what's happening. I do think that a group selection explanation, at least for maintaining sex, at least as part of the explanation if not the whole explanation, is a plausible approach.

In those cases where we do find a mixture of sexual and asexual organisms competing for the same resources, then sex must have a short-term advantage, not to the population as a whole but really an advantage at the individual level. And this is what George Williams calls a 'balance argument', and I think it's a very good argument. And essentially, the advantages we can identify fall into two classes. And I think we're still really quite uncertain about which of them is the more important, and different people you ask would take different views. But the categories are, first of all, the advantage of sex is it enables the population to evolve more rapidly to meet changed circumstances. And this is actually what I did most of my own mathematics on, when I was thinking about the problem, just showing under what circumstances and by how much the exchange of genes did enable a population to evolve more rapidly.    But the essential argument goes back to the 1930s, to HJ Muller, I think, and to RA Fisher, and it simply is that if you have a sexual population, if two different, favourable mutations occur in that population, both can increase in frequency, and then, by sexual recombination, one can produce a population containing both of them. If you don't have sex and you have two individual favourable mutations, there's no way they can get together, the population could have one or the other but not both. And it has to wait for them to reoccur, to occur twice. And when one does the sums, it turns out that sex can really give a quite substantial advantage in rate of evolution. The problem is whether one can, so to speak, turn that into an individual advantage. Can one show that, actually, selection even acting at the level of an individual, could favour sexual reproduction? I think there are still quite formidable difficulties about that, although people have been struggling with it for a long time. The other question associated with it is; is it really true that the environment changes all that much? I mean, after all, it doesn't change all that quickly, surely we can't be evolving so fast that we're really having to chase.
[Q] You can calculate how quickly it ought to change in order to justify sex. 
 That's right, yes. And I think that the main - I mean, most people you spoke to about this, and I think I go along with it, to a considerable extent, feel that probably the main reason why these populations are having to evolve all the time, they can't just sit there and say, I've adapted myself to the environment, let me just sit here and not change too much. The main reason has to do with diseases and parasites. Parasites are constantly evolving new ways of attacking us, and we are having to evolve new ways of getting rid of them and of resisting them. And there is accumulating quite a bit of evidence tending to show that sexual populations and sexual individuals have an advantage in resisting parasitic infection, much greater than asexual individuals. And I think the data there is quite good, and a lot of people are certainly working on that, both theoretically and empirically.

The engine and gearbox analogy is that if you have two clapped out Minis, one with no engine and the other one with no gearbox, you can actually make one working Mini by putting together the good engine and the good gearbox together in one car. And sex, by combining genes from different individuals, may be able to construct one efficient working individual from two that aren't too good.   The trouble with that argument, of course, is that you might finish up with a Mini with no engine and no gearbox. And the mathematics of this, again, becomes really quite... quite hairy. There are two questions, first of all: Is it true that a sexual population can get rid of harmful mutations and combine good ones? And here we're not talking about changing environment, we're just talking about getting rid of the load... the continuous load of bad mutations that are happening. Is a sexual population really superior to an asexual one? And I think everybody now, who's been into the mathematics, would agree, yes, it is. There are contexts, several contexts, in which that is certainly true. A much harder question is: can we turn that into an individual selection explanation? Could selection, even within a population, between sexual and asexual competitors, actually favour recombination and sex. We can certainly construct models in which it is true, that it can happen. The trouble is that the models assume a very high rate of deleterious mutation. And at the moment, I'm uncertain whether, in the real world, rates of deleterious mutation are high enough to justify the theory. So although, you know, we've been arguing about this since the mid '70s, I'd guess, I think it's fair to say that anybody who is being at all balanced would [not] think that the problem had been solved, I think the problem is still quite hard.

The parasite theory, I think its main proponent has been Bill Hamilton, though I don't think he was, by any means, the first person to say it. And the more general sort of Red Queen notion; that's to say, that the reason why species have to evolve is because of the other species that are there competing with or feeding on, or being fed on by [them], or their parasites. I mean, the basic notion that we evolve because of other species evolving, the so-called Red Queen Model, on the basis that... it's a quotation from Alice, when the Red Queen says, 'Here, we have to run as fast as we can to stay in the same place.' That theory was given its name by Leigh van Valen, but it's been around for longer than that, actually, I mean, it's an old idea. But the specific parasite notion I think is primarily...
[Q] It's clearly in Fisher, I think, the...
Yes. The Mutation Theory, in one of its forms it goes back to HJ Muller. And Muller, I never met him, but he must have been the most gifted and original guy, of all the sort of colleagues of Morgan who developed the chromosome theory of heredity, Muller does seem to me to be the one who really did have bright and original ideas. One keeps on coming across ideas. And he formulated one mutation - sex is good for getting rid of mutations model. The person who I think, at the moment, is its main proponent and has done some very elegant formal mathematics to investigate it, is Alex Kondrashov. I'm rather happy about Alex, apart from the fact that he's a nice guy anyway. He... he was a Russian working in Russia at a time when you couldn't really do genetics very well, not evolutionary genetics, because it was still unpopular. And he was working in a department of cybernetics, apparently, he was meant to be a computer scientist. And his boss - I'm not sure of his name - somehow had got hold of a copy of my sex book, The Evolution of Sex. Alex says, 'I took it from him because I didn't think he was able to understand it and I thought I would.' He assures me that it was really my book that got him interested in sex. That makes me feel very pleased, you know, it's nice to know that you've been a spark to start somebody thinking. Alex is now... has a permanent job in America. But he, I think, has developed the formalism for what has to be the case, if one is to maintain sex on the mutation... getting rid of mutations argument. And it's largely as a result of his calculations that I was being rather definite in saying that I thought the load of mutations had to be very high. He, himself, thinks that it may be very high, and he's even doing experiments to try to show that it is. And other people are also trying quite hard to measure the load of mutations, it's not... not a trivial thing to measure.

I think the origin of sex is unique, I think it happened just once. Sex meaning meiosis, the production of haploid gametes and then the fusion of them, I think that happened just once. And there... it happened somewhat a thousand million years ago, it's always difficult to be sure that one's got the right explanation, I mean, how do you test your ideas? But that's one area where I think there are difficulties. The other area... you see, sex can mean so many different things to a biologist. I've been using sex to mean, as I say, meiosis and the fusion of two equal gametes.
[Q] That had to happen once only, because it's too similar in...
Yes, yes, it's incredibly similar in animals and plants and fungi, the actual mechanisms are almost identical. But the whole world of bacteria go in for sex - I think we should talk about this later on, perhaps - but they don't do it the same way at all, they're sort of just swapping individual genes in a curious way, and that also requires an explanation for its origin and its maintenance and so on, and we really have almost no ideas about it. Well, I've got ideas about it, but the formal mathematics hasn't been done, we're not even sure what experiments we ought to do, it's much more sort of open, because people have only just started thinking about it.

I think of myself as a bird man or a fruit fly man, I don't know anything about bacteria, I never did a course in... in bacteriology or microbiology in my life. But it so happened that, almost 10 years ago now, my wife was working in a lab next door to a group of people who were working on antibiotic resistance in bacteria. And they, I think, initially thought it was a problem in protein chemistry, what is it that was changed about the enzymes that made them resistant to penicillin? But they increasingly, I think, realised that they were working on a problem which had to do with evolution, and very rapid evolution. And Sheila suggested to them that they might actually not be wasting their time if they came to talk to me about it.    And it was great for me, because for the last five years I spent most of my practical working time actually thinking about just this problem. And, you know, I get my first hands on the data and I'm able to think about it. And it is actually... rather, it's almost eerie, actually, the way that penicillin resistance has spread round the world in bacteria, in 50 years, since the first serious clinical use of penicillin. And now that we can actually sequence genes, and, sort of, trace them, we can actually give a history of it in some cases. Bacteriologists have the nice habit, when there's an epidemic of something, they isolate the bacteria and they put some of them in the deep freeze, so that it's as if all your fossils are in the freezer and when you want to know what their genes are you just pull them out and sequence them. It'd be lovely if you could do it with dinosaurs, but you can't. But here we've got an evolution... a bit of evolutionary history where we can actually go to the freezer and take out the ancestors and have a look. And in streptococcus, which was the first bacteria which they really worked on, it's actually a very sad story, that the first genes, the first bacteria resistant to penicillin, were found in New Guinea and in the northern part of Australia, but particularly New Guinea, in the years immediately after the war. And what happened was that foreign troops, both Australian troops and Japanese troops had been in New Zealand... in New Guinea and had infected the natives with respiratory diseases caused by streptococcus, to which they were totally unresistant and were really suffering seriously from respiratory diseases. And it's almost fair to say that New Guinea was sprayed with penicillin... I mean, it was used in a sort of mass, uncritical way. And it, in the short run, was effective - it did indeed cure the diseases, which is good. But the first resistant streptococci emerged during that period. And they did so in an interesting way. They did it by sex, and we can do that by sequencing the genes and looking at the genes responsible. And it turns out that the so-called Penicillin Binding Protein Gene, which is the main one that changed, has received a great insert from somewhere, by which I mean, most of the gene in the resistant and the sensitives are identical, but a piece of some hundreds of nucleotides in the middle of the resistant strains is quite different from the sensitive ones. And you can say, that bit's come from somewhere.    In streptococcus, we still don't know where it came from. Though, in the second bug we looked at, which is neisseria, which is a cause of meningitis and gonorrhoea, we do know where the gene came from and we know where the insert came from - it's exactly the same story, a piece has come in, and we can identify the source.
[Q] From a different kind of bacteria?
From a different kind of bacteria. In the neisseria case, it came from perfectly harmless relatives of neisseria, they're also neisseria but they're not causing meningitis or gonorrhoea or anything like that. And I wouldn't be a bit surprised if two or three of us in the room right now had it in our throats. They're quite harmless commensals. And they just happened, by chance, to be resistant to penicillin.

Penicillin kills bacteria by binding to some enzymes called, rather curiously, penicillin-binding proteins. When I first heard of them I thought their function was to bind penicillin, it's nothing of the sort. Their function is to make the cell wall, and the penicillin comes in and binds to them and prevents them making the cell wall and the bacterium dies. Now, we find that some of these commensal bacteria are naturally resistant to penicillin. That means to say, if you take an isolate out of the freezer, which was put there before the clinical use of penicillin, back in the 1940s or something, they're already resistant to a drug they've never met, and I think never could have met it. I mean, there's plenty of penicillin being produced in the soil by soil... fungi, and so if I found a soil bacterium which was resistant to penicillin, it would make sense as having happened by natural selection. But it's very hard to explain why something in our throats which could never have met penicillin, I think, should have this resistance. I think it's just a matter of chance as to whether the penicillin could or couldn't bind in an appropriate way to the enzyme. On the other hand, once a piece of that gene was transferred into a... the bacteria in our throats, and penicillin was being used, the selection favouring it would be enormously powerful, of course.
[Q] But was that gene doing anything in the original ones who just were spontaneously resistant?
It was certainly making cell walls, but I think the fact that it was spontaneously resistant was just an accident, that's my guess. It's hard to be sure. And the alternative is that... that it evolved by natural selection in soil bacteria, and then, by some accidental process, it's got transferred into the throat.

Bacterial cells don't fuse, I mean, they don't go into sex as we do, but there are a variety of ways in which genetic material from one bacterium can be transferred to another. Either quite small pieces, of a few hundreds or a few thousand nucleotides, up to a whole group of genes going across. And some of these processes are rather common, some only happen rather rarely. But the general notion that genes are moving about in bacteria, even across quite wide taxonomic boundaries, they don't even have to be closely related bacteria for this to happen always. The bacteria... I picture another analogy, I picture a bacterium like E. coli, a little like a football team, every now and then they need a new goalkeeper or a new striker or something, and they can sort of buy one in by these various processes of horizontal transfer.
[Q] Not even from other E. coli, but from quite different bacteria?
Maybe from other E. coli, but sometimes from quite different bacteria.

I think it's important to distinguish two very different processes. The one that I and my colleagues have worked on mainly is a process called transformation, which only goes on in some kinds of bacteria. It does go on in both neisseria and streptococcus, which are the ones we're working with. This really does look like a highly evolved process for transferring bits of genes between closely related bacteria. You have really to be a pretty close relative before you can do it, and it's very common. Gonococcus, the organism that causes gonorrhoea, was shown by a young colleague of mine, Maria O'Rourke, to be essentially random mating. I mean, the amount of frequency of exchange of bits of DNA between gonococci is so frequent that their genes are in what we call linkage equilibrium, it's complete random assortment from what genes you have at different loci. It says something about not only their sexual habits but ours. Of course, you'll appreciate that recombination only matters if you've got gonococcus from two different sources, otherwise it's just having sex with yourself, and that doesn't have any...
[Q] So they constitute what you might call a gene pool, in a real sense?
That's right, that really do. But that's one kind of recombination. It's one I'm very interested in, because I'm interested in how did it evolve and so on. The other is a much more accidental thing. What happens is that there are these what are called bacteriophages, they're sort of viruses that live inside, say E. coli, as a disease. And they may destroy the E. coli. And when they destroy the E. coli they make a new protein coat, and they package their DNA in the protein coat and then they get into another bacterium. Occasionally they make a mistake, and instead of packaging their own DNA, they package E. coli DNA, and if that happens, then they carry E. coli DNA into whatever the next cell they attack is. And this is a much more accidental procedure, it's much less common. It transfers great big hunks of DNA sometimes. And the... the donor and the recipient don't even have to be particularly closely related for it to work. And both these processes are going on, and other ones as well, it's all very complicated.
[Q] So could you almost say that the chunks of DNA that are available to all the bacteria in the world constitute a kind of giant gene pool that they're constantly swapping in and out of combinations with each other?
Almost you can. And this was sort of the football team analogy, the idea of E. coli is that it just takes in DNA somewhere when it needs it. And it can buy it from a team in Germany if it wants to, you know, it doesn't have to stick to another English team. Indeed, this led some people... there's a... I think he's a Belgian microbiologist called Sonea to say that we really ought to think of the bacterial world as a sort of super-organism, and what was evolving is not the individual bacterial species but the organism as a whole. I have to say, I think this is complete nonsense, because it's, you know, evolution by natural selection requires that you have a population of things competing with one another, and you can't talk about natural selection operating on a single whole. But nevertheless, he was on to a point that there is this whole field of creatures which are exchanging genetic material.

What we ought to be thinking about is not the individual bacterium as the unit of evolution, but these bits of DNA as the units of evolution. It's an idea that will be familiar to you, of course. And, let me give you one example of it, it's not my idea at all, it's suggested by two Canadian microbiologists, [JG] Lawrence and [JR] Roth. I think it's a fascinating notion. There are, in bacteria, groups of genes called operons. The classic one is the so-called lac operon in E. coli, it's the first one to be discovered. It's a group of genes, which if you've got them, they're all end-to-end on the chromosome, and if you switch them on, they enable the cell to digest and cope with lactose. And lactose is a sugar which E. coli doesn't often meet, but if it does, it can say, gosh, I must do something, and it can switch on these genes and start digesting lactose. And it was the discovery of this group of genes, and in particular the discovery of how the presence of the lactose switched the gene on, which was done by the group at the Pasteur, particularly Jacques Monod and François Jacob, which really was the beginning of our understanding of how genes are regulated. I mean, for me, after the Watson and Crick paper, the Jacob - Monod work was the most important thing that's happened in biology in my lifetime. But nevertheless, there's a puzzle. You've got this group of genes, and there are many operons in E. coli and every bacterium has these operons, groups of link genes with a switch or switches at the beginning for switching them on, when you need them. Why are they linked? You see, the thing would work perfectly well if the 10 genes, or whatever it is, of an operon, were spotted all around the chromosome, each with its little switch, and when you want them, you switch them all on, and they can all have the same switch and switch on. They don't have to be together. Monod would have replied, 'Well, it's easier to regulate them as a single switch,' and that's a perfectly plausible explanation. Maybe it's just they are together because it's convenient to switch them all on at once. What Roth and Lawrence point out is that actually being together has another advantage, it means you can be transferred from one cell to another together, and they want to suggest that these operons are little selfish... not genes, but selfish genetic elements. They've evolved under selection acting on them, because as a group, they can transfer. Now, this is interesting, because if it's true, there are certain implications. You wouldn't expect to find genes that you need all the time to be in operons, because you'd have them, you wouldn't need to acquire them from somewhere, they wouldn't need to move around.    The genes you'd expect to find in operons would be the genes which are only occasionally needed, only in special environments. And then, if you can work it out, there is selection in favour of tight linkage. And what Roth and Lawrence show is that, by and large, that prediction is born out, that genes like the lac operon, for lactose, which are... for an environment which is only occasionally needed, are in operons linked together, genes for DNA replication are not. You need to replicate your DNA all the time, and they're spotted all around the chromosome, switched on together, but they're not linked. And there are other reasons for thinking that maybe this sort of gene-centred view of bacterial evolution may be the right way of looking at it. The one I'm particularly interested in, and I want to work on it with a young friend in Paris, is the possibility that the genes responsible for transformation, this process of sex that I was describing earlier on, may be the same, that sexual transfer in the bacteria may be being carried out by groups of genes which are really doing it for their own good, because they want to jump, you know. They're bored with sitting in the same cell, they'd like to replicate, like getting into new cells. I don't know whether this'll turn out to be right.

I want to... really to think about adaptation at the organism level, as I'm sure you do, reading your books. I mean you want to understand why an albatross flies the way it does. Let's face it, you talk about the albatross, you don't talk about the genes of the albatross. And the reason you can get away with this, is... I think it's your analogy, the men in the boat; I mean, if you really can't jump from boat to boat too easily, there's nothing for it but to keep time with the other seven guys and row as fast as you can. And I think that most of the time in eukaryotes, genes have to rub shoulders, they have to be good mixers and so on. And I guess the same is true, to some extent, in prokaryotes, but I am increasingly struck by the frequency with which genes jump across big distances in prokaryotes and find themselves in quite unfamiliar backgrounds. And I think if we come back and look at bacterial population genetics, in 10 years time, it's going to be a very gene-centred science.

Watson and Crick just transformed the way we see biology. They made sense of why Weismann was right and not Lamarck. I think before Watson and Crick, the world just was very puzzling. How could genes be doing what we claimed they were doing? The whole thing was mysterious. But certainly, the universality of the genetic material is something that came as a shock to us, I think.
[Q] Once again, Medawar said, it is simply not worth bothering to argue with someone so stupid as not to see that Watson and Crick was the greatest discovery. Do you think he goes too far there?
No, no. I can imagine Medawar arguing with somebody about it though.

[Q] You were pointing out the sporadic distribution of asexual reproduction in the taxonomic tree, and you said, 'Wouldn't it be nice if we could find something else that had the same kind of sporadic distribution,' but you never actually said whether you'd found any such examples.
Well, I've not done the serious statistics. I mean, nowadays, you know one has to do proper statistics before you would justify a statement of that kind. But I have a candidate which I would like somebody to do the statistics on, and it's rather an unexpected one. It's the habit of producing your young alive, viviparity. Now, you think, come on, that can't be right, all mammals are viviparous, you know, one big taxonomic group. I think the fact that mammals are all viviparous is a little like the Bdelloid rotifers all being parthenogens. It's... it's a curious quirk. By and large, viviparity crops up, particularly in the vertebrates, in a very irregular way.
[Q] It's very sporadic in teleost fish.
That's right. I would like to see somebody do a serious statistical survey of the distribution of viviparity in the vertebrates. And I think they might find that mammals are really weird, in being... clearly mammals, it's an invention that's succeeded.
[Q] It's just one datum.
It's one datum in the statistics. I think someone, you know, your colleague, Paul Harvey, or one of his students, should have a serious go at it. Maybe there are others, I've not got a good example.
[Q] But in order for the analogy with asexuality to be correct, it would have to be the case that... I mean you would have to be predicting that viviparity, when it arises, quickly drives the species extinct, wouldn't you?
That's right, yes.
[Q] Is that what you want to say?
If that's what the data says, that's what I want to say, yes,  I think it's a terrible mistake.  
[Q] There are other things, like halpo-diploidy, which have the opposite kind of distribution, which are not sporadic, which really do characterise major taxa.
Yes, again, when I originally put forward the argument that the taxonomic distribution of parthenogenesis was... was patchy, I did use the haplo-diploids as a counter example to show that other breeding systems could, if they arose, spread to whole groups, and it... you didn't very often get this occasional example. But I'm afraid I didn't do the statistics properly, I mean, somebody should. In those days, you see, you could make these kind of statements without doing the statistics. Nowadays, the whole thing has... the rules of the game have changed and you have to do it properly, I'm afraid.

[Q] George Williams ends his 1975 book about sex in pessimistic vein, suggesting that he can understand sex for those animals which he calls high fecundity, but for low fecundity animals like us, he more or less throws up his hands in despair and says, 'Well, it's just a frozen accident. Once it's... once you're stuck with sex, you can't get rid of it.' Do you think that's what happened with, say, mammals, I mean are we stuck with sex because we just can't get rid of it?
Well, I think it's very possible. I do remember attending a meeting on parthenogenesis in Scandinavia, this must have been 20 years ago or so now. And I wrote in 'News and Views' for Nature, when I came back, just describing the meeting, as one sometimes does. I commented that we had recognised at this meeting that there were two major taxa which, as far as we knew, were never parthenogenetic. One are mammals, and I'm ignoring the one observed, or one claimed observed case, because I'm not entirely convinced.
[Q] You mean Jesus Christ or Dolly the sheep?
Oh, Dolly the sheep is fine, no, I was meaning Jesus Christ. I think the evidence in the case of Dolly the sheep is fairly good. But... the other actually, one are the mammals, the other actually is the conifers. There are no parthenogenetic conifers, so far as I know. Almost the next week, there appeared in Nature a letter saying, 'How can Maynard Smith be so ignorant as to not to know why mammals were never parthenogens.' And quoting this curious phenomenon of so-called imprinting of genes, the evidence is that in mammals, a few genes, it's not most of them but just a small number of genes, are labelled, in a sense, as to whether they came from father or mother, in the foetus, and it's called imprinting, you know, a little stamp saying, 'I came from mother.' And in some tissues, only mother's gene is active and the gene from father is not, and in other tissues, only father's gene is active and mother's is not. And I think, actually, David Haig has now given us a very nice evolutionary explanation as to why this imprinting works the way it does, but that certainly wasn't known in those days. But given that that's true, for the foetus to develop properly it must have one father and one mother, at least. If it hasn't got a father then the father's gene tissues fail and vice versa.    I felt a little cross about this complaint because the data hadn't at that time, about imprinting, had not even been published, so the fact that I didn't know it seemed to be excusable. It was some years later, actually, that I discovered why conifers are not parthenogens, it's much more obvious. I was reading a review about the inheritance of chloroplasts and mitochondria in plants, and it turns out that in the coniferous plants, the chloroplast is inherited through the pollen grain. And, clearly, if you don't have a pollen grain you're not going to have a chloroplast, you're not going to grow. Now, I've called these things sexual hang-ups, but... you call them frozen accidents, I think it's basically the same idea; that if a group has been sexual for a long period of time, then other, quite secondary, and in some ways quite trivial, secondary adaptations may be attached on to the male-female differentiation, and once that's happened, the reverse mutation may be exceedingly difficult. And... I'm inclined to think that mammals... we don't get parthenogenetic mammals because of sexual imprinting, we don't get parthenogenetic conifers because of the enhancement of chloroplasts.

I'm genuinely puzzled by Dolly the sheep. I think it's a fascinating problem... I mean I think it's a fascinating result. But I read the paper in Nature and it didn't seem to answer the... I mean, it convinced me that the phenomenon is a genuine one, and that's exciting, but it didn't offer any explanation of why it worked, because I would not have expected it to work, and most people in the trade would not. So, I think there's a very real puzzle about Dolly.
[Q] If somebody came along and said we want to clone Maynard Smith, what would you say? 
Not on your life, I think. My feeling is that the only person whose interest should be considered in the matter of cloning human beings is the future clone. I really would not wish to be a child, being brought up, knowing that I was genetically identical to this old twerp. I mean, you know it goes back to... I remember when it wasn't cloning but it was artificial insemination by famous donors, was a popular scheme. And I had this image of this wretched child who had been conceived by sperm derived from Francis Crick, and I had this picture of two parents looking down at the child and saying, 'When are you going to discover something?' It'd be awful. And I think it would be terrible to be brought up as a child, knowing that in some way or other you were expected to be... the genetic replica... sort of follow in the footsteps of some already existing adult.    I mean, if somebody cloned me and took the clone away and could be absolutely certain that the child would never know who he was or who he was meant to be like, I don't think it would matter, but then I don't suppose they'd want to do that. No, I think the child is the person you have to mind about in these contexts, not the person who thinks how nice it would be to have lots of copies of me.

We've never actually worked together on... on a problem. It's not been a deliberate decision, we've never said, 'We will not work together.' But I do think it would be tempting providence in a way. I mean, marriage is not the easiest of relationships, I mean, we've been married for 57, 58 years or something now, quite a while, anybody who could put up with either of us for that length of time, you know, it's not the easiest thing to do. But if you've known one, a really close research collaboration, it's very like a marriage. It has just the same kind of tensions and potential jealousies and potential feelings of being let down, all the things that can threaten a marriage can threaten a research collaboration. And I have seen several research collaborations between people whom I... I loved and whom I really liked to see the joint work, break up, rather as marriages could break up, in recrimination and mutual, sort of, distrust and so on. To try and bring both off in one relationship would, I think... I think it would be terribly hard. But on the other hand, it has been a great advantage to Sheila and me that we've... I mean, she worked as an engineer while I was engineering as well, and we married when we were students but... we went to the same place to work when we were working on aeroplanes.
[Q] She also made the switch from engineer to biologist then?
No, no, she's not an engineer - I'm not allowed to say she's a mathematician, because she's - actually, it's quite true, she's not a mathematician, but she took her first degree in mathematics. And if you took a degree in mathematics and it was wartime, you were employed as an engineer. And she sort of picked up the engineering on the way. And then she had a biggish break for producing kids, you know. Then, when, you know, the youngest was old enough to go to nursery to be looked after and so on, she wanted to get back into some sort of work and actually worked in human genetics, at University College, which was nice because... I mean, she wasn't working directly for Haldane but she was working for Haldane's colleague, Lionel Penrose, and we were all in the same department, so that was a good relationship. And then, when we came down here, there's no medical school, and there was no way she could go on being a human geneticist. You can't be a human geneticist without a medical school because you can't let blood out of people, even, you know, unless you've got a medical colleague. And I had this colleague, Neville Simons, who was working on bacterial genetics, and so Sheila decided to become a bacterial geneticist. If you can add and subtract, you can do anything in science, I believe. I mean, all the detail you can learn, but to have a mathematic... an ability to think logically and clearly, which you get if you're a mathematician, I think you can take it anywhere.
[Q] Do you talk shop a lot, even though not actually collaborating on particular research?
Oh yes, yes. We've always talked about the work we're doing. That... it may be one of the reasons why we've put up with one another for so long, I don't know.

There are two theories on that, as it happens, two quite convincing theories; either one of which would be fine if only the other one didn't exist. The first one is actually due to Geoff Parker and myself, who did a game theory analysis of... we started with an isogamous population, a population of organisms producing equal sized gametes, and asked, 'Is this evolutionarily, and could it be invaded by individuals, either producing much bigger gametes or much smaller ones?' And we showed that there were circumstances in which it could so be invaded. But interestingly, the invasion would be, you'd have small motile gametes, and then the invader would be the one producing great big gamete, which shows that in spite of what it says, you know, that males are actually the first sex, which is nice, we were there first and women only came along afterwards. That's one view, and I think it's... there's even some supporting evidence. Looking at... well particularly there's a group of algae called volvox, in which the theory predicts exactly which one should be sexual and which one shouldn't and it works out very nicely. Not sexual but dimorphic.
[Q] How could the first one have been the male, because it doesn't make the economic contribution?
Well, perhaps I'm stretching a point by claiming they were males, but they were motile, they had little, you know, they had flagella to drive the cells along.
[Q] But also tiny.
And tiny, but not so tiny that they didn't have enough cytoplasm there to make themselves work. The essence of being a female is to produce a large non-motile gamete, and all gametes were small and motile initially, I think. But there is an alternative view, which I quite like, which is due to Lawrence Hurst and Bill Hamilton, I think, and others, which is that it really has to do with the inheritance of these organelles - chloroplasts and mitochondria. And it turns out that almost universally, organisms transmit their organelles, their... their mitochondria, let's say, only from one of the two parents. Of course, even if you're isogamous - it sounds crazy this - but an organism which is isogamous nevertheless has what's called plus and minus mating types. You can't tell them apart except chemically, by looking at them you can't tell, but plusses will only fuse with minuses. And this is, obviously, you'd say, well, that's because otherwise, no sooner has an organism produced gametes than they'd fuse with one another and you'd be back where you started. And I think that's right, it prevents selfing. But it then turns out that even in organisms with isogametes, the organelles are inherited from only one side. In chlamydomones, for example, which is a little alga, the mitochondria [are] inherited from one mating type and the chloroplasts from the other. And the argument is that the reason that's important is that it doesn't offer the opportunity for selfish behaviour on the part of mitochondria, the mitochondria don't fight one another, so to speak, and the chloroplasts don't fight one another. And I think that's essentially correct as an explanation. And some people have wanted to suggest that this is the origin of unequal gametes. I mean, the gametes are already unequal in a sense, they either contain chloroplasts or they don't. And the argument has been that you evolve large and small gametes as a way of preventing other kinds of selfish elements, parasites and so on, spreading. I'm not convinced that the argument works, but better men than I am think it does, so we'll see. I like the one that I invented myself, one always does.
[Q] Yes, I confused that with Parker, Baker and Smith, which is similar.
It's the same idea. No, I'm perhaps making unfair claims for myself here. Parker, Baker and Smith, came up with the idea, and it's essentially the same idea. They showed it to work in a particular case, by computer simulation. I, in my sex book, showed that the principle is quite general, and applied game theory to it to show that the conditions under which it would work, so I... in a sense, I did the analytical proof that it works, but they had... the basic idea was theirs.

The essential difference is that if a female gamete is very expensive, male gametes are really rather cheap. Consequently, a female will not benefit by mating lots of times, because her fecundity is limited by how many eggs she can produce. A male will benefit by mating with lots of females, because his fecundity is not limited by his ability to produce gametes. And in the beast that I worked with, Drosophila subobscura, it was very striking, that the female mated once in her life, a male could mate five times a day. And their attitudes, if I can put it that way, towards mating, were very different. The male... female is extremely choosy and selective, not only would she only mate with members of her own species, but they had to be the right age, they had to be fit and healthy, and she had methods of discovering whether they were fit and healthy though the courtship dance. The males were... you could get a male to attempt to mate with a blob of wax on the end of a bristle that you moved in the right way, he'd dance with it, and when you held it still, he'd try and mount it. I mean, he just wasn't a very discriminating organism. I'm afraid, it's what's to be expected. But once you get the formation of a pair bond, and... which lasts through a breeding season, or through life, and you get both parents investing in the offspring, then, of course, it is as important to the male as the female to select an appropriate mate. And you get these very elaborate mutual courtships in many birds, for example, where both parents are feeding the young and making equivalent contributions; except, always, of course, the female has to lay the eggs, but otherwise the male may be doing as much, to make the nest, to look after the kids. Going back to the very early ethology that Julian Huxley did on grebes, for example, where you can't tell the male and female apart by looking at them, and they have this extremely elaborate courtship in which they're both having to perform to convince the other. So it really does depend how much investment you put into your kids.

I actually attended a meeting of feminists in biology, in America, about two years ago, and I think it's fair to say... I mean, first of all, they were courteous and gentle people, I mean, I wasn't attacked, I might have been disagreed with. But, more important than that, I realised that feminism - I should have known anyway, but I have to be educated - that feminism is an incredibly broad church. I mean, it spread all the way from women who held the view that, first of all, women were getting a somewhat unfair deal in science in promotion, in getting jobs, in coping with the interruptions in their careers through having children and so on, and who felt that something should be done about this. And also, since a number of people were working in the field of animal behaviour, held the view that it was very possible that if women looked at the behaviour of baboons or bluebirds or whatever, they might actually notice different things to what men noticed. And I'm sure both these things are true, and I had absolutely no disagreement with such people. But the people at the conference went all the way from that kind of what appears to me to be rational and desirable opinion, right across to the view that science is a male construct, and the only thing to do with it is to throw it away and start again.
[Q] Newton's Principia is a rape manual.
Well, I hadn't heard that phrase, but I mean, essentially that is the position. Now, that really does seem to me to be crazy, and I don't understand why people who believe that expect the light to turn on when they press the switch. And I certainly don't understand how they risk going up in aeroplanes and generally living in modern society, which is totally dependent upon this male construct. So... and there were a number of different sort of stations in between these extremes, and I felt a lot in common with the women at one end and very little in common with the women at the other.

I had a slightly curious position on that when the serious debates were going on.  I mean, when Kimura's paper was published... Kimura and King, it's - one's so bad at dates, 1961, could it be? - anyway, whenever, when it was first published, this led, particularly in Britain, to deep hostility to the notion that anything could be selectively neutral. The whole tradition of British population biology had been if you find a genetic variability, it must have some kind of selective explanation, and if at first you don't find it, you must try, try and try again, until you do. And the suggestion that there were genetic changes out there which were selectively neutral, was really deeply distasteful to these people. And there was really quite an extraordinary level of debate on the issue. Which... and what seemed to me so strange at the time, that people felt they had to take sides. I remember, it was at its height at a period when Dick Lewontin spent a year in my lab here. And I remember we talked about it and we both agreed that at the moment we couldn't see anything really decisive, one way or the other. And we kept on trying to think of decisive statistical measures or experiments one could carry out, to decide whether the neutral theory was true. And we kept on coming up with ideas and then deciding that they wouldn't really settle the issue, because, you know. And so we both agreed the only sensible thing was to do was to say we don't know, it didn't seem to be necessary in science to say you know when you don't. But almost everybody else seemed to take rigorous sides. I think that the... this degree of polarity has disappeared, and I think today most people who've thought about the matter seriously, really see the value of the neutral theory as a kind of null hypothesis. The great beauty of the neutral theory is it says, there is no selection. It is then possible to work out, in great detail, what you expect to happen, and what you expect to happen to distribution of gene frequencies, their rates of change in time, and all sorts of things of that kind. Once you start saying there's selection, anything goes, because you don't know what the selection is, you can't predict anything. And so the neutral theory provides one with a really admirable sort of null hypothesis against  a background to which you can... you can pick out the cases where clearly it's not neutral, and you can say, 'That's selective because it doesn't agree with the neutral hypothesis.' So, I've no doubt at all that Kimura's contribution was profound and really has changed population genetics.

I was in Berkeley for a semester, and I was teaching a group of graduate students a course in theoretical biology. It was a lovely teaching job, I know many of them still and they were great students, lovely. And while I was running this seminar, Kimura came through and gave a seminar. And I asked him if he would spend the evening with my class, and just talk, we would talk with him and so on. And it was a fascinating evening, I'd love to have it on tape, except you should never tape something without the person present knowing, I mean, I wouldn't have dreamed of taping it, but all the same, I'd love to have a tape of that evening. Because these kids were very nice and, on the whole, very bright, but they were also, being Americans, rather brash and they... they were quite willing to press this great man and not let him get away from it, and so he was really pushed into discussing issues which are normally very hard for him. And the one thing I remember of the evening, actually what he said, was actually in answer to a question I asked him. I said, 'Look, Motoo, there are really two parts to the neutral theory. The neutral theory first of all says that selective... not selective, that changes in molecules that occur, or mostly occur, because they're selectively neutral. And the other one says that the... if you look at the standing crop of variation at any one time, most of that variation is neutral. Now, it's logically possible that one of those statements is right and the other one is wrong. How would you feel if it turned out that you were right about substitution but wrong about polymorphism?' And he said, 'It is logically possible, but it would be very inelegant.' And I think this tells you about Kimura's mind. It was a mind which liked elegance. It was a very powerful mind but it was a mind which was seeking for simplicity.

When I published my sex book, The Evolution of Sex, I sent a copy to Motoo with a covering letter saying 'You'll find a lot of your ideas in this book,' which is true. And he wrote back a really typical Kimura letter, he wrote back saying 'Dear John, many thanks for sending me your book.' He then obviously can't think of anything polite to say about it, so he says, 'It is, however, very beautifully printed.'    He then goes on to say, 'But, I feel you ought to know that equation 167 was, in fact, reached by Jim Crow and myself in a chapter of our text book which we finally didn't include in the final edition, but you ought to know that we did.' Because he's very obsessional about priorities, Motoo. But, still, the book is very beautifully printed - however, so deep is the hostility of all British geneticists to my work that there is no chance that I would ever have published a book with such a beautiful printer. I rang up my contact at Cambridge University Press and said, 'Look, I think if you play your cards right, you can get a book out of Motoo.' And so that's why they published The Neutral Theory [of Molecular Evolution]. The other thing about that book - I wrote a review of it in Nature, which in general was very complimentary, because it's a great book - come on. But I did point out that he does say, in the first chapter of the book, that - I can't remember the exact words, but it's roughly something like; 'Of course, morphological structure has evolved by natural selection acting on random mutation.' And then he goes on to say that it's all the molecular stuff he's going to talk about, which [he] hasn't. And I quoted this in my review because it seemed to me that people would take, certainly the sort of, British naive panselectionists, would take what he had to say about molecules more seriously if they realised that he accepted the Darwinian explanation of the evolution they were interested in. And after the review appeared, I was rung up by Jim Crow, who, you know, was the... I'm not sure, I think Motoo took a post-doctoral period with Jim, but obviously Jim was his teacher in an important way, and indeed, he's very proud of being his teacher, but I think, actually, he's rightly proud, I mean, I think he did a great job. Jim rang me up and said he was so pleased that I'd written such a nice review of Kimura's book in Nature, but he thought I might like to know how that sentence got into the book. And I said, 'Well, I'd assumed because Motoo wrote it.' He said, 'Well, not quite.' And he said, 'What actually happened was that when Motoo showed me the text of the book, I said, "Look, Motoo, if somewhere in the beginning you said, look, I accept natural selection as an explanation of morphological evolution, it'll make people more sympathetic to the rest of the book".' And Motoo said, 'Right, I will.' 'But,' he said, 'the pen wouldn't write down the words, and ultimately Jim wrote that sentence.'  But still, Kimura put it into the book and signed it, so, you know, he clearly did believe it, it was just he couldn't write it.

If the neutral theory is true, then molecular clocks are fine. If the molecular... there's a lot of controversy about whether they are true, and I mean, by and large, my feeling about clocks is that the neutral theory is near enough true to make the clocks fairly reliable. But there has been a big problem with bacteria. To discover whether the clock in bacteria goes at the same rate as a clock in mammals, let's say, because we don't have any fossil bacteria. But the problem has ultimately been solved by a group of people, the only one I actually know is Nancy Moran, who was a student in Ann Arbor when I was there, who have got the clock calibrated by realising that aphids - greenfly and things like that - have endosymbiotic bacteria, and you can show... and they're transmitted in the egg by the aphid, so that the mother gives it to her daughters. And it turns out that the phylogenetic tree of the aphids and of the bacteria are identical. And since you can date the branching of the aphids, by amber and things of that kind, you know the branching of the bacteria, and you can ask how fast is the clock going. And it really is going surprisingly similarly to that in the aphid, I mean, it really is a very striking observation, to me a bit unexpected, for various reasons. But it really does look as if the bacterial clock is not greatly different in rate to the... the clock for the rest of the world.
[Q] Shouldn't you be able to use the molecular clock to test the idea that there was a Cambrian explosion, by looking at say, I don't know, annelid and mollusc DNA and seeing whether you really can trace them back to the Cambrian and whether they would trace back to some time in the pre-Cambrian?
I think the clock obeys Maynard Smith's rule about numbers in biology, which is that they're always right to a factor of two. And when I say I believe the molecular clock, I do believe it to a factor of two, I do not believe it to a factor of 10%. And to get Cambrian versus pre-Cambrian, which is, after all, 600 million years ago, I think the error is too big to enable you to do that. It is clear, from the molecular clock, that... that the radiation of the main groups was reasonably rapid, but it could have been a 100 million years. I mean, it could have been slow by genetic standards but fast by paleontological ones.

What really matters in evolution, is the... and indeed, in biology, almost, is the transmission of information, in a quite technical sense. And that what... that occasionally, in the course of evolution, there has been a change in the way in which genetic information is stored, is transmitted between generations. One of the transitions we've already talked about is sex. I mean, the change from simple division to sexual reproduction is essentially a change in the way in which information is passed on, so that instead of getting your information from one parent you get it from two, and so on. But there are a number of other major changes of this kind in the way that information is stored and transmitted. And... the book I wrote jointly with my young Hungarian colleague, Eörs Szathmáry - essentially because we tend to think very similarly about problems. I'm surprised to the extent to which when we think about a problem we seem to come up with the same kind of way of seeing it, and yet he knows a lot of chemistry and molecular biology - of which I'm rather ignorant - and I know a fair bit about behaviour and social organisation and structure of higher animals. And I wouldn't like to accuse Eörs of being ignorant, but he knows less about it than I do. So we were able to sort of cover everything from the origin of life to the origin of language by... I don't think either of us could have done it on our own. And we really just tried to understand how these... these major transitions took place. Of course, in a sense, they're something of an interruption of the sort of image of evolution being a series of gradual change. We really are looking at something which one might also call a revolution or a series of revolutions.
[Q] Could we go through what some of those revolutions are?
Yes, I won't go through the whole thing, but the ones that are perhaps most familiar, we now believe that there was a period in the early period of life in which the distinction between nucleic acids as the carriers of information and proteins as the... coded by the nucleic acids, doing all the work, I mean, being the enzymes and the structural proteins and so on, that no such division of labour between an information molecule and a doing molecule existed. And that, in fact, all there was, was RNA, nucleic acid, which was both the replicator and the enzyme.

The first major transition, after the origin of life itself, the first major transition is the origin of the genetic code, whereby nucleic acids actually codes for proteins. The next revolution... is the origin of cells, in a sense, instead of having naked, replicating molecules, in a... either on a surface or in a liquid, you have molecules which are enclosed within compartments. And for reasons I'm sure you'll appreciate, that once you enclose a set of molecules in a compartment or a cell of some kind, then, to some extent, co-operation between those molecules is enforced, they've got to co-operate because they live and die together, so to speak, and they sink or swim together. And we attempted to do the formal mathematics of this. I mean, I think our philosophy is that you have to think in words but you have to prove it in more formal mathematical terms. And each stage we tried to get some kind of verbal understanding of how the transition worked, and then tried, if it hadn't already been done, to... to develop the mathematics which would be an underpinning for what we were saying verbally. There's the origin of chromosomes, which may actually have happened after the origin of cells, i.e. tying the genes end-to-end, which has the consequence that when you replicate one of them, you replicate all of them - which again, enforces co-operation upon the entities. Then there's the origin of so-called eukaryotic cells, cells with a nucleus and all sorts of organelles inside them. There's the origin of multicellular organisation in which an organism consists not of one cell but of many cells. There's the origin of society, as in the social insects, and in humans. And finally, the last transition, or the last one we discussed, it's not the last one that's going to happen, the last transition is the origin of language, in which most of the information passed between generations, as in humans, or if not most, a great deal of it, is transmitted not by genetic signals but by linguistic signals.    So we've got a kind of dual inheritance system; we transmit information in parallel, by words and by genes. We don't cope with the transition we're now living through, which is the electronic revolution, in which information, in fact, is transmitted electronically, between people and between generations.
[Q] You've characterised this as differences in the way information flows through generations, I suppose there's also another theme, which is that selfish entities at one level come together and form a new entity at the next level up. Apart from the... from language itself, almost all your other transitions do have that property.
That's right, yes, it does seem that you have entities like... I mean, it's most obvious, perhaps, in the many-celled organised case, where before the transition, you have cells which reproduce on their own, afterwards. I mean, a kidney cell or a liver cell can't reproduce indefinitely on its own, it may divide for a time within the body; but, you know, its future depends upon the replication of the egg and sperm cells. And this does present a problem. I mean, you have to explain how is it that the integration, the co-operation at the higher level, wasn't disrupted by selection at the lower level. And I... I wouldn't say we've solved all these problems. I mean, I think we've formulated most of them pretty sharply, and some of them, I think, are solved, and some of them, I would have thought, are very much up for grabs.

Language, I certainly think is unique. If I was a young man of 20 or 25 or something, I'd be tempted to work on the evolution of language, it's a fascinating topic.
[Q] It was actually forbidden by the French Academy as being impossible to work on.
And I think with some justification. I mean, a lot of rubbish was being written about the evolution of language. My own prejudices, because I'm a geneticist, is that we shall really get our teeth into the evolution of language when we get to know something about the genetics of language. I mean, I'm assuming - though it's a big assumption - that the sort of Noam Chomsky position on language is correct; that being that we have, in his words, a special language organ, a special part or component of our minds, which enables us to learn languages, as children.    And if you've brought up children and watched them learn languages, it's very persuasive. They do so with so little reinforcement and so quickly that one really feels that they have some special preadaptation, if you like, for learning language. If that's right - and I think this is the step that Chomsky, for obvious reasons, has been reluctant to take - but if it's true, it has to be genetically programmed. I mean, we're not born with complex adaptations by chance, that would be rubbish. I mean, if this is a highly complex adaptation, it must have a number of genes responsible for programming the development of the capacity.
[Q] And must have evolved gradually over a longish period.
Yeah. I mean, until we know how many genes, it's hard to say how long it could have been, but yes. Mind you, the problem here is that it didn't come from nowhere, because new organs don't. I mean, birds do not develop wings from nothing, they develop wings from arms, you know. Usually, a new organ evolves by the modification of a pre-existing organ. I think that whatever it is that... the part of our mind that is coping with language was doing, it wasn't doing nothing, it was doing something else. But if we can identify the genes or some of the genes responsible for language, and by identify it's going to mean finding mutants which have quite specific effects on people's ability to construct grammatical sentences.  
[Q] Specific aphasias.
Yes. And they exist. And in one case, there's really rather convincing evidence for a genetic involvement. But one swallow doesn't make a summer, we need more. All sorts of possibilities open up. We can start asking, all right, what were these genes doing before they - what are they doing in the mouse, what are they doing in the chimpanzee, you know. And furthermore, we can ask, what are they actually doing, what is the nature of the defects which happen when one of them is missing, and so on. And I think we... that approach, together with the much formal and mathematical approach to the problem of how language can evolve, I think that it's... the whole area is a very exciting one, it's just being born. The sort of area you want to get into, you don't want to work on something that people have been working on for years and years and years, you want to get into something new. I think it'd be a lovely thing to start on.
[Q] But do you... are you suggesting that Lucy, for example, though she may not have spoken, was using the precursor of the language module in her brain to do something else, like organise her behaviour, or organise her... plan her strategy for hunting for a water-hole or something?
Yeah, I do. Or maybe something much more primitive than that, like analysing visual input. I mean, there's possibly quite a lot of grammar involved in analysing and turning the pattern on our retina, which is a very optic problem, to make the pattern on the retina, but to turn that into an image in our minds of a chair or a radio or something, I mean, that's hard.
[Q] It's 'syntax-like' isn't it?
It's syntax-like. And I think it possible that we've duplicated and recruited some of that material for talking with. I don't know, it's pure speculation. My point is that it is an answerable question. 
[Q] It's very interesting speculation.
And I think we can answer it, you know, given... given time. And given that linguists and geneticists talk to one another. But it's this old, old problem in science, people from different disciplines find it difficult to converse. And when... it's particularly difficult when genetics has traditionally been seen as a science and linguistics has typically been seen as one of the humanities, and communication between linguists and geneticists is hard. It's beginning to happen, there are a few honourable people who are actually talking across the divide, but far too few.

One of the most remarkable phenomena, I find fascinating to read about, are these sign languages that deaf children will evolve almost for themselves. I mean, it's not that some adult dreams up a sign language and then teaches it to deaf children, it's that deaf children evolve sign languages among themselves by passionately wanting to communicate. And these languages have a syntax, I mean, they're really complex... they're real languages, they're not sort of just a collection of meaningless signs or... and it's one of the things that makes me... persuades me that we really do have a kind of drive, an inner set of genetic mechanisms causing us to develop, and learn, syntax and grammar and language. But it could well be that for a time we spoke largely in gesture, we didn't have to use our voices at all - I don't know.

It's popular among the people studying evolutionary psychology, at the moment, to suggest that the brain may be more modular than we thought, it may contain modules for language, modules for sexual relations, modules for making tools and so on. My feeling is that the evidence is much stronger in the case of language than it is in the case of other conditions, essentially because there are people who, as a result either of genetic or physical damage, have no serious impairment to their general intelligence but find speaking very difficult, or the other way round, who apparently talk perfectly well but can't think, and the two things do seem to be separable. The evidence for other modules seems to be a lot weaker, that's not to say I don't think they exist, I'm just saying that I'm not... I don't think, as yet, the evidence is as strong as in the case of language. But one rather fascinating suggestion, it's due to Stephen Mythen, is that what happened with the origin of language was that a series of independent modules in the human mind had been evolving, one for coping with social relationships, one for coping with manufacturing tools and using them, one for coping with natural history and maps and finding your way around and remembering where you saw something yesterday, and so on. That these evolved as rather separate modules in the mind, but what happened with the origin of Homo sapiens is that they started talking to one another in the mind, and communication between modules was what was crucial. And which may also have underlain the origin of language. Now, it's not quite clear to me how that would work out. But the world is full of ideas about it at the moment.
[Q] A devil's advocate might point to reading and writing as being obviously an adaptation, it's immensely complicated. Quite clearly, the brain has been naturally selected to read and write. What sort of an answer would you give to that?
Well, I think one would reply, the contrast between teaching a child to read and write and the contrast of teaching it to talk. You don't have to teach it to talk, the problem is to shut the little beast up. It just talks. And although parents do occasionally correct grammatical errors, it's quite unnecessary. The child will learn to speak the grammar of the language in which it is raised without any teaching at all. But you can leave books lying around and if you don't teach the kid, it will never learn, and it's a slow and painful process, learning to read. And I think that's the... the difference.
[Q] I suppose you could also say that the sort of painful way in which we can... in which children do learn to read and write is perhaps rather like language itself was originally, and whatever the pre-adaptation was, perhaps some particularly gifted individuals managed to teach themselves to use it, to speak, in rather the same way as we teach children to read and write.
Yes, I like that general approach, that you know we sort of learned to do things and then they gradually got genetically assimilated. I'm sure there were, sort of, I think there's a lot of room for individual initiative in the evolution of language, in the sense of individuals coming up with new grammatical, or new words and so on, initially being copied culturally, not genetically. But gradually, if they were grammatical inventions being incorporated at a more genetic level.

I don't think I knew, when I first read Watson and Crick, what an important idea I was reading. I know why I read it, why I did everything in those days, Prof told me to. I mean, Haldane was in the corridor... outside the corridor, and said 'Smith, you'd better look at that.' When he said that, I did it. And I think... I mean, first of all, I had no difficulty in understanding it. You know, there's a lot of rubbish in the history of science about paradigm debates, about how major revolutions in science are brought about by a lot of young Turks who come up with a completely new idea and the older generation can't understand it, and there's a paradigm debate goes on, and it's all settled by rhetoric and so on. Nothing could be further from the truth about the molecular biology revolution.
People like me, who didn't have the technical skills to do the molecular biology, who were not raised in that technique, had no difficult at all in understanding the ideas. And in my case, no difficulty at all in accepting them. Clearly Haldane had no difficulty in understanding and accepting them. We found it much harder to acquire the techniques... the experimental techniques involved, but I don't think Francis Crick ever acquired them, so it probably didn't matter too much. But intellectually, there was nothing even remotely approaching a paradigm debate. On the other hand, although I understood what they were saying, and realised that this was important, I don't think I realised how important it was going to be to me as an evolutionary biologist. You must appreciate that Watson and Crick's paper explained replication, how a molecule could replicate, how a gene could replicate, and that was fundamental. It wasn't, at that time, clear how a gene could influence anything. One had to wait for the discoveries of Messenger RNA, of ribosomes, of translation of the genetic code, and so on, before one understood how genes not only replicated but could do something. And it all came very fast. That development of molecular biology was an absolute explosion of ideas. And again, I don't remember having any difficulty in understanding it. You know, I didn't contribute to it, but I could follow it perfectly well. But I don't think I understood how important it was for an evolutionary biologist, until... well really it was until the notion of the central dogma of molecular biology. I mean, Crick's claim that the central feature of molecular biology was that information could go from nucleic acids to proteins and it couldn't go from proteins to nucleic acids.   And I did think... I think I did see at once, once he'd said that, that this was the whole... the root of the Weismannian position of the non-inheritable acquired characters and so on. But I certainly didn't see that when the Watson and Crick paper came out. It took time for the significance of it all to filter through.

I have a kind of chequered relationship with [Charles] Weismann. As a boy, I guess I read almost everything written by George Bernard Shaw. And you know that Shaw was a Lamarckian and deeply anti-Darwinian in his thinking about evolution. And he treated Weismann as a cruel and ignorant and stupid German pedant who had done this absurd experiment of cutting the tails of mice in order to demonstrate that acquired characters were not inherited. And Shaw says 'Look, you wouldn't expect the tails... taillessness to be inherited, because it isn't something the mouse did of its own volition, it's something that was done to it, and it's only things that the creature does out of its own inner drive that are going to be inherited.' And I grew up with the conviction that Weismann was, you know, was, indeed, an ignorant German pedant. And I was about to say something, I think I actually wrote something quite impolite about Weismann in something I was writing, and I thought 'Well, wait a minute now, I wonder whether it's true that he thought this.' And I went round to the library and started reading his big fat book that he wrote towards the end of his life and discovered that it was totally untrue and, I think that after Darwin, Weismann is my hero as an evolutionary biologist. I mean, first of all, to get rid of the mice story. He has this great thing about how the first time he gave a paper, at a German zoological society, explaining why he thought that acquired characters were not inherited, people leapt up and said 'But this has to be wrong, everybody knows that if you dock the tail of a bitch, she will produce puppies that have no tails, so what you're saying has to be wrong.' And Weismann... indeed, they talked a lot about the inheritance of wounds, and it was claimed that even duelling scars were inherited, fortunately only by the sons but not by the daughters, which was handy.    And so Weismann said that he... he had to do the mouse experiment just to get rid of this particular piece of nonsense, but that's not why he thought acquired characters were not inherited at all. And it's... it's fascinating to read him on this. He has two big chapters in the book on why he thinks that they aren't inherited. And he discusses classical examples, like the adaptations of the worker bees cannot possibly be inherited by the inheritance of acquired characters because their ancestors have never had those habits. Or he points out that the... the argument that the whole outer skeleton of an insect - the adult insect - is hardened before it is used. And so there's no way that use could modify the shape of the exoskeleton of an insect so as to become adaptive. And he gives a number of good arguments of that kind. But, at the end of the chapter, he obviously realises he hasn't really quite said what he wants to say. And he says 'But the real problem is,' and I can't remember his exact words, 'that how could it be that some adaption of the body could be transmitted to the germ cells and somehow or other change the germ cells so that when the germ cells form a new individual, they somehow would have acquired the information from the body and can transmit it to the new individual.' And to prove that he really did have this notion of information, he has this extraordinary sentence, which I can more or less quote, though it's an English translation, I'm afraid. He says 'If you came across the case of the inheritance of an acquired character, it's as if a man sent a telegram to China and it arrived translated into Chinese.' And what's fascinating about that is that he does know that heredity is about information. He knows... he has the notion of translation. But also, interestingly, he does use the mechanical analogue of the telegram.

I think what's happened, in the 20th century, and a bit at the end of the 19th, is that we have been surrounded by machinery which transduces information; tape recorders, record players and telephone... what we're doing now, film and television and so on, all are machines which change information from one form to another, telephones and so on. And prior to about 1880, nobody had this notion of information being something which could be coded and transformed. And biology, during this century, has become increasingly concerned with... precisely with information. Genetics is the question of how the information is transmitted between generations, molecular biology is concerned with how it's translated from DNA into protein.   Developmental biology is concerned with how it's translated from the sort of... a set of proteins into a morphological structure. And evolutionary theory essentially is about how the information got there in the first place. And I think you could almost characterise the 20th century in biology as the century in which it became the science of information in living systems. Lots of biologists wouldn't like that because it's not what they do. But I think that's what's really new about biology in this century.
Yes.

I guess most evolutionary biologists have had the following fantasy; that we're given a day in Down House, with Darwin, and we're free to tell him what we like, and what would we tell him? It would be lovely, wouldn't it, you know? So that he didn't waste his time on all that pangenesis stuff and concentrated on the things that he did so marvellously. And clearly we want to tell him about genetics, I think, because that's the one thing he didn't have. But would he find it terribly hard to understand, for the reasons you describe? We are used to tape recorders, he wasn't. Maybe he'd find the concepts difficult, I don't know. We're not going to get a chance to do it, but it would be lovely to try.

[Q] [RA] Fisher, at the beginning of the Genetical Theory [of Natural Selection], discusses how Darwin was closer to it than one might have thought. He was definitely on to the idea that sex was inherited in an all or none way, so he... he probably wouldn't have needed much prompting from Mendel.
No. Curiously enough, his cousin, Francis Galton, was awful close too, and clearly Weismann was very close. Weismann almost reinvented Mendel's Laws a priori, actually, if only he'd been prepared to believe the world was a bit simpler than he did, he'd have got Mendel's Laws a priori with no experiments at all - but he didn't quite.
[Q] Fisher thought they ought to have been invented a priori.
Well, they very nearly were. Weismann gets the whole thing, he says... he talks about Ids, not genes, he gets the whole thing, except that he cannot believe the world is so simple that there's just one copy of each gene in the gamete and two in the zygote.   And he does it, I can't remember, for a hexadecaploid, something with 16 copies of every gene. And, of course, the thing becomes horrendously complicated. If only he'd said, the simple way is to have one copy each, he'd have got Mendel's Laws. Sad, really. But I think, obviously, the fact that Haldane understood something and taught his student, doesn't mean to say that everybody at that time did. But I didn't see any signs of incomprehension. I mean, there were people around who were in the old morphological trap who didn't actually see this was interesting. You know, that's always the way. And there were fights about grants and editorships and all that sort of... the sociological stuff, but there was no intellectual difficulty.

When I graduated, Helen Spurway, Haldane's wife, given me a great mass of data she'd collected and saying 'Look, these data really look strange and I can't make sense of them, but if you can make sense of them then we could publish them together.' And I looked at them for a bit, and I thought, 'Well, I don't want to look at Helen's data, I want to discover my own things, you know.' But the data must have stuck in my mind. And about a year later there was a paper in Nature by Bruno Pontecorvo, on the white locus in Drosophila, showing that the linear sructure... the linear arrangements of mutations in the white locus, in Drosophila, judged entirely from genetic breeding data, recombination and so on. And I can remember to this day, sitting there, and thinking, 'Oh, that's what Helen's data means, that Helen had the perfect data demonstrating the linear structure of a gene, but she hadn't seen what it meant, I hadn't seen what it meant.' And I thought, you know, it's just... we all find ourselves in this situation, there are more things we didn't discover than we did. But there, I had the data in my hands and I didn't... didn't see the point. But I think, you know, it doesn't matter, I guess.
[Q] There are have got to be things staring us in the face now that will be important in the future.
Yeah, that's a good... another parlour game one can try, you know, what is it that everybody in this room knows, or at least all the biologists in this room know, which if only we realised was important, we could get the next Nobel Prize? There must be things like that out there, but they're so hard to spot, aren't they, you know, until somebody tells you, and then you feel an idiot.

I do have a great respect for Popper. I mean, I think... he's nearer to... I mean, Popper's ambition, in relation to science, at least, was to discriminate between, sort of, science and what he called pseudo-science. As a very young man, almost as a schoolboy, his problem was to discriminate between Einstein, on the one hand, and Marx and Freud on the other. As far as he was concerned, Marx and Freud were sort of pseudo-science and Einstein was real science, but the question is: What was the difference? And it was his notion of the concept of falsifiability... was the criteria which he ultimately used to distinguish with Marxism and Freudism on the one hand. And I think I already mentioned earlier, talking to you, that, you know, neither Marx nor Freud are easily refutable, because they have, sort of, built-in self defences. Relativity theory, on the other hand, is very easily refutable. If wrong, there are experiments you can do to refute it. So I think Popper was... was a genuine contributor to our understanding of what we're doing. But more generally, my impression is that... that people who take... scientists who take the philosophy of science seriously and allow their scientific research to be influenced by philosophical preconceptions, are far more likely to do themselves harm than good. I mean, the classic case, I guess, is Karl Pearson, who because of his developed positivist stance - which says you mustn't imagine hypotheses, you mustn't hypothesise anything that you can't, sort of, see and touch - screwed up genetics for 20 years and completely ruined himself, because he wouldn't postulate the existence of an entity that he couldn't pick up and weigh. It... but he did that on philosophical grounds. And... and I suppose another and much worse example, I give Lysenko enough credit to believe that he was influenced not only by careerism but also by philosophical conviction. Certainly the errors he made about heredity are precisely the ones that Marxism should lead him to make, and it's another case where philosophical preconceptions misled him. And I think it happens again and again in science. So, I'm... I'm a sucker here, I mean, I love reading philosophy of science, I find it interesting. I feel all ready to argue about it. But I do not believe one should allow oneself to be influenced by it, when actually thinking about science.

Within the realm of biology, there is the problem of the origin of life, which I don't think we could claim to have solved at the moment. But I don't think we are waiting for a Darwin, exactly, I think we know what we're looking for, the problem is to... getting the chemistry to work, and that's a big... big and very hard problem. I still hope to live long enough to see it done. I mean, I really don't think, I mean if I was a creationist, I certainly wouldn't pin my faith in the impossibility of creating life in the laboratory, because I bet we're going to do it - it's just it may take a bit of time. The other end of evolution, I mean, the whole problem of the human mind, and it's not a field in which I've worked, it does seem to me that we just don't really yet know how to go from neurophysiology to thinking, and maybe we can't. But I never like to admit that you can't. But it does seem to me that it may be that a really quite different kind of theoretical notion, a new way of thinking about things, a new Darwin is needed. Not that I've got anything about neurobiology, it's fine, but I do feel at the moment that it's sort of stuck and it's not quite clear to me where it's going to go next.

[Q] Is it possible that life is such a rare phenomenon in the universe as a whole that the kind of chemical event we're looking for is too improbable that we should ever expect to see it duplicated in the laboratory?
If I can quote somebody I quoted earlier: 'It is logically possible, but it would be very inelegant.' I mean, I would hate to think that some wildly unlikely event had to come across. At the moment, I see no reason. Things don't seem to be going that way. I mean, things are going very nicely, thank you, I think, in the origin of life problem, I mean, we're getting closer and closer. We don't seem to be up against an impasse that we can make no progress with. Maybe we'll hit one, but at the moment, I should say, things are looking relatively...
[Q] 'But if it's that easy, where are they?' to quote Fermi.
You mean, up there somewhere, but why haven't they come? 
[Q] Why haven't they come?
Well, there's a rather sick reason, that life is fine until you get the evolution of an intelligent, tool-making organism, and then it blows itself up. And they're not here because, although they evolved, they destroyed themselves as soon as they reached our stage. I'd prefer not to believe that either, I think. It is a little puzzling that we haven't picked up information, even if we have, you know, one might expect in the... all this radiation that's surrounding us, be able to pick up a message of some kind. Disappointing.

At the moment, we just don't know which features of life are like that because of the accidents of common origin and which of them are like that because they have to be. And I know you have speculations about what things have to be, and I do, but it would be nice to have another case of an independent origin of life and see whether our hunches about, for example, inheritance have to be Weismannian rather than Lamarckian, or like, inheritance has to be digital and not analogue, and so on. Are these speculations correct?
[Q] Double our sample size from one to two.
Well, three. Haldane had these three theorems which would enable you to do the whole of science. One was Pangloss's Theorem, which is 'All is for the best, in this best of all possible worlds.' But the one that is relevant to the question you've just asked, was the Bellman's Theorem, which is 'What I've told you three times is true.' The third one, just for completion, was Aunt Jobisca's Theorem, which is a very powerful theorem if you get into an argument; 'It's a fact the whole world knows, that the Pobble is happier without its toes.' And indeed, these theorems do get... three cases would be enough, but actually two would be great. Two would be marvellous.
