jonathan.miller

Jonathan Miller (1934-2019) was a British theatre and opera director. Initially studying medicine at Cambridge, Sir Jonathan Miller came to prominence with the production of the British comedy revue, Beyond the Fringe. Following on from this success he embarked on a career in the theatre, directing a 1970 West End production of The Merchant of Venice starring Laurence Olivier. He also started directing opera, famously producing a modern, Mafia-themed version of Rigoletto.

I came from only a mile from here. I’ve lived no more than a mile from where I was born. I was born in… down just south of the park where my father was a doctor and he had his residence there in Park Crescent. I was born there in 1934. My father was an English doctor, he was a psychiatrist by that time.  My mother was a writer and a novelist, there’s a picture… there’s a sculpture of her by my father, there.
Both of them were the children of Lithuanian Jewish immigrants.  My grandfather - my father's father - came in about 1868… 1870, to the East End of London where he established himself near Brick Lane as an importer of fur, and he was, as so many Jews were, he was a fur merchant.  And my mother's father was also born in Lithuania and he took a ship bound, I suspect, as so many of these ships were, for New York, and was offloaded in Cork, so he must’ve misheard when they landed, Cork, oh, New York, this is where I get off, and he did indeed get off in Cork, and I think he probably sold stuff in the street as a 12 year old boy, and then he gradually became a businessman and became fairly prosperous, and my mother was born in Cork in about 1910, with two brothers and a sister.
Her mother was a Swedish Jew born in Karlstad, related to the French philosopher Bergson.  She was a Bergson, a Jewish family that I suspect had arrived in Sweden from Poland in the 1840s, and they had a large, and once again, a prosperous clothing business in Karlstad.  And then she married my maternal grandfather and moved to Cork where my mother was born in 1910.

And my parents must’ve met one another, I suspect, in the late 1930s when my father was already well established and one of the founders, if not the founder of child psychiatry in England.
Now, he, not withstanding his Lithuanian Jewish ancestry, was already a pretty assimilated person.  He went to Cambridge in about 1907 where he studied first of all moral science, in other words did philosophy, at St John's College, which is the college I went to nearly 50 years later, and then he took up what was then called, and still is called, Natural Sciences.  He did zoology and botany, and I think by that time was interested in becoming a doctor.
He was taught at Cambridge by a number of interesting figures, including perhaps the most interesting of all, his tutor was a man called Rivers, WH Rivers, who figures in Pat Barker's books about the First World War. Rivers was a… he was a visual physiologist, first of all.  He wrote the 200-page chapter on vision for Schäfer’s textbook of physiology.
And then in the late 1890s, in about 1898, he was invited by a colleague of his called Haddon, who was a zoologist who'd been studying invertebrate zoology in the Torres Straits up between the northern tip of Queensland and Papua New Guinea.  And Haddon came back and was very struck by the fact that this was a… what it was then called, rather politically incorrect, a primitive culture which was disappearing under the influence of Christian missionaries and the new industry of pearl fishing.  And so he took Rivers, and my wife's great uncle, a man called Seligman, to do what to all intents and purposes was the first piece of field anthropology.  Up to that time people like Tylor and Frazer had done their anthropology sitting comfortably in chairs in universities receiving reports from district commissioners, and… or district officers and missionaries, but this was the first time that a group of Europeans had actually gone and lived with the tribes.
So Rivers had come back to Cambridge, I think, in early 1900, by which time he had become an anthropologist, one of the first real British anthropologists.  And he was my father's supervisor, and I think he was one of the first people to receive and publicise Freud's work, Rivers, that is. He wrote this famous book called Instinct and the Unconscious in the early 1900s, about 19… sort of 16, 17, and I suppose he must’ve had a great influence on my father.

He, himself, during the war... Rivers, that is... was one of a substantial group of medical and psychologically interested people to study shell shock.  And, in fact, my father, who had qualified at the London Hospital as a doctor under the auspices and tuition of a man called Henry Head - who was rather appropriately named for a neurologist - and my father got interested in injuries to the brain and spinal cord and during the war he began to study them and like so many people at that time was struck by the appearance of people with very serious disorders without any physical injury, paralyses and blindness and voicelessness and so forth.
And both Rivers and Head and my father and many other people were studying what was then called shell shock.  And from about 1917 until about 1922 my father was interested in these disorders, which moved him away from classical neurology towards more psychiatric concerns.  And in about 1926 he established the first what was called child guidance clinic in the East End of London - called the East London Child Guidance Clinic - and became more and more interested in the jurisprudential problems of delinquency and the psychiatric problems of delinquency.  And between the wars was establishing himself as a psychiatrist with… he was, as it were, interested in Freud but not, I think, altogether persuaded of psychoanalysis, he never undertook a training analysis, but he was amenable to some of the ideas.
And by the time I was born in ‘34, he'd married my mother in ‘33, I think that… he'd had some difficulty in getting jobs in a teaching hospital, I think many Jewish professionals between the wars experienced great difficulty in getting into teaching hospitals.    And I think one of the reasons why he took up psychiatry was not only because of his interest in it but because, as for Freud, psychiatry, skins and VD were the three subjects which Jewish doctors were able to take up roles in, though not necessarily at teaching hospitals, because they were completely prevented from getting jobs in straightforward consultant medicine or consultant surgery.  So that by the time he married my mother he was, you know, a qualified psychiatrist, whatever that means [sic] in the 1930s.
I think by that time he'd got his diploma in psychological medicine, and then he joined up again in 1939, or I think in 1940, and continued the study of psychiatric disorders associated with war.  And then we followed him around the country, partly to avoid being in the Blitz but also because, you know, my mother wished to… well, wanted to be with him and so we went from one military mental hospital to another, or we didn’t go to, but where he was, and we lived in villages and towns which were near to that, and I went from one prep school to another.

My mother's background, as I said, she was called Spiro, but her mother was called Bergson, and she was related to Henri Bergson, the philosopher, and she had begun writing.  She didn’t go to university but she began writing when she was only about 18 or 19, and I think published her first novel when she was 21, I think, called The Mere Living, which was a title taken from Robert Browning, who she later wrote a biography of, much later, but she published I think about seven or eight novels before she switched to biography.
The switch took place when she began writing literary articles, she wrote for Cyril Connolly for Horizon and for other literary magazines. She wrote about Samuel Butler and then she became rather preoccupied with the Brownings and she wrote this portrait of Robert Browning in the late 40s, early 50s, and she was embarking on a biography of Kipling when she suffered early Alzheimer’s and died when she was only 53.
But she was a witty, rather interesting woman who… with an interest, which I think I’ve adopted, whether I adopted it under her direct influence I find it quite hard to say, but she was always interest in negligible details.  She thought that it was just the meticulous examination and noticing of things which were right in front of your nose which actually made for good fiction. I remember asking her once whether I could go abroad when I was about 14 to have a summer holidays in France and she said, ‘Well, of course you can if you want to, but you must remember that travel narrows the mind’.  And I think that she had always had a belief that if you couldn’t see what was there, where you lived, it was unlikely that you'd learn anything from going somewhere else.
And I think under her influence I became very much committed to the idea of observing negligible details or… as it turned out later on, I didn’t know that at the time, but once I became a theatre director I think whatever success I’ve had as a theatre director has been largely due to the fact that without any special training in the subject I came to the subject with my mother's interest in just noticing what people really do.

I had a sister and she’s died… she was injured in a car accident. She wasn’t really...
[Q] Was she older than you?
No, she was younger than I, she was about two years younger than I was. And she worked for the BBC as a secretary to, I think to the Music and Arts Department, and she worked there for quite a long time, about 20 or 25 years.
[Q] Oh right.
We had disagreements, she and I, because I was less interested than she was in being Jewish. I think my mother was totally uninterested in it, and I think in some respects fell out with my father over her reluctance to identify with ‘her people’, as people might’ve said. My father was much more… he was 20 years older than my mother and I think was still rather preoccupied, partly as a result of what had happened during the Second World War, he felt that some sort of conscious relationship to one's ethnic group was required of one, and she wasn’t interested at all.
In fact one of her novels is about marrying someone who turned out to have been much more interested in being Jewish than she was, it was a novel called Farewell Leicester Square, which has been recently republished. But… and I felt the same way, but my sister, I think, was much more, I think, affiliated with my father in that respect and felt that I was disloyal - what some people have always called a self-hating Jew.  And I’m not. I’m neither a self-hating Jew nor a particularly enthusiastic Jew. I don’t know what it means, really, since I have no interest in the religion and not much interest in the Jewish culture. I think of myself, if anything, as just simply a sort of reluctant Englishman. I mean, I’m Jewish for anti-Semites and that’s all.

[Q] There was a time, I suppose, at school when you became aware that you were a Jew and that that somehow meant something to other people if not to you. Maybe we could go back to your childhood?
Yes… well, in my childhood I don’t think that I was ever made aware, and was certainly not conscious of being thought of by my contemporaries, at any of the schools that I went to, that I was Jewish or that they thought I was Jewish and they looked on me as anomalous.  It’s true that I was never at a boarding school, so that I didn’t have to suffer the sort of hectoring, bullying that might’ve gone on at a boarding school.
Many of my Jewish contemporaries who did go through places like Eton and Winchester and so forth, if they were Jewish, were certainly never allowed to forget the fact that they were.  But when I went to public school, when I went to St Paul's,  which had a significant number of Jewish boys, and many of, if not most of my friends at St Paul's were Jewish, I don’t think I was ever made to feel by the Gentiles of the school that I was one of this rather anomalous and exotic and contemptible group called Jews. I never really became aware of anti-Semitism at all, except at a great distance when I gradually became aware after the war of what had happened in the Holocaust.
That didn’t make me feel more Jewish, it made me feel, what I think almost any liberal person would feel, a sort of, a hatred for ethnic loathing.  But I didn’t feel that I ought to be… stand up and be counted as a Jew, except when people made anti-Semitic remarks and I would say, ‘Well, I’m one, and what are you going to make of that?’ But as far as my affiliation with other Jews of various sorts, on the whole I never felt it was very important to me at all.

I think perhaps in some ways I was slightly backward in many ways, educationally, partly because I was going from one school to another and couldn’t settle down and I didn’t understand a lot of what was going on at school.  Certainly in all the schools I went to I never felt that I was one of the bright ones admired by my teachers. The last school I went to just before the end of the war, I went to a Rudolf Steiner school in… north of Watford, a place called Kings Langley, when I was taught by, amongst others, by two of Ivy Compton-Burnett's sisters and taught the sort of loony stuff that you get taught at Rudolf Steiner schools. I mean, I never learned anything at all and by the time I went to a real prep school just before we returned to London in 1945 I was really quite seriously educationally disabled by learning not much more than how Manu led his peoples out of Atlantis, which was one of the things that I was taught, and eurhythmics and so forth.
But I couldn’t understand maths and I couldn’t understand other languages and I couldn’t write an essay, and I think I was in many respects a difficult, backward child. It wasn’t until I came to a London prep school in ’45…‘46, that I began to recover some of my capabilities, though never outstanding at all. I don’t think I was regarded as a precocious child.  And I got what was called my Common Entrance and scraped into St Paul's under the Common Entrance and went and did classics and found that within the first year that I wasn’t particularly interested in doing that… that I had begun to develop a sort of interest in biology, partly because my father, I think, had given me an old brass microscope and I got interested in that.  And I got interested in chemistry when I was about 14.  So that I began to develop capabilities at that time, though relatively modest ones, and I don’t think I was regarded in, when I finally moved to the science side, I don’t think I was regarded as a particularly good student.
[Q] By others? 
Or by my teachers.
[Q] Or by your teachers.  But did… I find it a little hard to believe that you weren’t aware quite early on that you were rather unusual?
No, I had no feeling at all, I just, I felt I was unusual in the sense that I was ill at ease and backward and irritated my teachers because I couldn’t understand how to write an essay, or let alone do a précis, as it was called, I didn’t know what was involved. And I didn’t learn languages properly, I mean, I could just about learn how to decline and conjugate and do all the things that were required of someone doing classics, but that was just dull, automatic rote stuff. But I couldn’t compile pieces of Latin verse, which were expected of someone doing classics, and I felt rather sort of ill at ease. I was just simply a school boy, that’s all, and in no sense a bright school boy.

[Q] What about outside classes, I mean your friends and so on… what sort of interests did you have outside school?
Well, until I came back to London in ‘45 I don’t think I had any outside interests. I was interested in train numbers… all during the last years of the war I used to sit with working class boys on a creosoted fence outside Kings Langley station with a notebook taking train numbers, and I was just interested in them. I was interested in the various classes of locomotives that came through from Euston.
I was very fascinated by these trains with their brass funnel bindings and their various exotic names.  Otherwise I was interested in chucking stones and avoiding the assault of local gangs who also wanted to chuck stones, but otherwise I don’t think I had any particular interests. I don’t think I developed those particular interests until I moved on to the science side when I was… I had a number of, admittedly Jewish contemporaries, Oliver Sacks amongst them, and a man called Eric Korn and a man called Michener Farney [sic], and a number of others who went into the biology class, and we became increasingly curious and capable biologists under the auspices of a very enthusiastic teacher called Mr Pask [sic], who refused to acknowledge, A, the reality of the examination curriculum,  he wasn’t interested in that, he just felt one ought to know as much as one possibly could, and therefore take the requirements of the curriculum in our stride.
He wouldn’t tolerate our taking the full lunch hours, we had to be back after a quick bite and get back into the lab and do dissections of crayfish and dogfish and so forth and make microscope slides and stain sections of plants and so forth, which we all became very capable of… and then weekends we were expected in the winter to go to the Natural History Museum and do drawings of invertebrate limbs and understand their, what was then called, their homologies.  Why was it that a bat's wing and a fish’s fin and a horse's hoof were related to one another.  And then in the Easter holidays we used to go up to the Scottish Marine Biological Association laboratories at Millport in the Clyde Estuary and collect and classify and dissect marine invertebrates.
And by that time, I think I'd become an enthusiastic biologist, and I think I was quite good… I got rather good at that. I wasn’t much good at the other sciences.  Chemistry and physics rather defeated me because I was never very good at mathematics; I mean, I could… I was a competent, you know, school cert chemist.  I could answer the questions, but my deep understanding of things like the periodic table was, I think, fairly primitive. But I was good when it came to biology and I suppose I had begun to develop an ambition to do something in the natural sciences, whether or not I wanted to be a doctor at that time I wasn’t quite certain.
I think probably, again, I sort of weakly accepted what my father felt that I ought to do which was, there was no point doing biology unless you became a doctor. I didn’t see that there were… it was possible to become a biologist.

I got a scholarship to Cambridge in 1952 and I went up in ‘53, by that time with a view to doing natural sciences with a view to getting what was then called a First MB.  In other words natural science degree to get what was, in fact, the first exam which qualified you to go to a medical school and start doing clinical studies.
But I had a very good time at Cambridge and I enjoyed doing zoology and I also did a…. I of course did anatomy and physiology.  So by that time it was quite clear that I was on my way to becoming a doctor, though I hadn’t got much of an idea about what sort of doctor I was going to be.  That would, I suspect, I thought would turn out as time went on.

I had begun to develop an interest in the nervous system, interested in voluntary movement and what it was for a movement to be voluntary and how it was executed and how the nervous system implemented these actions and how it implemented perception and so forth, that I had begun to get interested in.  And I came under the influence of some rather eminent teachers, people like Horace Barlow, for example, who was a great visual physiologist, and Richard Keynes, who the Professor of Physiology.  So that, I think, fairly early on in my time in Cambridge I was beginning to move in the area of natural sciences towards a neurological emphasis in medicine.
But I also did a what was called a half subject in the history and philosophy of science. Now, that may have been under the influence of the books I had seen and partly dipped into from my father's library, and I still have many of them back there, because as I say, my father had studied philosophy at Cambridge, though the philosophy that he had studied in the early 1900s was very different from the philosophy that prevailed after the war.  It was very metaphysical and Hegelian and so forth.
But nevertheless I can see from the many additions of Russell's work, The Analysis of Mind and so forth, that I had come under the influence of… and as he had come under the influence of a more modern type of philosophy, so that by the time I went to Cambridge and was a student of a man called Russ Hanson, an American physicist who was interested in the philosophical principles of science… had written a very influential book called Patterns of Discovery, and he introduced me in our supervisions to the ideas of Wittgenstein.  And Wittgenstein had died, I think, only two or three years before I came up to Cambridge and I was introduced to the later Wittgenstein, the Wittgenstein of whom Russell disapproved, you know.  It was the Wittgenstein after the Tractatus and the philosophical investigations that I began reading, and they seemed to me to be very interesting and obviously have a bearing on what it was for something to be a voluntary action.
I remember there’s this line that he has in the investigations, he says, ‘If I subtract from the sentence I lift my arm, the sentence my arm goes up, what is left over?’ and that preoccupied me, and I was by that time really interested in what it was for something to be a voluntary action, and where did it originate? I knew where it got out of the nervous system in what Sherrington had called the final common path, and there was the last neuron in the spinal cord beyond which there was no way of interfering with the effect on the muscle.  But then I was interested, as I suppose Sherrington was, and others, was how did volition in the start, where did it initiate, what decided what was going to happen in order to lift my arm as opposed to discovering, to my surprise, that it had gone up?
And that continues to be a preoccupation of mine and I suppose it’s related in some way to what I do in the theatre. I am studying voluntary actions and the interactions between volitional subjects.

I suppose that I was fascinated by what it was that distinguished things like sweating and sneezing and blushing from things like picking up a cup of tea and bringing it to my lips. I would never have surprised myself to find while talking to someone that my arm was involuntarily bringing a cup to my lips, it might’ve been absentmindedly being brought to my lips while I was engaged in talking, but at no point would I have ever said that this was an involuntary action like blushing and sweating or sneezing.  So that I became interested in what it was for something to be a voluntary action.
But then… much earlier on I suppose that I had been struck by the difference between actions and events.  In other words what is the difference between a piece of soot rolling down a sloping sheet of paper and, as Robert Frost once described in a poem of his called A Considerable Speck, what’s the difference between that and a tiny almost imperceptible speck which by its movements across the page led him to credit it with vitality. And I suppose very early on as a biologist I became preoccupied with what it was for something to be vital and alive as opposed to being inanimate and inert. There was quite clearly a difference between a rock rolling downhill and an ant going uphill and stopping and pausing and suddenly moving at right angles to its transit and going elsewhere and stopping and picking things up.
Well, at a much higher level there is something comparable about us.  There are things over which I have no control.  Once I have taken food and it’s got to a certain point in the back of my mouth and I voluntarily swallow it, it’s out of my hands, I have no further either concern with, let alone control of, its proceeding down my intestine.  That’s an internal affair, though an affair of mine, but it’s an affair of mine over which I, as the proprietor of it, have no control.  Whereas the taking of food, the choosing of food, the preparing of food, the hunting for it, in addition to being affairs of mine, they are affairs of mine over which I exercise voluntary control and choice.  But I can’t, as it were, halfway down my intestine decide to halt the peristalsis and say, right, stop now, let’s put it off for a while so that I am not embarrassed by wanting to take a shit.
I can make myself vomit but I can’t vomit voluntarily. I can make myself sneeze but I can’t sneeze at will; I can take snuff or stare into the sun and find that I have, to my pleasure, sneezed, but I can’t, as it were, decide to sneeze and do so, though I can make myself sneeze by doing things which bring about the involuntary action of sneezing. So that I became very interested in that and I became very fascinated by that when I went into clinical medicine and went to University College as a clinical student.  But by that time, as a result of people like Russ Hanson, as a result also of the neurobiologists who had taught me, Fergus Campbell, for example, who was a visual physiologist at St John’s, I’d got very interested in vision and what, how vision implemented itself.
It was obviously something different from merely having my eyes open. I had to do something in order to see things, though what it was I had to do eluded me. I could decide to look, but in deciding to look I was completely unaware of what it is that I did in order to bring looking about.

Now, this may have also been influenced by my membership of a society which I joined in Cambridge.  It had… in those days it was a secret society, well, secret, I mean, it was private and not well known, called the Apostles.  And I was invited to join the Apostles.  So I must’ve attracted someone's attention being amusing and bright in some way, and my future brother-in-law, who has the same surname as I, Karl Miller, who then became Professor of English at University College London, he was a member of the Apostles and he asked me to join. Anyway we used to meet every Sunday night in EM Forster's rooms where he was, I suppose, once every three weeks on a Sunday night, and we'd, you know, one of us would read a paper and then we'd get up on what was called the hearth rug and… one by one and discuss the paper. And I think that meeting a lot of interesting and intelligent people who prided themselves not merely on being serious but being light-hearted and witty with their seriousness, had a great influence on me.
[Q] Can you share a bit more about the Apostles? I mean, the Apostles were people like… Hardy was an Apostle, wasn’t he? 
Yes, well, I think that the Apostles had been founded much earlier in the 19th Century by Tennyson and some friends of his, a man called Frederick Denison Maurice, and then it became much more famous retrospectively by its early membership in the 1900s with people like Bertrand Russell, GE Moore, Lytton Strachey and Maynard Keynes and so forth.  And then… I mean, then it was secret, or private, at any rate, it wasn’t… you couldn’t join it because you wanted to join  it as you could’ve joined other societies, you simply got invited not knowing that it existed.
I was rather surprised to discover that my mother knew about it but she didn’t know about its current existence when I was in Cambridge, she was rather surprised and delighted to hear that I was a member of it for the simple reason that she was at that time engaged in writing rather lengthy essays on Tennyson, and she knew that he had been an Apostle.  And, actually, she had a rather interesting and rather original theory about the Idylls of the King. She thought that the Round Table, which was described in the Idylls of the King, was nothing other than the Apostles.
In fact, I remember walking across Trinity Bridge with her one lunchtime when she came to do some work in the Trinity Library, and we walked across the Trinity Bridge and looked over towards my college, which was St John's where there was this Neo-Gothic new court, and she paused on the bridge and said, look, there is many towered Camelot, and there’s the river winding down to Camelot, and she thought that the relationship between Hallam and Tennyson, they were… both of whom were Apostles, was in the Idylls of the King, and she was delighted and surprised to find that her son was part of a society that she was writing about.

I enjoyed myself there. I had a good time learning how to be a scientist, or learning how to acquaint myself with science. And I enjoyed my time in the Apostles, and I liked that world of the Backs and long discussions at night. I don’t think I ever thought of it as paradise. I was pleased by what I was being taught, was fascinated by the problems that people like Russ Hanson introduced me to, and I think I enjoyed my weekends in Morgan Forster's rooms.
And, of course, there was the charm of visiting villages outside Cambridge and walking in Grantchester Meadows and so forth, but I don’t think I ever thought of it as paradise. And contrary to what people think, I was not enormously involved in the theatre. I appeared twice, without being a member of the club, in the Footlights’ May Week Review, and I did some comic stuff and I think attracted a fair amount of attention. I think I was really quite a competent comic, and had been once or twice at school when I was at St Paul’s, but it certainly didn’t take up any of my time, and I was never in the Footlights Club where they used to meet once a week and do stuff in the way that Peter Cook did.  He was a member of the Footlights and I wasn’t. I wasn’t even a member of the ADC.
I appeared once in one of the plays at the Marlow Society. I played Sir Politic Would-be, and… directed by, I think by Dadie Rylands, but it took up none of my time.  It was quite impossible if you were a medical student to spend too much time being in the theatre, as so many people like Trevor Nunn and Peter Hall, who obviously went to Cambridge with a view to being in the theatre. I went to Cambridge with a view to being a medical scientist, and also took up a lot of my time, you know, thinking about philosophy and knocking around with people who were, I suppose you might’ve called them… I flinchingly call them so… intellectuals.
People like Neil Ascherson, for example, who was an Apostle when I was there. Runciman, Garry Runciman and Chris Foster and people like that, they were all in the Apostles and it was just a world of intelligent gossip.  But by no means did I think of it as paradise. There were long sort of hot summer terms and punting, but I was already pretty well engaged to the wife who you’ve just met.
[Q] I was going to ask you, I was going to say do you mind if I ask if women played [sic]…
No, there was my wife, that was all. I knew her before, we had met at St Paul's, actually, at a joint play reading between the girls' school and the boys' school. I think she was rather reluctant to go out with me, she thought of me as rather a pushy bugger. But her sister was at Cambridge and was actually in the ADC and used to act, and she later married Karl Miller.
I got associated with Granta. I used to do cartoons for Granta. This was the year after Mark Boxer had left when he was expelled for publishing, I think, what was regarding as an obscene… no, as a blasphemous verse. But Granta by that time under a different title, I think it was called Gadfly at that time because the proctors had forbidden the existence of Granta after this blasphemous publication, and my brother-in-law was the literary editor of Granta.
I don’t think I ever wrote anything for them but I did do cartoons for them from time to time including a cartoon of which I was rather proud showing a bearded man with a long overcoat, his hands in his pockets, and instead of feet, coming out from his trousers are a pair of wheels and underneath I had ‘God moves in a mysterious way’. And I did a number of cartoons and so, I mean, I had a nice time there and I was amused by my time, but also rather fascinated by what I was being taught by these rather interesting physiologists and anatomists as well. But I, by that time, was thinking, well, what’s going to happen when I go down to London and go to University College?
[Q] Did you do anatomy at Cambridge?
Yes, in order to do… the natural sciences which were required of you in order to qualify to take up clinical medicine… you had to get… you had to do anatomy, physiology, biochemistry and pathology, and I had begun doing that and found them rather interesting, I had a good time doing that. And also I was in Cambridge, I went to Cambridge the very year, though I didn’t know of it when it actually happened, when Crick and Watson had burst into the Eagle Pub with the information that they had solved the secret of life. And indeed they had just published their great paper on DNA. I don’t think I knew anything about it at that time, my biochemistry wasn’t up to it. I knew something about genetics but certainly not enough to take on that until really several years later.

I can remember on the first day of going into the anatomy building with a lot of us rather, sort of, hugging ourselves with fear of our forthcoming encounter with the dead.  And there were these chilly stone floors with this frosted glass doors leading into the dissecting room, and people were wondering whether they we going to flinch at the spectacle of these dead bodies. And I can remember the door opening and there was this long vista of tables with these grey, mummified corpses which had been collected, looking not unlike those stone corpses which you see in Pompeii. And I don’t think I was ever, sort of, horrified by it, I just went about it, and my first morning of dissection making the cut in these rather greasy skins. I remember talking to a brown overalled superintendent, and I said what’s it like working here, this was some weeks after, I asked him and he said, ‘Oh, it’s all right here in the term when you gentlemen are here, it’s the vacations I can’t stand when it’s just me and them’.
But we became, you know, carelessly indifferent to the dead. And I can remember seeing people at the end of the day holding a dismembered arm over their shoulder as they strolled towards the tank in which they were going to dump the limb to be in formaldehyde until they started work the next morning.  It was a sort of careless indifference. I enjoyed it, I enjoyed just gradually opening up these bodies.
But then I was completely familiar with dissection, in any case, not with human dissection, but I'd done a lot of dissection in the previous three years at St Paul's. I'd done lots of invertebrate dissection and a lot of vertebrate dissection as well, so the dissection itself was something that I was rather competent at. I could do it carefully and well and conscientiously, and I enjoyed tracing the origin of nerves up the arm and into the brachial plexus and finally to their outlet in the cervical spinal cord.  All that seemed to me to be worth doing properly and I enjoyed that very much indeed. And I enjoyed the anatomy lessons, a man called Boyd, Professor Boyd, who was a… who'd written a wonderful book on embryology called Hamilton, Boyd and Mossman, so he introduced us to human embryology, and I enjoyed that, and I retained an interest in how things assume their complicated shapes starting from such unpromising beginnings as a fertilised egg.
And I enjoyed all that and I enjoyed the anatomy of the nervous system and learning what the brain looked like in various sections.  But remained completely puzzled by where these various initiatives, one would call actions, originated, and asking myself questions, is it reasonable to say that they originated anywhere? Certainly, I didn’t find myself looking for the soul. I knew that everything that happened both perceptions and actions were implemented by the brain but I didn’t think that I would eventually, like Descartes, think that there was one place which was where I was.
I certainly wasn’t, nor did I think that any of these dead individuals were anywhere in particular.  They certainly weren’t in their hearts and they weren’t in their livers, and although, in fact, without their brains they would’ve have been them, I found it rather perplexing in what sense they could be said to be in their brains. I didn’t feel that… I knew that without their brains they wouldn’t have been people or the individuals or the persons that they claimed to be, but that unlike, as I say, Descartes, who actually felt that you could identify the pineal gland as the seat of the soul, but by that time I wasn’t interested in soul.

[Q] Were you... I mean if you are an atheist, I guess you are… I don’t know if you’d call yourself that or…
No, I don’t call myself an atheist because it’s not… no… least of all do I call myself an agnostic. I mean, agnostic has the connotations of hedging one's bets, and atheist seems scarcely worth having a name for not believing in God any more than I have a name for not believing in witches, I’m not an ahexist. It’s just that it’s never occurred to me that there might be a God or that there might be this immaterial entity called the soul. I don’t know what happens when we die… well, I think I do know, we just simply stop being, but I don’t think anything makes an exit at that moment, and these curious euphemistic terms that are used, he's passed away, make it sound as if, in fact, death is… coincides with something that makes an exit from the body and goes elsewhere, I don’t think that.
[Q] It can’t not have occurred to you that there might be something called the soul or God, because [sic] many very clever people spent ages thinking about it?
Yes, no, it never... Well, I didn’t, it never occurred to me, and I could never understand why people who quite clearly in many respects were very clever, could actually sustain such an idea. It wasn’t that it was wrong but it was incoherent. The idea of a disembodied person makes no sense at all, anymore than the idea of a circular rectangle makes sense.  You can utter the phrase but it doesn’t mean that it’s meaningful.
[Q] Wittgenstein didn’t [sic] 
Yes, I suppose. No, but long before… I mean, Wittgenstein gave me the lingo with which to talk that way, but I don’t think I ever thought about it very hard. I suppose that I was puzzled by what was the difference between something that was lively in the same way as I'd been preoccupied with looking at paramecium down the microscope.

What was it that made the motions of the paramecium under the microscope different from the random movement of the particles amongst which they moved.  Vitality was puzzling to me, and I suppose that intelligence and will was an even more puzzling version of the same thing but it was simply an aspect of vitality.
But by the time I went to Cambridge and was using Baldwin's Dynamic Aspects of Biochemistry, I was exposed to a biochemistry which had already, 30 or 40 years earlier, had precluded the necessity for invoking a vital principle. The energetics of oxidative respiration explain where the energy came from.  It wasn’t necessary to invoke some sort of immaterial principle, and the last person I suppose to invoke that notion of a vital principle was Driesch, and that would’ve been about 1910.  But after 1910 I don’t think anyone who was a serious biologist ever thought in terms of a vital principle because biochemistry had actually begun to reveal how the energetics of cells was implemented.
I mean, it’s complicated and quite mysterious but it isn’t mysterious in the way that people who want there to be a deeply and incorrigibly mysterious principle is at work.  It’s mysterious only in that it’s complicated and therefore it’s quite hard to understand how it works. But once I was exposed to Kreb's notion of the tricarboxylic acid cycle one began to see how oxygen got into the system and what it did with carbohydrates and phosphorylation and energy rich bonds and so forth… explained how it was that living things were different from inanimate particles.
[Q] Fabulous really, of course. Did the Origin of Species and Darwin matter to you? 
It didn’t matter to me in the sense that it must’ve mattered to people, I suppose, between 1860 and about 1900, by which time natural selection had begun to suffer quite a reversal and people had begun to revert to a more Lamarckian explanation. But by the time the evolutionary synthesis, the new synthesis, as it was called, under the auspices of people like Huxley and so forth had begun to emerge in the ‘30s, it wasn’t an important principle any more than, as it were, Newtonian Physics was an important principle. It was simply a presupposition upon which all one's more interesting and original observations took place.  One didn’t have to argue about it, I mean, it’s only in the last 15 or 20 years that one has to argue against creationists and exponents of intelligent design that one finds oneself rather wearily going back and, as it were, defending Darwin.
I never found myself thinking that Darwin had changed my life. He'd no more changed my life than Newton had changed my life.  It was quite clear that this was how it worked, and when people say, as they do now, oh, it’s only a theory, you rather wearily say, well, look, most of the things in science are in fact only theories.  It isn’t because in fact there’s something which… there’s an alternative of absolute certainties, all science… I mean, you might call the atomic theory, they’re entities that we never meet. We infer their existence but the question is is the increasing probability of the correctness of the theory.  And the same thing applies to Darwinism. It’s hardly worth calling it Darwinism any more than one calls the physical principles which determine the way in which intergalactic flight is performed… no one, as it were, refers to Newton in order to justify the design of rockets. I mean, way back it’s based on Newtonian principles and the laws of motion, but people don’t defensively defer to Newton in order to explain their physics. And I don’t think anyone really now defensively defers to Darwin until they encounter, in a rather weary sort of irritation, people who say that natural selection and evolution is only a theory. But that’s not because one's confronted by a serious alternative which has to be argued about, you’re confronted by a frivolous idiocy which has a very large amount of unjustified publicity.

[Q] When you were at Cambridge, were you… I mean apart from being a humourist and a cartoonist, I mean were you ever any kind of an -ist, I mean like an existentialist?  Did you think of yourself as…
No, I had absolutely no -isms at all. I suppose I was a… I was Secretary of the Humanist Society, without very much enthusiasm for it.  It didn’t seem to me… I was just invited to do it.  But it was a rather nice form of social life, that’s all. I wasn’t there, as it were, as an ardent upholder of [unclear] belief. I don’t think I was an exponent of any particular ‘-ism’.
I suppose I was what you would call left in inclination. I was a creature of the Labour landslide of ‘45 and felt that they’d introduced more fairness.  But I was certainly not a communist.  Not that I'd objected to it, and I didn’t really know an enormous amount about it, and of course I was really pretty well unacquainted with the appalling and atrocious tyrannies that had been implemented in its name. It wasn’t until the mid-50s that we really… the outsiders like myself became acquainted with what was done in the name of this millennial theory of social improvement.

I left Cambridge and got a fairly good degree, less good than I'd hoped for. I think…  I only got a 2:1, and I think everyone expected me to get a first as a scholar of St John's, but I think I spent too much time doing other things, and doing things like the history and philosophy of science, which got in the way of just getting the answers to the questions that came up in the big subjects like anatomy and physiology. But I, you know, I did perfectly well, and then I went to London, got married almost the same year I came down in ’56. I got my degree and I got married in 1956 and my wife and I moved just a mile up the road here in Primrose Hill, and we lived there for five years and she was at the Royal Free doing medicine and I was at University College.
I did some performances at University College. I used to run one of the things called… there was a review every year which I produced and appeared in and directed and actually appeared in, but then so did lots of my colleagues, but it certainly wasn’t done with a view to becoming a comic.  It was just one of the things that one did, it was rather like a, you know, it was the same mood as University Rags and things of that sort. But then what I’ve always described to interviewers like yourself as the person from Porlock arrived. Now, you'll remember that Coleridge was in the middle or writing the Kubla Kahn, and I think his servant came upstairs and said there’s a person from Porlock who wishes to talk to you, and in order… he had to break off in the middle of doing Kubla Kahn and never returned to it, it remained unfinished.
Well, a person from Porlock in the form of a man called Bassett, John Bassett who'd been at Oxford with Alan Bennett and Dudley Moore, who was then employed as an assistant to the director of the Edinburgh Festival, came to me when I was working in the casualty department.  I was already by that time… I'd qualified, I was doing my house surgery job.  And he asked me whether I would be willing to take part in a late-night review at the Edinburgh Festival, not as a... Let me go back, he asked me whether I'd be willing to take part in a late night review at the Edinburgh Festival because the director of the Festival at that time was rather exasperated by the success of fringe productions that had come from universities, and he wanted something which came under the auspices of the Festival itself.  So Bassett, who had known Alan and Dudley and he had known of me through my wife because he'd been at Bedales with her, asked me if I would participate in this and did I know anyone else from Cambridge.  And I said, oh, well, I had seen this younger man, Peter Cook, appearing in the Footlights and I thought he was very funny.  So we were brought together and had a rather awkward and anxious lunch in a little Indian restaurant somewhere in the Euston Road in… it would’ve been about 1960, and we undertook to take two weeks off with a view to doing a late night show and then I would go back and do my job.

John Bassett put together this lunch, the purpose of which was to see whether we sort of liked one another, and I don’t think we either liked or disliked. I think there was a sort of mutual suspicion, and it was perfectly clear that in many ways the leading figure of the quartet was Peter Cook.  And I have never changed my view that he was really the most ingeniously and originally funny person that I'd ever come across.
So we knew it was going to be something interesting, and we just thought it was… I thought it was ten days out, or two weeks out.  We went up to Edinburgh and  banged together this rather improvised late night review which was going to last 45 minutes after… I think, the Old Vic had brought a production of the Seagull and we came on at night.  And it was so clamourously approved, and lots of critics wrote about it, that people began to invite us to come to London with it.
And I remember spending a very restless night walking in Edinburgh with my wife who was trying to discourage me from doing it because she felt it would distract me, and I thought, well, let’s try it, it could be fun and also we'll make a little bit more money to cover the very poorly paid next two or three years… junior doctors were very badly paid in those days. And we… I took time out because I had another job to do, so I was… I had to do another job, anyway, so I went to Central Middlesex where I had my first house physician job, and they used to come and sit with me on my small narrow bed in the residence at Central Middlesex, and we wrote stuff with a view to having a full-length review.  And I think we were then… there was a man, a rather ridiculous, foppish creature called Willy Donaldson, who took us on, who, it turns out, cheated us, and he made a lot of money out of it and gave us very little.
And then he formed a liaison with, oh, what was he called, the man who used to own those theatres in, oh… anyway, I mean, and they took us to Brighton.  We did a tour of Brighton and Cambridge… much disliked in Brighton.  But it began to look as if we would go into London, and then it turned out to be a big success when we went to the Fortune Theatre.  And Donaldson and this rather ghastly one-legged man who owned so many theatres like the New Theatre and the Aubrey… he was called Donald Aubrey… really cheated us very badly.  But we… it went on for a year and then we were asked to come to New York.
Well, I suppose that I yielded for reasons which I still can’t quite understand, perhaps because I thought it would make some money. I certainly didn’t think that I would leave medicine.  But when I went to New York it became increasingly likely that I would, for… not for any good reason. I didn’t feel that I was going to… I was destined to continue in the theatre, certainly I was not intending to be a director.
Though I had been asked just before I went away to New York… who was it now, George Devine, at the Royal Court, asked me to come and direct a play that no one else wanted to do of John Osborne's, a double bill, one called the Blood of the Bambergs which John Dexter directed, and another one called Under Plain Cover. And I explained to Devine that I'd never directed a play in my life and for some reason he wasn’t particularly put off by that and he thought that I would do it because I was a funny guy.
And I found, to my surprise, and mild delight, that I could do it, and that it was actually sort of common sense.  And so I… I mean… it wasn’t a great hit but it was certainly quite well received. But… and then I went off to New York with the rest of the fringe and performed there, but without an intention of coming back and directing. In fact, I used to still go to grand rounds at Mount Sinai, and keep up with my neurology. But I also began writing for the New Yorker, by, again… everything that happened to me was the result of yielding to unsolicited invitations. I never went looking for anything at all.  Because I never intended… I didn’t intend to be a journalist, I didn’t intend to be a director, but invitations kept coming my way and I rather weak-mindedly yielded to them and found I quite enjoyed it. I liked my, you know, two or three months working at the New Yorker.  It was good fun being there and going down to the Algonquin for drinks and… but I had already had my first child then and we were living in New York with my eldest son and shortly afterwards our second son was born. But I was… I suppose by that time I was cheating myself into thinking that I would go back into medicine, but not cheating myself in the sense that what I really wanted to do was to be in the theatre or to be a journalist. I didn’t… I didn’t want to do any of those things in particular, I wasn’t interested in them.        
But we came back to England in, what was it, 1964, and I wasn’t quite certain what I was going to do when I came back.

The only occasion in which I went out and looked for something which wasn’t medicine was I did go to the BBC because I thought it might be quite interesting to learn how to make film.  And the BBC had a sort of film course, and I, for some reason, was interviewed on the subject by Huw Wheldon. I suppose because I was, by that time, rather well known, I got to talk to him rather than to someone who was running the course, and he listened to me with sort of mild interest, and then out of the blue he said, would you like to edit and present Monitor?
And once again I said, well, I’ve never done anything of that sort, and he said, well, that doesn’t matter, I didn’t know what to do when I started.  And it was in those great days when just simply being educated was probably thought to be the best qualification, which I still think probably is, now it doesn’t seem to figure too much… and so I… this was the first moment when I experienced anything other than approval.  Up to that time I'd been lauded for these performances and lauded, to some extent for this production that I'd directed at the Royal Court, not extravagantly, but then I did Monitor. And I started it by doing this lengthy hour-long interview with Susan Sontag, and the shit hit the fan then. And they… I instantly acquired this reputation of being a, sort of, trendy pseud. And all the critics were, almost without exception, appalled and disgusted that someone with no qualifications to do it, though whatever the qualifications would’ve been… I don’t think Huw Wheldon had many qualifications for doing what he did when he edited and presented Monitor in his day… but in any case people were outraged to see this, first of all, an American, a girl, and a Jewess appearing and given an hour to talk about herself, although she didn’t talk about herself, she talked about something which, again, the British critical community had never heard of.  She talked about kitsch and camp, and no one had ever discussed those issues, and from then on I think practically everything I did on Monitor was disapproved of.
But I fought on and did them and I think I did bring to Monitor something which the old rather mandarin type of Monitor, where you just had the big names like, you know, Henry Moore and so forth were interviewed. I did a lot of American stuff which people like JB Priestly disapproved of and he, sort of said, dull Jonathan Miller settled down on the corner of Broadway and 42nd Street.  And there was that, sort of, distaste which the English artistic establishment had for anything American, they always referred to America as the US of A.  As soon as you hear that phrase you know you’re in the presence of, sort of, you know, English… English Nationalistic Philistines.
I had… by that time I'd become acquainted with a lot of people who would’ve been deeply disapproved of by the English establishment and that was the people surrounding the community that were built around The New York Review of Books, people like Bob Silvers and Barbara Epstein and Jason Epstein.  And I suppose in some sort of subdued way it was regarded by the English art establishment as being, oh, yes, rather Jewish, sort of Hebrew in some way.
Though it was never said overtly, it was implied always in Private Eye. But then Private Eye consisted of this sort of Thameside Moley and Ratty and Badger sort of community, and behind it all did lie this sort of anti-Semitism. But I had a bad year, and I’ve never really recovered from it.  Ever since then anything I’ve done which has been original or interesting has always been regarded as ‘typical’ in some way of this jack of all trades.
[Q] I was going to say how much did you mind all of this but I suppose you just said you minded …
Well, yes, you do mind, if you get attacked in the public.  You see, it’s what I call the Wizard of Oz effect.  You remember at the end of the Wizard of Oz they make this journey and they finally arrive at this great place and this great booming criticism is levelled at them and the little dog runs across and pulls aside the curtain and the voice says, ‘Ignore the man behind the curtain’. Well, as I’m acquainted with all the men behind the curtains I know that I am talked about and by people who have the advantage of the boom which their voice is given by the organ for which they write.  So that if you get reviewed by Brown Sewage [Brian Sewell] or by Michael Billington or the hundreds of people who have criticised me you become rather annoyed by the fact that your public reputation is created not by what you do but they what these little Wizards of Oz do behind the curtain. I get written about in that sort of tone of voice almost all the time.  Every now and then something I do breaks through and they have to admit that it is rather good, but behind it all there is this sort of idea of too clever by half.

But I felt, well... why have I given up a profession in which I know I was competent and perhaps even could’ve been quite original in something which really matters, and where you expect what can only be described as peer group review. Now, I’m not saying that peer group review itself is not occasionally competitive and spiteful, it often is, but at least you’re being reviewed by people who are competent in the area for which you’re being judged.  Whereas most of the people who write about me could scarcely do any of the things that I can do with my left hand behind my back.  And I find that very irritating. But it gets out. The public don’t know the critics because they don’t know the man behind the curtain. I know the man behind the curtain and I’ve said, you know, I keep on saying to myself, if only the public knew who it was that was writing about one.
I mean, I remember I had this adverse review from Brown Sewerage [Brian Sewell] when I did this big exhibition devoted to reflection at the National Gallery.  And I got this extremely condescending review from this very pretentious man who really was much less qualified to do it than I was, but nevertheless his voice boomed out, and that became the accepted judgement on the work.
[Q] It’s probably too painful to talk anymore about this really because it's obviously... I’m surprised that you're so vulnerable…
Well, you’re vulnerable about it because it’s cumulative.  People say, oh, well, you should develop a thick skin.  The funny thing is the constant assaults on the skin don’t thicken it, they make it more and more liable to Herpes.  And as I say, a lot of the time you’re reviewed by people who you know perfectly well are not even... they can’t do anything themselves at all except scribble.
[Q] Well let's go back to what happened next...
Well, what happened next was that I went on doing Monitor for a year and some of them were good, some of them were bad, but they were all, I think, rather interesting because I brought into the programme all sorts of people who would never have been on the programme at all...
[Q] Like Susan Sontag...
... like Susan Sontag, and even, sort of, rather major figures like Ernst Gombrich. I mean, the idea of talking to an art historian rather than to an artist would never have occurred to old Huw, or to the people who looked, you know, they just wanted... there’s a sort of upper middle-class view that art is, you know, something done by important English people or important French people, and Americans were always regarded as vulgar.
So I did... I endured it for a year and then actually the programme came to an end anyway. I think probably it was the beginning of that slide towards really straightforward old-fashioned, not old-fashioned, new-fashioned celebrity intoxicated populism.  But I did do two things afterwards of which I was very proud. I did Alice in Wonderland and I did a ghost story called Whistle and I'll Come to You, both of which I think were very good. The Alice in Wonderland, again, came in for an awful lot of stick,  One or two people liked it, but on the whole, it wasn’t liked.
As was... I also did another one, I did the film of Plato's Symposium, The Drinking Party with Leo McKern.

Many years later people write to me and say this is probably one of great classic productions. Well, that’s not what I got at the time, I got at the time, oh, it’s Freudian, you know, again, from ignoramuses who know nothing about Freud and couldn’t see anyway there was nothing Freudian in it at all.  What it was was Victorian. I was simply interested in a Victorian childhood, which was what I based it on.
[Q] Would you like to talk about  Alice in Wonderland... 
Yes, I enjoyed doing it, I knew exactly...
[Q] Tell me how it came about...
I... Lillian Hellman had spoken to me when I was in New York, at a party in New York, and said why don’t you do a film of Alice in Wonderland, no one's ever got it right, it’s always been jokey.  And I... it lodged somewhere in my imagination, and several years later I thought, yes, it would be rather interesting to do it.  And then I suddenly realised that it had always been turned into this jokey thing with animal heads, and Disney had vulgarised it with, ‘I'm late, I’m late, for a very important date, no time to say hello, goodbye, I’m late, I’m late, I’m late’.  And they would always get famous people and then completely disguise them by giving them masks and artificial heads, and in any case that’s not what it’s about.  It’s quite clear to anyone who'd been brought up like I was, by a mother who was a great expert on mid-19th century literature, and on the importance of childhood to the Victorians, that that was what it was about.  It was about a Victorian childhood.  It’s about Oxford, and they’re all Oxfords dons.  And so I got hold of all these artists, who all agreed to do it for nothing.
I mean, I got John Gielgud and I got, you know, Malcolm Muggeridge and Michael Redgrave and Leo McKern and Alan Bennett, and lots of people just to do it as if it was a long, hot summer dream in Oxford.  And it seemed to me to be perfectly obvious.  But, of course, the only... it was always assumed by these idiot invertebrates that of course it had to be Freudian because I was medical and was modern, and therefore that it would be bound to be Freudian. Most of them were unacquainted with Freud, and, I mean, it astounded me that they couldn’t see there was nothing Freudian in it at all.  Unless they thought that the fall down the rabbit hole was, you know, Doctor Miller saw it as a vagina. Doctor Miller saw nothing of the sort, it’s just what a child would’ve dreamt about, getting lost down a rabbit hole.    
But it was attacked, and now, you see, afterwards you get this wonderful... long, long, long, years afterwards you get people talking about it as if it’s a great classic.  No one thought about it like that at that time at all, I was just attacked for being a trend... a trendy pseud. You see, I’ve always been a victim of a strange double-sided thing, that on the one hand I am constantly referred to by cheap journalists as a Renaissance man or as a polymath, and then the other side, which is actually what they’re really saying, is that I’m a jack of all trades and master of none. Now, first of all, the people who level this term polymath and Renaissance man are completely unaware of what, you know, Renaissance people were like.  And certainly when I consider what my father was like, they would’ve called him a Renaissance man because he could do sculpture, he painted, he drew, he was acquainted with philosophy, he could write books and he was a very good doctor.  But he would’ve been appalled to have been called a Renaissance man.
It’s a vulgar journalistic slogan used by people who just don’t know what being a cultivated person was, and that was what my father was and I was brought up by two parents who were just simply cultivated intellectuals. I mean, I hesitate to use the word intellectual, but that’s what they were.  They were, you know, almost indistinguishable from the people who were part of the Bloomsbury Group.
But I've been suffering that all my life.  You see, I find it almost as offensive to be called a Renaissance man because it’s vulgar and inaccurate and cheap and also has no either understanding of the Renaissance to which it refers, because they don’t know what the Renaissance was like or what the people did or who are examples of it, and on the other hand it was another way of saying that one's a jack of all trades... by... called that by people who are scarcely jacks of one.  That’s why I find it so offensive. But it gets into the media and it is in the media that most people's opinions are shaped.  So that in the end your image and your... the way you are represented to the public at large is based on how you’re talked about in the papers.

I can’t remember how I came to do the Whistle and I'll Come to You by MR James. I mean, I’ve never been particularly interested in ghosts. I’m interested in the sociology and the social anthropology of ghosts, of what belief in ghosts consists of and what they represent in terms of mental constructs, that was very fascinating to me.  And so I took the story of MR James and modified it tremendously. I didn’t do it... I didn’t literally recreate it as James had written it because actually it’s very... again, it’s rather a mandarin sort of Cambridge don's piece.  But it was an opportunity for talking about what it would’ve been like to have been a rational intellectual suddenly exposed to possibly his own fears of the supernatural.
And I was lucky enough to get Michael Hordern to do it, and he played it brilliantly. I wrote... I completely rewrote all the conversations and, of course, then was attacked by another, sort of, English gent for whom I would’ve been, but he couldn’t put it in those words, a sort of trendy Jew, and that was Kingsley Amis, who just attacked it violently.

I can still remember this... this lordly review from Kingsley, who was really just simply a pendant, in many ways, of Private Eye. But these things, these wounds remain and they actually... because they add up, and because they add up not only in one's own imagination, they add up in one's imagination because they represent in some strange way the atmosphere and the climate of opinion which one finds oneself in. And over the years I keep on... have kept on feeling why on earth did I leave something which was, where in fact one could be right or wrong in science, rather than being the subject of largely invertebrate opinion?                  [Q] Do friends of yours ask you… I mean, don’t they say, ‘Can’t you rise above all this?’ and... 
No, you can’t rise above it.
[Q] ... particularly, as you said, you know, there were things that were regarded as classics. You knew they were good at the time and know they’re seen as good now. Is there no way you can deal with this wound, as it were?
No, because what happens is that you live most of your life in the media, because that’s where you do it.  You do it in what is called the media, and the media are in fact filled with hydrogen sulphide.  And so if you’ve been breathing the hydrogen sulphide which is secreted all around you apropos of the things you work, there’s no way in which I can rise above an atmosphere. You simply are sunk in a slightly unpleasant smell of hydrogen sulphide.

[Q] Have you ever thought about seeing a therapist about this?
Oh, yes, I think I have once or twice done that, but it’s just not worth it. I mean, I go on doing the work and I think I go on doing good work. I mean, I watch the things of mine that have been running for years. I mean, for example, my... well, these are things that I did much later, my Rigoletto, and you look at the early reviews and they’re very, very dismissive, and now it’s been in the repertoire at the English National for 27 years. The Mikado was also regarded, oh, wouldn’t you know it, of course he’s taken all the Japanese out of it, he’s got to be original in some way. Well, it was original in some way to the point that it ran for 25 years. But what I remember, and still live in, is this hydrogen sulphide secreted by these Platyhelminthes who infect my world.
[Q] What a shame.
It is a shame, hmm.

I thought it would be a rather interesting... I worked with this man called Leo Aylen, who was a classicist, and we thought it would be quite a nice idea to set it, as it were, as if it was a mid-summer reunion in an English public school.  And we went to Stowe and found these Greek temples which they had built at Stowe, and I thought it be quite a nice idea to have these dinner-jacketed gentlemen doing what in fact people had done for nearly 1000 years, which is celebrating Plato's birthday by having a dinner of that sort and rereading the Symposium.  And so I got together people like John Fortune and Alan Bennett and Michael Gough and Leo McKern, and we set it in this rather chaotic mid-summer dinner out on the...
That did very well, that was very well reviewed, people liked it... and that was where I first learned how to make film. I did that before I did any film at all, and I was taught how to make film in the ten days that we did it.
Charles Parnall, who was the cameraman, told me what I could and what I couldn’t shoot.  And I kept on looking through the camera and saying I'd like it much more this way, and then he'd say, well, you can’t cut from that to this, and I would say, well, tell me where I would have to do the next shot in order for it to cut together.  And, actually, in the course of a week I learned the principles.  And it was... I think it was rather a good film, and I think people did like it.  It was funny and at the same time rather serious. And that was, those were all the films I made for the BBC and then I went off and started directing plays.

I was asked to come and do plays at Nottingham Playhouse. Oh, no, before that I had done some other plays and I can’t remember which order they came. I was rung up, again, one of these unsolicited invitations that came my way, two undergraduates from Cambridge, a man called Stephen Wright, who subsequently became my agent - many years later - and a man called Jonathan James-Moore, who ran... went on to do... to be Director of Comedy for BBC Radio, rang me up while they were still undergraduates and said we’ve formed a thing called the Oxford and Cambridge Shakespeare Company where we get together undergraduates from the two universities and get a professional director to come and do a play which we'll then take around America... to American universities.  Would you like to do one? And I said, I've never directed a Shakespeare, and they said, well, I’m sure you’ll know how to do it, and so we did a production of Twelfth Night. And then I did two more... the year later I did Julius Caesar, and then I did Hamlet, and took them with great success all around.. well... twice in places in England, it went to Oxford and Cambridge and then we took them to American universities. Once again it came in from the, sort of... Private Eye came and jabbed me because I did a production of Julius Caesar which I based on the artist... the Italian artist de Chirico... and that was attacked as being typical... as opposed to doing it in, you know, in Roman costume, which anyone, you know, a decent person educated in the classics would’ve naturally done.  But, of course, the good doctor, as I’m always called, the good doctor has to be different.
Well, the good doctor is different because he keeps seeing things differently, and that’s why subsequently when I wrote my book many years later called Subsequent Performances, the whole subject was what do you do with works from the distant past which have constantly been repeated.  You can’t just repeat them, and there’s a long and detailed logical analysis of what repetition means in the performing arts.  And I think I justified, well not only my own work, but justified this rather complicated business of works which have entered their... what I call their afterlife... that it’s not an example of being different for difference's sake, it’s being different because, in fact, I’m different from my predecessors, and that if I weren’t, I'd be a fossil. As indeed anyone who does these works, if you were to line up these works in some magical process where you could see their many subsequent performances, looking at them you would hardly believe that they were instances of the same play or opera because they’ve entered this thing that Aby Warburg referred to as their nachtleben... their afterlife.  But try and explain that to Private Eye or, indeed, to any of the critics for whom it is just typical... being too clever by half. As far as I’m concerned too clever by half is not half enough. But there we are.

[Q] What was happening to medicine then?It had gone completely. I mean, I was not doing it. I kept up with my own subject, I'd go on reading about it and I kept on intermittently going back and doing things. I spent two years in which I abandoned this subject, I mean, I abandoned the theatre altogether and I went to... I had a research fellowship at the University College in the Wellcome Foundation and was doing stuff on the history of mesmerism, which I never completed the book of, but I wrote a lot of stuff about it. And then many years later I went back and got a Leverhulme Fellowship at Sussex doing work in neuropsychology.  And I, you know, working with someone else, published a paper.  But then I drifted back into the theatre... I was out of it by that... I was out of the academic world really, though at ease in it as well, at the same time. I was able to keep up and talk and converse because I kept up the, you know, the... the interest and the reading. I mean, I know what people are talking about in this area, in many of these areas which I’m interested in. But they’re all related to one another, it’s not as if I’ve splattered around into... I mean... there are literally thousands of areas about which I know nothing.  But, of course, to these rather vulgar journalists knowing more than three things is being a Renaissance man.
[Q] Do you... do you sometimes think... I mean many, many people good be doctors, and even neurologists, and possibly even make major discoveries in neurology...
Yes.
[Q] ... probably would have done... the ones you might have done, or someone else might have made them. I mean, whereas its far less likely that anybody could've been the perosn who did the original work that you did in films, in  theatre and in opera?
Well, I don’t know whether it’s... possibly. I’ve never known. I mean, I quite... the works that I’ve done... a number of the works... I know that there are people who are delighted by what I have done and they come out of the theatre or the opera or whatever it is, or the television, saying the funny thing is it’s made me realise that I hadn’t really seen that work before, now I understand it in a different way.  And that’s all I set out to do. If I... yes, of course I hope that it’s going to be different because that’s the point of taking works from the past and finding aspects of them which had previously remained concealed or unrealised, that’s the point of doing it. Otherwise there’s no point just simply reviving them and... and, you know, like a Danish bog man.

Well. I enjoy it because it’s easy.
[Q] Is it?
Yes, it’s absolutely dead easy, in a way that I know that most of the work in science is extremely difficult. I mean, that’s what makes me slightly uneasy about being in it. The originality that I bring to it is not achieved by anything that I would call hard work which is comparable to the hard work which has to be put in order to make a really major contribution to the development of science. I can go in, as I do each day, to rehearsal, really not knowing what I’m going to do that morning, I haven’t got plans or schemes.
I’ve got a rough idea before I start the whole thing where I’m going to set it and what I feel it might be about, in general, very general, but the actual process of rehearsing it is a question of just playing nursery games. I mean, not doing what some of my more pretentious contemporaries do, playing improvisionational games in order to find out, to loosen up people's... the actors' imaginations, but just simply finding different ways of saying the words which are written down opposite the character's names that they’re playing.  And I do it without any sort of complicated theories. It isn’t something about which you can be that theoretical compared to, say, you know, cosmology or physics.
[Q] But at the rehearsal how do you get the ideas for what you want done? 
I don’t know. I’ve got no idea. I mean, by being familiar with social history, with social anthropology, which I’ve read all my life, by knowing what... by being interested in how people washed their clothes, the extent to which they did, the extent to which they washed their bodies, what they expected of succession, what they expected of monarchs.  But all this is simply being acquainted with social theory and social history, which I, you know, I sort of read about all the time, and as soon as you start... as soon as you get appointed to do a play, it becomes apparent what it’s about.

I’m usually asked to do it some months or even a year before, and I'll sort of think about it for a while and I'll suddenly get a vision of it in my head about when it ought to occur... when it ought to be set. I have fairly, sort of, straightforward principles about the extent to which it, if at all, it should be updated or reset in something other than what it seems to be set in. Because all the works I do, almost without exception, are works from the distant past. I don’t do works of contemporary playwrights or contemporary composers.  Almost all the works I do are the classical repertoire. And there are, in fact, problems about how to do them, what do you do with works which have entered their afterlife, which are no longer visualised either by audiences or critics or even by performers and audiences in the way that they were visualised, cherished and so forth at the time when they were done... so there’s a problem about what you’re going to do with it.
I mean, the sort of... the more idiotic versions of it, you do it as the playwright intended.  But, you can’t do it as the playwright intended because when Shakespeare did it he wrote it for the Globe Theatre, for a style of acting which no one would put up with nowadays, and where there has been 400 years of redesignings of the notion of theatre. So what happens is you start to suddenly get a picture of what it... how it might look, when it might look, and you sometimes, as I sometimes do, update it. I’ve just done a Hamlet which I wouldn’t dream of updating. I’ve always done it, and I’ve done it four times, set it in the year it was written. The preoccupations, the interests, the events that take place are inconceivable outside the period in which it occurs. I mean, it’s about monarchy and succession and legitimacy and so forth, as King Lear is.  There’s no point changing the period.But every now and then there are things like Measure for Measure which are not really set in anything which has got that sort of presupposition built into it, and I have done a production in which I set it in Freud's Vienna in 1910... because it’s about people who are dishonest about their own sexual desires... who discover them as a result of being exposed to someone who they lust for.  And here was Freud writing about that at that time, so I thought it would be nice to have it drably set in Freud's Vienna, without, in fact, having Freudian issues.
But one of the things which I always come across when I think about a particular period is what’s it going to look like? And because I’ve been saturated all my life in the visual arts, partly because my father was a painter and a sculptor, but also because of just going to picture galleries again and again and again and again. I know what the past looks like. And photography has a great effect on me. I mean, when I did that Measure for Measure, which was done with a scenic design which consisted just simply of the scrap doors from building sites... but I set it in this Freudian Vienna without recreating Freudian Vienna, but I looked at Austrian and German photographs of that period and I just dressed people like that.
I based it on this great Austrian German photographer, August Sander.  Well, you know, no one in the critical world has ever heard of Sander. I’m just about to do a production of La Bohème and I will not have people wearing berets and smocks standing elegantly against what they believe to be artists' easels.  And I've based it entirely on those wonderful pictures of Paris that Cartier-Bresson has of Paris in 1930. Cartier-Bresson, Kertész and Brassaï.  Well, I don’t know of a critic who has ever heard of those.

I know what happens when you start getting these things right, you get attacked for certain things which, in fact, you get... I'll show you, I'll give you a perfect example. I've done several productions... and I’m about to do one again for the third, fourth time, of La Traviata. Now, I would never dream of changing the period of [La] Traviata because Verdi had the common sense to set it in the year that he was writing.  It takes place in Paris in 1850. Madness to change it. I only change things like Rigoletto because he set it in something 300 years before about which he knew fuck all. So I have, in my various productions, invariably dressed her in something for which I am consistently attacked by these critics... wearing these trousers.
And then these fuckers have the impudence to tell me that I just do it in order to be different, to be trendy, and they’ve dressed her in ski pants... and I’ve updated her. I haven’t updated her at all. I’ve set her exactly as someone doing work in the same year as Verdi is writing, drew girls having their parties. There, again, there are hundreds of them dressed like this, and I just regard it as a... as a... they manage to achieve something which I say is the unpleasant and rather improbable skill of condescending upwards. Particularly American critics who know nothing about it at all.
Well, I mean, I spend an enormous amount of my time going to art galleries, collecting cards and looking at pictures and, you know, and I just remember all these things and I know how they ought to look. But it’s hopeless to be written about [by] people who are visually illiterate, and in many cases, historically illiterate, as well.  It’s just... and I sound so cantankerous and misanthropic but, you know, 50 years of it is enough to get under your skin.

But I’ve never had anyone except what I call the Jurassic Park singers, object to it. Once you have the people like Domingo and so forth, with the... 'No, I don’t think Alfredo would do that'... and you think, listen, dear, Alfredo was a fictional character, he doesn’t exist.  Let’s find a performance of someone who might do that, and I can assure you that in the period in which we’re going to set it, that’s probably what he would wear or what she would wear.
Well, it’s quite difficult with some of these megastars, again, who are just international travellers... rather than... they’re applauded for their voices, their acting is usually terrible.  But most of the people I work with are delightful. I mean, I’m often said to be this spiteful person who attacks and criticises his cast.  There are only about five people about whom I say adverse things, and I say adverse things because they deserve it because they are... they’re stupid and they’re powerful and they are, in the opera world, given undue attention and where it’s very hard to get anything on other than what they want to wear.
And they are... they’re from the Jurassic Park.  They’re accustomed to wearing the traditional clothes, which are themselves vulgar versions of the past in which it is apparently set. Even if you set it in the past of, say, 1450, and dress it accurately in the costumes of the 1450s they wouldn’t wear it. What they want to wear are Victorian versions of 1450.  It’s what I call Madame Tussaud history. But that’s... on the whole, I don’t think I’ve ever encountered real objections from 95% of the cast with whom I work, who find it delightful and challenging and interesting to see it that way.
I did a production, for example, some, oh, a couple of years ago, of a famous opera by Janáček, which I did in Upstate New York in Glimmerglass. Now, it takes place, apparently, in the Czech community, in Czechoslovakia in, you know... round near to Brno  where Janáček was writing. Well, I don’t like peasant costumes on the whole on the stage, I think they just look sort of kitsch.
But then I had been reading some years before... and this is the way these things bubble up... I was reading without a view to an opera, I was reading the novels of, oh, what’s her name, the American novelist who writes, amongst things, about the Czech community living in Nebraska... and so I thought, hang on, when I was asked to do this Janáček, I said I know what I'll do, I'll set it in 1930 in the Czech community in Nebraska, written in these novels. I'll remember her name in a minute, novels like My Ántonia and O Pioneers! and things like that.  They were wonderful, wonderful novels... a huge success. Completely ignored by the American critics who never came to see it.  But it was wonderful, very, very good, and many people came and saw it and just said, oh, God, how stupid not to have thought of that.

I used to listen to what were then called gramophone records. I used to go to the Marylebone Public Library and get, you know, one after another of Beethoven's symphonies and piano concertos and all the Mozart symphonies on, you know, 12 inch gramophone records, and I'd listen to them.  But I had no intention or interest in opera. I don’t think I'd ever seen an opera at all when I was asked to do one. Roger Norrington rang me up once, and he lived around the corner from here, and he asked me if I'd like to do... to direct Così fan tutte.  And I had already done a lot of plays, and I'd worked at The Old Vic with Olivier and had done the Merchant of Venice with him.
And I said I don’t know, I’ve never done Così fan tutte.  And I looked at the story, listened to the music, and I said, yes, I think I know how to do this. I know what it’s about.  It’s not about fidelity, it’s about identity.  It’s about what happens when you dress up and pretend to be someone else.
People think it’s all about infidelity.  Well that, of course, was one of the things that it’s about, but the infidelity is the consequence of disguising yourself and finding that you are someone else.  That’s a much more interesting theme. But then, once again, I’ve done it many different ways, and people always assume that I... they take literally the idea that they dress as Albanians, as if they know what Albanians looked like in the 18th Century. I’ve done it traditionally three times, and then the fourth time I decided to do a really updated version of it and set in last Thursday afternoon.  And it’s one of the biggest successes Covent Gardens ever had.
[Q] The Armani one?
Well, it was Armani to begin with.  But in the ten revivals of it I got rid of all the Armani stuff, but it was always called the Armani production. I just modernised it and it was a way of getting cheap costumes which we didn’t have to pay for.
[Q] It was fabulous...
It was very good, but it got better and better and better... but it got better and better and better when I finally did it two years ago, and I didn’t have them dressed as Albanians, nor in Armani costumes. I based them on these heavy metal bikers with their bandanas… and their heavy, you know - ‘hey!’ - and it was fantastic.
And I’ve always had Tom Allen playing it... playing Don Alfonso... whenever I’ve done it.

Well, it was rather surprising to be asked at the very early stage in my directing career to direct someone as distinguished and well established as Olivier, and someone as charismatic and famous and as celebrated as him.  And when he called me up I think I was doing something and someone said it’s Laurence Olivier in the phone and I said pull the other one, and there it was, he was on the phone and he asked me whether I would... first of all, I think he didn’t think about being in the thing himself, he always wanted to do a Merchant of Venice in order to have his wife, Joan Plowright, appear as Portia.  And I began to think about it and I thought, well, it would be rather nice to get away from that awful traditional way of doing it in period, and I thought of another period in which I might do it.
And I thought, well... I showed him these wonderful photographs of this man called the Count de Priuli, the Comte de Piuli, of Venice in the 1890s and I thought well, that might be a nice, and he suddenly said, I'll do it.  And once we agreed, he was simply one amongst a number of actors who attended to my directing.  And I think, if you read his autobiography, you will see that he, I think, had one of the best times in his life.
He didn’t condescend to me as a great figure of the theatre with a young rookie impudently telling him what to do. I found myself recommending things that he did, and his eyes widening with surprise and delight that no one had ever asked him to do such things before.
There was a moment at which he discovered that one of Antonio's ships has gone down, and said, is it true, is it true, and then he said to me, what should I do? And I said, well, there’s a marvellous newsreel of Hitler signing the Surrender of France in the railway carriage at Compiègne. And I said he does a crazy little dance, and I said, well, why don’t you do that? And he said, oh, I love it, I love it.  And he did it.
And I gave him a number of things which he... no one had ever asked him to do anything like that.  And I asked him also not to do certain things, and no one had ever had the cheek to ask him not to do any of his traditional stuff.  And I kept on saying, why are you doing that?  No one actually does that.  And he never argued, he said you’re absolutely right, let’s try it. And he was delighted with the idea and when he came in... I said, we'll do the court scene at the end. I said, I’m not going to do it in a court, I'll do it in Justice's Chambers so that everyone’s sitting at a long table, these 19th Century figures, and you bring in this briefcase and click it open. He was delighted with the idea of a briefcase and very carefully selected so that it made wonderful click-click as he opened the fastener to open it.  And he was delighted with being given the opportunity to work in a way which he had not previously been asked to work.  And I think it was the first time that he had been consistently and unremittingly advised to do things which he found himself agreeing with and enjoyed it. At no point did he pull rank, and at no point did I impudently say that I was smarter than he was.  It was just that we talked amiably and I came up, as an imaginative young man, with lots of really good ideas which absolutely eliminated the cliché versions of the stage Jew.
I mean he wanted to start it off with all sorts of, you know, Fagin sort of things when, you know, with the nose and I said, but I really don’t need all that. I said he’s just a businessman, let the anti-Semitism take care of itself.  And he should look like someone perfectly normal, about whom his anti-Semitic colleagues have adverse views, notwithstanding the fact that he looks exactly like them. I said, believe me, I’m Jewish and I don’t look like any of the traditional views, and I’m only a Jew for anti-Semites, and you should be Jewish only for these anti-Semites. So he… he did everything I asked him to do, and he did it with enthusiasm, there was no sense of surrender or giving in.  Each time he took it, it was like passing a rugger ball, and he always caught it and ran with it.

Well, when I did Rigoletto, that was much later, because I hadn’t been asked to do opera when I was working at the National Theatre with Olivier. I had only worked... and very little, by that time... in the theatre, I'd only done about four or five productions as a director.  But I'd done many more plays by that time, and then I began working at the English National.
And I'd done a fairly straightforward, traditional production of The Marriage of Figaro for Lord Harewood, because I had never felt tempted to change the period.  I mean, I’ve always had a general principle about this, that if a composer or an author sets one of his plays in his own time there’s no reason to change it, because he knows more about his own time than I do, and therefore it behoves me to find out what his own time was like, and he'll get it right.  And that... so when I did a Figaro I set it in the year it was written.
Whereas with Rigoletto, as with so many of the 19th Century composers, Verdi endlessly backdated his works.  It was one of the vices of the 19th Century.  It was called historismus, and people got absolutely obsessed with the exotic past. It was the equivalent in time of what the Orient was in space.  It was an exotic else-when.  And I thought it’s nonsense, this Rigoletto, it’s about this Gonzaga world which could never have looked like, nor could the people have behaved as, they seem to in the opera.
And then my wife actually reminded me of something which set me going, she said do you remember that scene in Some Like it Hot where the police chief investigating the St Valentine's Day Massacre comes into that Speakeasy and there was George Raft, who was involved in it, tossing a dime, and the police chief accused him.  And he said ‘I couldn’t have been there, I was at Rigoletto'.  And then he turns around to one of his henchman, ‘Ain't that so?’, and this henchman said ‘That’s right, we was at Rigoletto's’.
And if you remember at the end, the whole massacre at the end takes place at a meeting of these gangsters under the auspices of friends of Italian opera.  So I thought, well, it’s a perfect setting. I'll base it on The Godfather.  And it seemed perfectly natural.  It all worked in exactly the same way.  The Don Capo or the Duca was the precise equivalent of a Duke.  Most of those, you know, aristocrats in the 15th Century were just titled gangsters. So I very carefully based it on parts of New York that I knew very well. I took my designer to New York and said I want it to look like that.  And I found a building with a fire escape going up the side with a basketball court in the front, and I said that’s where the second scene should be.  And I knew the bars for the first scene, and it all worked.
And, again, there was a huge outcry from the traditionalists who said, ‘How can you violate a work, why can’t you honour the intentions of the composer?’ And I’ve always said, well, the intentions of the composer are now visualised in a totally different way because at a distance of 150 years we can see that his vision of the distant past is nonsensical and it’s just kitsch. So after the lot of adverse criticism, comparable to the adverse criticism I got from some baboon on the Daily Express when I did the Merchant of Venice, who said it's Portia in a bustle and it’s all wrong.  And you thought oh, you idiot, you twerp, you inflexible ninny.  Well, I got the same sort of, you know, wiser than thou... the sort of Brown Sewage stuff, you know, ‘Why on earth did you have to mess around with things like that?’
And here it is, 28 years later, still running. So that was fun doing it, getting it right and having that last scene based on Edward Hopper's Nighthawks in the bar when the Duke comes in.  And instead of being a Duke he’s a gangster, but he’s dressed as if he'd just come back from Korea and he’s waiting for Maddalena to come down.  And I had him go up to the jukebox, put the dime in the jukebox and then go, do da da da da da dun, da da, and the audience couldn't believe their eyes and ears when they saw that happening. And, again, a lot of attacks.
I mean, what is so interesting are these people who get fossilised in certain mental postures because they are being conditioned like Konrad Lorenz's greylag geese, to what they saw the first time when they saw the work in question.  And because they have a traditional idea of how it should... how it was always done, they assume that’s how it should always be done, and they don’t realise that the passage of time changes the image of what is done.  And that’s why I then went and wrote this very long book called Subsequent Performances about what happens to works which enter what I describe in the book at their afterlife, what Aby Warburg called the 'nachtleben de antike', the 'afterlife of antiquity'. Works which are continuously redone after many years have to be reconsidered, and there’s no way in which you can just faithfully reproduce the way in which they were done at the first performance.

I don’t have any favourites about these things. I mean, I’ve done these transpositions really several times, and, of course, critics, like Pavlov's dogs, have learned to, if not salivate, to spit whenever they see me doing those as if it’s oh, it’s typical Jonathan Miller updating, not realising that I have a discriminating choice in whatever I do.  Sometimes I update, sometimes I don’t, and when I update, I update on the whole when the composer or the author has backdated the work.
What is so interesting is the stupidity with which people fail to understand the extent to which backdating prevailed, certainly throughout the 19th Century. I mean, the novels of Walter Scott exerted a dire influence on the making of operas, and therefore you have to reconsider them. Whereas if someone is writing something in his own period as, for example, something I’ve done four times, which is Verdi's La Traviata, which takes place in Paris in the 1850s, I’ve never felt even the slightest temptation to set it in anything other than the 1850s, and to get it right.
[Q] So it's nonsense this idea of, sort of, perverse being clever and all that...
No, well, it’s just typical of the sort of, the reason why I get so, why I've descended in my old age into misanthropic solitude is that I’m tired of being constantly told that I’m just, sort of, too clever by half and trying to draw attention to myself by spectacular forms of updating. I mean, whenever I’ve done The Marriage of Figaro, whenever I’ve done Don Giovanni, I’ve always set it in its own period. In the same way when I did The Magic Flute.  Most people absolutely violate The Magic Flute by turning it into an idiotic Egyptian pantomime, and it’s quite clearly... if you set it in the year it’s written you realise it’s about the Enlightenment.  So I set it in a Masonic Library of the late 18th Century, and, of course, people then started complaining about the fact that I'd eliminated all the fun, which is what brings children to see The Magic Flute.
I’m up against people who are, in fact, like Konrad Lorenz's greylag geese.  Do you know the story I’m referring to... when Lorenz took newborn geese and hatched them in such a way that they never saw their goose parents, and he would drag things in and things like wastepaper baskets across the enclosure.  For the rest of their life they would court wastepaper baskets. Well, that’s exactly what happens with the theatre with the stupider critics and the stupider public, they get exposed and imprinted in the way that Lorenz said, by what they think of an authentic performance, and think that anything else is a smart-arse violation designed to draw attention to the director's own originality.
Well, I hope that they are original, but not perversely so. What has happened in the last 30 years since I first did all this updating, and I was one of the first people to do it properly, is that it’s now done routinely.  It’s what I call theatre schlepping, a wonderful Yiddish term which I learned in New York.  Theatre schleppers are people who transport theatrical scenery in trailers from one location to another in order to do a production on tour.  Well, I think that a lot of my contemporaries... younger contemporaries... are simply theatre schleppers.  What they do is they dump the opera in a truck and drive it 250 years up the freeway and dump it in last Thursday afternoon, preferably in Iraq, or... and, you know, if a young woman dies in La Traviata she has to die of AIDS.  It’s always got to be a fashionable thing which was in the news last Thursday, and that’s theatre schlepping.
But I always do it with some discrimination and some idea of their being what I’ve always called, because of my biological training, as isomorphism.  That you have to find some format in the original, and when you transpose it there has to be...  going to a place where in fact there is some coincidence between the two things.  In the same way as there are between my right hand and my left hand, they’re isomorphic.  So that when I moved Rigoletto from 15th Century Mantua into 1950 Little Italy, I realised that the families, the Mafia families, were really very, very similar to, you know, Italian courts.
But I, as I say, I don’t do it when someone's writing it in his own period.  But people are always backdating, and I then will sometimes take the work and update it to the period in which the author was, or the composer was, writing. I did a very successful production some years ago of Der Rosenkavalier. Now, Rosenkavalier, written by Strauss and working with von Hofmannsthal, set it in the 18th Century.  And I thought, what in God's name is going on here, it’s got nothing to do with the 18th Century.  And it’s written in 1912, and I thought, well, hang on, it’s in that Vienna which is poised on the edge of complete catastrophe. Eighteen months later the shot will ring out from Sarajevo and the whole of Europe will be destroyed, as it was, by the First World War. Octavian will die on the Eastern Front, as he does in that famous novel of Joseph Roth, The Radetzky March.  Why does the Marschallin go around stopping the clocks in that famous aria at night?People think, oh, it’s because she thinks she's aging, well, that’s one reason, but the other thing is that she knows that time is up, that everything will change.  And I set it in the year it was written, and suddenly the whole opera becomes meaningful instead of being an exotic piece of 18th Century kitsch. I can’t bear theatrical kitsch.

[Q] Do you dream alot?
Yes, I do dream alot. As I get older I can never remember my dreams, they’re just like a mouse's tail going into the mouse hole just as I wake up, and I don’t catch it. But when I did Alice in Wonderland I made it as close as I could to the grammar of my own dreams.  And I realise that dreams have a certain peculiar quality which is not to do with exotic impossibilities and Daliesque perspectives, but just the strange absurdity and banality of things.  And that’s the way I tried to make it work.
I wanted to get rid of all the animal heads.  And I knew what it was about, it’s about Oxford.  It’s about the people that Alice Liddell would’ve met as the daughter of the Dean of Christ Church.  And it’s also when William Empson wrote that famous set of essays, Seven Types of Ambiguity, the last essay is called The Child as Swain, which is the vision that the Victorians had that growing up was a catastrophe and that there was a moment in early childhood when, as Wordsworth says, ‘There was a time when meadow, grove and stream, The earth and every common sight, To me did seem apparell'd in celestial light, The glory and the freshness of a dream’.  Which is, in fact, what I had at the front of the credits in that film of Alice in Wonderland.  But of course, the critics, with predictable idiocy said it was Freudian, and it wasn’t, the very thing that it wasn’t was Freudian, there was nothing Freudian about it, it was Victorian.
[Q] And there's Wordsworth at the end as well.
And Wordsworth at the end, 'The things that I have seen I now can see no more'. But did one critic notice that? I mean, it’s amazing when they’re on the lookout for intrusions, that the two things which were nothing to do with Lewis Carroll, are with Wordsworth at the front and Wordsworth at the end, none of them identified them, or even saw it.  They were all there to pick up, oh the good doctor will be bound to be Freudian about Alice.
I wasn’t Freudian, I don’t think there’s a Freudian thing in Alice at all.  It’s about the catastrophe of growing up. It’s very significant that at the end what happens, after the accusation is now levelled at her rather than at the Knave of Hearts, ‘All people more than a mile high to leave the Court'. 'I’m not a mile high', said Alice. ‘Oh yes, you are’, says the Queen, ‘more than two miles high’. She’s grown up and that’s what the whole work is about. But, of course, try and argue that to most of the people who write in the newspapers, it’s idiotic.
[Q] Are you quite interested in memory? I mean, seeing as you've got such an exceptionally good one.
I haven’t got an exceptionally good memory now, my memory fails, I can’t remember the names. I forgot the name of Kurt Schwitters in the middle of talking to you. I’ve got a memory for some things and lots of other things disappear. I mean, there are things that I do remember, but I remember less and less.  Certainly not names, and I sometimes wonder whether I’m, sort of, falling into dementia, but I think it’s just what people call a senior moment.

If you make physical artefacts they do, if they don’t get destroyed or dumped, they might be picked up later on and people may, you know, 30 or 40 years on say... after I’ve gone... say, oh, how interesting, he did that.  But I don’t see them, again, like some people see their children, as vehicles or media through which I will be perpetuated in some way. I think they’re quite nice, I think they’re as good as some of the rubbish that’s being made now about which such a fuss is being made, but they’re very unfashionable because they’re, sort of, in a way, old-fashioned modernism of the early 20th Century, which affects me very much. I mean, that’s one of the main influences in my artwork. I’m very much under the influence of people who were working at the beginning of the 20th Century, they still have an effect on me. Post-modernism and all that sort of drivel has no effect on me at all.

Modernism is simply a loose name for that burst of remarkable, often abstract inventiveness that took place between about 1905 and 1920.  Cubism, futurism and surrealism and Dada and so forth, that was modernism, and I think I’ve been much more influenced by that than anything that’s happened subsequently. I like some of the things that the Americans did after the war, abstract expressionism and so forth, though I don’t feel influenced by them in that I'd like to paint like them.  But I do find myself looking back to people like Malevich and Lissitzky and Popova and Goncharova and so forth and think, well, I like that, and I don’t copy them but I look at them with some interest and I feel myself a sort of minor part of that community.

I started doing it entirely by accident. I mean, I have a long causal chain which led to it. I took up photography a long time ago, I think shortly after I went to New York.  An American photographer who had been friends of my mother gave me a camera and I began taking a lot of photographs in New York, but mostly of my newborn sons, and I became rather intrigued by it.  And then gradually I became more and more interested, not in scenery, I didn’t want to photograph, as it were, beautiful scenery or memorable places, I found myself photographing more and more abstract close-ups of real places from which, in fact, you couldn’t, as it were, deduce where they came from. I wasn’t interested in them as pieces of visitable beauty, I was interested in their abstract formats.
I found myself, when we lived in Scotland... I had a house in Scotland where we used to go for long holidays, and I kept my... I kept photographing the edges and sharp ends of gun emplacements, the way in which old 1930 bathing huts overlapped with one another and formed rectangular formats. I photographed bits and pieces of lighthouses, not in order to have exotically attractive pieces of visitable monuments but because I liked the way in which the cylindrical format of the lighthouse tower and then the various bits and pieces of chimney related to one another rather in a sort of geometrical fashion.  And I began doing lots and lots of those, and I kept albums and I kept on putting them away, and I have a vast album library upstairs of these photographs.
And I went on doing them, and I photographed bits and piece of decaying posters when I was working in Italy. I loved that sort of collage effect of posters which have been superimposed upon one another so that you got many, many layers and bits and pieces torn off and then other layers torn off and then painted over and so forth, and I would get very close to them and photograph them. And I put them together, finally, in a book called Nowhere in Particular, which fell stillborn from the press, no one talked about it at all.   But I think it’s rather a beautiful book.

After I had seen what my photographs looked like I would, you know, linger over the old albums and then I would say, well, it might be quite nice to sort of make some of these things rather than merely photographing these rather interesting remnants and bits and pieces.  So I, as I say, I would go out with a Stanley knife and rip bits and pieces of old decaying posters off Italian walls and pack them away in my suitcase and bring them back and cut them up and reassemble them in collage.  And I think I was influenced by the greatest of all the collagists, which is... oh, what’s he called, I'll remember his name in a minute... anyway, it’s a German, and I used to...
[Q] Herzfeld? 
No, not Herzfeld, no, I'll remember it... and so I used to make these assemblages and then I would start getting bits and pieces of wood so that I started making three dimensional objects, which, again, were totally abstract.
Schwitters was, the man I was interested... was Kurt Schwitters, who took bus tickets and bits and pieces of old decaying, you know, cigarette cartons and bits and pieces of wood and fragments of paint and there wasn’t in any sense copying him but I was in his style. I mean, if you look at any particular period in art you'll find that there are lots of people doing the same sort of thing. Now, this is a slight anomaly in that here was someone who was not a member of that community and who was born long after it had finished, but I found myself to be part of that community vicariously because I liked doing that sort of stuff, and I still do.
And then I began collecting bits and pieces of wood which I would saw up and reassemble and make, sort of, wood assemblages, sometimes by adding paint and sometimes just simply daubing them with bits and pieces of cement.  And then when I was away in Santé Fe when I was doing opera, the man who owned the house had an estate manager who saw me doing this and he asked me if I'd ever done anything with welding, and I said, ‘No, no I don’t know how to weld’.  And he asked... he said, ‘Well, if you can’, he said to me, ‘If you can light a cigarette without burning your fucking nose you can weld’.  And he took me into the garage of this house where there was a nice, safe stone floor, and we went out with his Ford pickup truck and raided these metal dumps and took stuff back and made it, and I learned how to weld. I can’t do it here because I haven’t got a safe studio space in which I can do it. But I like doing that and I'd like to do much more of it.
So, I mean, over the last ten or 15 years I’ve assembled an enormous amount of stuff and actually exhibited them. I’ve had two shows… and I’ve sold stuff.

You have to realise that I’m one of the few people, and I’m not boasting here, because it’s just, it’s anomalous... I’ve done Desert Island Discs twice.  And the second time I did it, which was 30 years after I did it for the first time, I did choose as my book a wonderful five-volumed book on invertebrate zoology.  And... I mean, I always liked this wonderful routine, 'What would you take, apart from, of course, the Bible and Shakespeare', as if somehow these were the things... I wouldn’t dream of taking either.  And so this… this second time, I wanted this book by an American woman zoologist on invertebrates.  And that goes back to what got me into the sciences in the first place. I spent a lot of time with my friend Oliver Sacks and another friend of mine called Eric Korn, doing marine zoology and, you know, and a lot of invertebrate zoology.  And I thought it would be nice to be on a desert island and to be able to go down with my dredger and net and spend my long solitary hot days dissecting polychaete worms.
[Q] That’s why you wanted a dissection kit?
Yes. I love dissecting, and I’ve always been fascinated by, and continue to be interested in, what I would call the architecture of living forms. Now, as soon as I say that, of course, the creationists get very excited because they think that I’m underwriting the notion of intelligent design. Well, they’re not designed, that’s simply the way they’ve evolved, and there are certain formats which repeat themselves and there are certain sorts of coherences and patterns which have always interested me.  And I very much like this book on invertebrate zoology.
The first time, I think, I selected another book which was a book about the writing of Kubla Khan by Coleridge.  It’s a wonderful book by a man called John Livingston Lowes called The Road to Xanadu.  It’s immediately behind you on the bookshelf there. I’ve forgotten what my... oh, my luxury item the first time, which caused them to stop recording when I said it.  He said, 'What would your luxury item be?' and I said, 'A razor to cut my throat with', because I thought that what Robinson Crusoe apparently found so attractive would, in fact, be desolation. So those are the two things.  But the dissecting kit was now not for cutting my own throat but for opening up some more polychaete worms.

When I first did the Desert Island Discs I knew nothing really about music at all. I mean, I liked music and I liked a lot of Beethoven and I liked Bach and I liked Mozart. I used to go to the St Marylebone [sic] Public Library and get gramophone records, as they were called, you know, on loan, in the same way as you go to the library and you could borrow things.  And I acquainted myself with all of the Beethoven symphonies and the piano concertos and all the Mozart symphonies and so forth, and bits and pieces of Bach.
I knew nothing about the [St] Matthew Passion at all when I was young. I never went to it.  And it was only when I got married and my wife and her musical interests, I got directed towards the Matthew Passion... and then this rather unexpected invitation came my way about 20 years ago, someone said have you ever thought of staging it?
And I thought, well, no, I’ve always been slightly... you can’t ever be impatient with any performance of the Matthew Passion because it’s so beautiful to listen to.  But I always got slightly impatient with the standard format of people dressed in tuxedos standing behind lecterns with a choir obediently ranged behind them.  And it always struck me as a drama.  And I said to the man who asked me, would it be possible to have a day or two with a scratch orchestra and a bit of a choir with, you know, no pay at all, just to run it through and see how we might do it?
So we went to a high school down in Pimlico during the holidays, and on the second floor of this school we got almost the complete choir and orchestra and a few soloists.  And I thought, well, you know, let’s, why don’t we get up and start acting some of these scenes? I don’t just want to have them sung, and, well, why don’t we do away with the score?  Just learn it like you'd learn an opera?
And in the course of it I became absolutely passionately addicted to this moment when St Peter discovers, as Jesus predicts, that he will betray him.  And he sort of goes into a state of remorseful sadness about what he's done.  And then there’s this extraordinary consoling aria sung by a countertenor, with an obbligato instrument - a violin accompanist.  And I said why don’t we just bring the violinist over and play it into his ear as a consolation to him and have the countertenor put his arm around his shoulder and can sing consolingly to him?
And I’m always reduced to tears by the Erbarme Dich, and so I chose it as one of my items. But that was one of the best things I’ve ever staged.  No costumes, I mean, just everyone was in their ordinary clothes and they just sat around in a circle and every now and then they’d get up and act.
And with one or two exceptions, actually, I got almost unanimous approval from the critics, I think they were bowled over by it.  And I’ve done it now in America three times and I’m about to do it next year for the fourth time at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.  And we fill the place, absolutely pack it out with it, and the audience goes mad with it.  They suddenly feel they’ve seen and heard it for the first time. And that’s all I ever want to do with works, I want to find a way of doing it which somehow brings them to attend to aspects of it which were previously invisible.
I’ve always been very struck by one important issue in psychology, and it’s called the figure-ground relationship.  That’s what the Gestalt psychologists talk about. The best example of it is this famous thing called the Rubin Vase, when you see two faces, black faces looking at one another across... and then you realise that, actually, you can see it another way.  Without there being any change in the format it isn’t two black faces looking at one another, it’s a white vase on a black background.  And that business of two equivocal, equivalent versions of something which you can encourage people to see what they previously had not looked at.
There’s another famous example which is called the Duck-Rabbit.  A format which looks in one way like a rabbit with long ears with its little snout facing that way, and then someone says, but doesn’t it also look like a duck, and instead of the ears they’re the bill and you’re suddenly, oh, yes, I quite hadn’t seen that, and seeing it with the bill eliminates, without changing the format, the ears. Well, that has always been my aim in the theatre, never to change the format very much but to bring to people's attention aspects of the work, as Wittgenstein would talk about, aspects which had previously escaped their attention.
That’s the only reason why I continue to work in the theatre, is that there is a creative obligation in the afterlife of these works to demonstrate to the audience that they’re not straightforward versions of what they seem to be.  That they are like the Rubin Vase and the Duck-Rabbit.  They’re things which have alternative aspects which without any violation of the format you can actually bring to their attention. This often involves resetting it, but you don’t change the words, you just change what the words are about. But try and explain that to Herbert Kretzmer and you’re up shit creek with no paddle at all.

Well, we’ve had a long relationship, that was slightly strained in some ways because I think that he [Herbert Kretzmer] felt at the beginning that perhaps more attention had been given to me than was given to him, and now it’s gone the other way around.  But, you know, we’ve seen each other on and off for nearly, well, for more than 40 years.  And he once lived downstairs when we first came back from the United States and he used to eat regularly in the house. So we see him on and off, less now, now that he's got a partner, but, no, we see each other on and off.  It’s a sort of slightly tense relationship, but it’s okay.
[Q] What about other friends?
Well, I’ve got friends that I knew from school.  My old friend Oliver Sacks, who was at St Paul's with me.  And then there are people I knew at Cambridge like my brother-in-law, Karl Miller, who accidently has the same name, he's married to Rachel, my wife's sister, and occasionally people like Neil Ascherson, with whom I was at Cambridge. But I don’t have a lot of friends anyway, now, many of them are dead.  People I knew from The New York Review of Books, Barbara Epstein has died, but I see the editor of The New York Review of Books from time to time.  But on the whole I’ve sort of withdrawn and don’t see many people. I don’t give dinner parties. I occasionally go out with people but mainly just down the road to have dinner with them, or lunch, but I have fewer friends than I used to. I’ve sort of withdrawn into a somewhat misanthropic solitude, really. I mean, I see a lot of my wife, and some of her friends, but otherwise I don’t have a number of very close friends.
[Q] It’s very difficult to believe in the idea of you being misanthropic.
Well, I mean, as time's gone on and as... I  go on about this... if you live in a world where in fact you get people attacking you, and then there are people who resent and think that one is, sort of, over-talked about, you get people who withdraw from you, and I withdraw from them so that I... as life has gone on and I’m, you know, approaching my 80s, or I will be, you know, in five… five years or so, I don’t actually see friendship as a particularly important part of my life now.
I mean, I’m much more interested in my children and my grandchildren. I mean, there are relatives I see, but I don’t go out and have lunch as often as my brother-in-law does, for example.  But I think he’s withdrawn much more than some of his friends. I mean, I don’t feel particularly sad about it, it just is the way it’s turned out.

[Q] Have you got anything to say about old age? I mean…
No, the only thing I have to say about old age is that this is one of the things that seems to happen, or it has happened to me, is that while I was sort of sparklingly sociable in the early days when I was in the theatre… I… it seems to be associated with getting older, not because I feel myself feeble or disabled by old age at the moment, I have a bad back and I can’t walk around quite so much as I used to, but I’m perfectly healthy, but I don’t have any particular feeling about the arithmetic sum of my years, as if it’s getting on top of me and anything like that.
I’m nearer to death, I suppose, and all I have... I have anxieties only about what will happen when I get ill enough to be disabled and perhaps in pain and wish to end it.  But otherwise I have no feelings about old age at all. I feel myself to be very much the same person that I was when I was younger. I mean, my interests are the same and I, you know, go on reading the same sort of stuff and get as interested in a certain range of things as I was when I was, say, 30 or 40 years younger, so I don’t feel age as such means very much to me.

[Q] And about death, when it comes to death, does the idea of extinction trouble you? 
Not at all, no, I mean, it’s perfectly inevitable and I don’t have any sense of posterity. I don’t think I'll be remembered long after I’ve died.  There’s nothing... there'll be nothing to see because all the things I do disappear. One or two films that I’ve made may well be looked at again, but none of the plays because they will never be revived, or there’s no way of reviving them.  I mean, if they’re revived, they’re revived by someone else, not by me.
I don’t... I’ve left one or two books behind which I think might be talked about in many years to come, because I think one or two of them are quite good.  My [The] Body in Question, for example, I think, has still got a lot of extremely interesting philosophical ideas about the nature of biological science. I mean, they’re not major works but I think that they’re quite significant. Again, disregarded and criticised when they first came out, as the programmes were themselves. People may look at those and say after many years, well, you know, they were better than they were thought at the time. But I have no feeling of posterity, and I don’t think of my children as carrying my name into a future that I will not attend. I’m not interested in posterity in that sense at all.
[Q] Are you just made that way or is that something to do with having studied medicine?
Oh, no, I’m made that way.  It never seemed to me to be particularly important. I remember meeting someone in the street, a writer, and I was talking about my grandchildren, and he said, 'Oh, you know, so they’re you’re future, they will carry your name into the future', and I said to him, 'That’s a ludicrous idea'. I’m interested in them as long as I’m alive because I love them, but I don’t think I love them because they are, as it were, vehicles with my name stamped on the side as if it was a car make labelled Miller. I’m not in the least bit interested in that.
And this twerp obviously thought of himself as being someone for whom posterity was important and that there might be two ways of actually having a posterity, either by the books that he bequeathed to posterity or the children that he never had. I mean, I think he's talked rather enviously about my having children as if, in fact, they were vehicles which would carry my name into the future. I’m not in the least bit interested in what they do in the future on my behalf, I’m only interested in what they do on their own behalf because I love them now.

As I get older the only thing I think does happen is that as I do less and less work in the theatre, which... I mean, the whole point about theatrical work, and I suppose the same would’ve gone for the scientific work, is that you have an obligation to go in at a certain time, you then meet a lot of people and you work with them the whole day and you, you know, have a drink with them and go out, and then you take a rest and get up the next morning with an appointment at 9:30 or 10 o’clock to do some more.  Well, as my theatrical engagements diminish because I’m no longer, you know, what they call cutting edge, I don’t get asked to do things as often as I used to and therefore I have long periods of depressed idleness and I wonder well, what ought I to be doing?
So I keep trying to do some of this work and I try to write but, again, I get blocked as well. I haven’t written anything, sort of, coherent and serious for quite a long while, nor have I done much of this artwork, so I’m in a, sort of, rather curious, sort of, desert period at the moment.
I mean, I… it isn’t that I like the theatre that much but at least there’s a reason to get up in the morning, because you’ve got a lot of people waiting for you to come up with ideas. And then the few things I’ve done in the last few months I find myself pleased to be going and starting work and then I find within about ten minutes that I’m inventing with exactly the same vigour and imagination and intelligence that I did... perhaps even more than I did, say, 30 or 40 years ago when I first began doing it. I know so much now.
I mean, there are some people who, when they work in the theatre, keep on repeating what they always did, but I know from the things I’ve done in the last three or four months, they’ve been some of the best things I’ve ever done in my life. I did a production of Hamlet about three or four months ago, and judging by the, for once, almost unanimously favourable criticisms, I realised I'd turned the play on its head and made people think about it for the first time as if they’d never seen it before.
But that’s because, as I say, if you keep your wits about you the older you get the more you know about life and you’ve seen a huge variety of things horizontally and then vertically over the passage of time.  You’ve seen so much more... you’ve seen everything that goes from youth to old age.
So that in that way I slightly resent and am disappointed at the fact that I don’t get used more often in the theatre, notwithstanding the fact that I wonder there’s anything worth doing in the theatre. But every now and then when I get doing it I find, well, I can do it probably as well, if not better, than most of my younger colleagues.

You find yourself in love, loving people, and, again, as Wittgenstein would say, it isn’t something which you can, as it were, undertake to encourage yourself to do. It’s very interesting that we use this verb which is usually associated with accidents. I fell in love.  It’s an involuntary thing that befalls you. It’s often... it may be very agonising but it’s often very joyful and sometimes it can continue throughout one's life, as it has to that woman who's just walked out of the room, and to my children.
And those are the only people I’ve ever loved. So it’s a fairly narrow group of people that I love.  There are people I like, but the people I love and would, you know, would wish nothing but good for them are really limited to my family. I have no idea what it is, I don’t know why it is that when they are in your house and are born from you, that you do, as it were, fall in love with them. Why should that... their origin guarantee their beloved quality? You can become acquainted with all sorts of children but you don’t love them unless they’re yours.  And it’s not, as this rather foolish man said, because they are the vehicles that will carry your name into the future which you have no part of.  It’s very peculiar that you get, in a Konrad Lorenz way, you get imprinted by them, by their first appearance, and you do love them in the way that you don’t other people's children.
