jules.engel

The late Hungarian-American film-maker Jules Engel is best known for his contribution to the field of animation. His work includes the dance sequences in Walt Disney's 'Fantasia' and the creation of 'Mr Magoo'. His films and lithographs are housed in museums all over the world and have won many awards.

No, if you, if you're going to take me all the way back, I can only say that my mother used to cover me up when I was in a crib, she told me, because my head was like a hexagon. It wasn't round, it was, it had shapes, and, and she said that people used to come and look at me, 'What's that'? She says, 'That's my son'. 'My God!' Because my head was a shape, hard shape, I think that was a foretelling eventually what's going to happen, you know? And so, she put a curtain on this thing that she pushed me around. You know the curtain? So the people wouldn't see me because the comments she was getting from everybody, but that made things a little easier for her to deal with me as a, as a six-month-old or whatever I was, you know? Yeah. But you have to go through those ages.
[Q] Is, Judy, is younger than you? 
Yes.
[Q] Your sister Judith? 
Yeah. Uh-huh.
[Q] Did she have a…a?
No, no it was normal. I was abnormal, with that shape I looked like... it was probably a foretelling what's going to happen, because eventually it became shape, you know? It had sides to it, and she said people were laughing at me and that's what that... But I had other weird situations, I think. I think I grow my bone, or whatever, because she said I used to walk around on the street with my hands behind me, like this, you know, how elderly people walk like that. And I used to do that when I was like three or four years old, to walk to like that, on the street. Now it's nothing weird, isn't it weird?  
[Q] I guess. This was in Hungary?
Oh, sure.

My sister, Judith, was a great sculptress and Vicky was, was really into the violin - on their own, everything was on their own. But Judy has made about 20 heads and theyre beauties, I mean, she became an excellent sculptor, sculptress.

Maybe I was 13.
[Q] Uh-huh
Because I went to high school here you know? But one big reason, because the language.
[Q] Yes, it must have been terrible, having to learn a whole new language.
Immediately.
[Q] Yeah.
Yeah. Well, you know in retrospect, looking back… looking back, you're absolutely not aware that that was a problem. But I'm, what I'm saying, you're not aware now when you think back that there was ever a problem. No it was never a problem, I don't know why. But then again, you see, what I know that I picked up the language by even if I said, 'It's ha' pas' twelve', but I said 'Ha' past twelve' - if you've got something in half, you know? So I just used that because I didn't give a damn whether it was correct or not, as long as I know that I mean to say, 'Ha' pa'' - but I didn't have the language yet so I said, 'Ha' past one'. Well I know it's okay if it's a little bit of fruit but if you deal with time it's ha' past. So whereas my sister Judy didn't spoke a word of English, not a word, for a year - but when she opened her mouth, she was perfect. Her pronunciation and everything was incredible, was just 100%. But with me, I started to speak English the next day, you know, because I just picked up words and I used them. I didn't give a damn whether it was correct or not but you see, that's the difference between people. She wouldn't talk for a year but then she was 100% correct with her language, and then she kept correcting me. Which is okay, there's no big deal, you know?

The first animated film that I saw? Well, that's a… that's a big one. I'm trying to… I'm stalling right now because I'm trying to think. I think it was probably some Disney film. Oh yes, I think it was something like Three Little Pigs…Three Little Pigs, that's right. And that, that was of consequence because it was something new I've never seen before. And without knowing yet, I fell in love with animation, but not knowing it.

It was, it was very interesting and I could see her, because I remember at one time when they came back from the trip and all that and I, you know? And then on their way out from the room, I remember, after they were out and they looked at my drawings - the children, you know? They looked as they walked out and when they were all out, she said, 'They don't know'. That's a biggie, because you see, now I was with her alone and she said, 'They don't know'. So she knew something, you know? That she allowed me to stay in the room and do my stuff. And then for her to say that, you know? That's, that's really special, you know? That was just one of those little things you'll remember the rest of your time.

There was one - Miss Page. Isn't that funny? Now, why would I remember her name? There's no reason for it. It's weird, you know? Miss Page. She was also… But they… they had something very nice, I must give Evanston High School a bravo. Because every once in a while, the ladies came from the ladies club, there's a name for that. And they wanted to see me. So they asked me to come outside, outside the class and they asked me if I need anything. Now, they were aware of me, you know, being there, they liked my art and also, which has nothing to do with this event, but I'm involved with myself, but I was a top talent as an athlete. Yeah. A half-a-mile and a mile, that was mine, yeah. In all of Illinois, all the state. Yeah. So they knew that. These ladies who came from the club, the athletic side of me, you know, which brought me to California. To a degree, brought me to California. To a degree, where I could have either gone to USC [University of Southern California] or UCLA [The University of California, Los Angeles] on an athletics scholarship. But I had a teacher at Evanston High, Rangy. His name was Rangy. Mr Rangy. Geometry - I was lousy. I was the worst thing of geometry, I knew from nothing. And I could never figure those things out but he desperately wanted me to go to a university that he left and his son just finishing. He wanted me to go there on a scholarship and he could arrange all that because I would have an athletic scholarship, plus an aesthetic scholarship. Both, you know? But I could only see Los Angeles at that time and I had to go. I had to come to this city, yeah.

I was at Evanston High School at that time, and as a kid I did not know who he was, I had never met him before. But he said that he would like to invite me to go with him wherever he wants to go. And I had a hunch, it was just a hunch, that some of the teachers put him up to it. But anyway, I told this kid, 'Okay'. I have no idea what the hell he's talking about or where we're going. So we went to this place downtown Chicago, to this big place, where they're, you know, showing operas and all that and all that. Anyway, and then this curtain goes up and that's the first ballet I have ever seen. And it just knocked me for a loop. It was Swan Lake, Swan Lake, that was it. And you had dancers like [David] Lichine and Vechine [?] walking in with pink tights, you know, and blonde hair. Well, all that was something new. I've never seen anything like it. But the important thing was that they moved. And that aspect of it has stuck with me, you know? But I'm still in high school, okay? But it was something I'd not seen, I'd never heard about. But at least I could have given this guy a bravo of taking me because that was the beginning of my interest in the world of dancing, which led to dance of sculpture, which then led to the dance of painting. But it all started with that one moment, when this person that I'd never met, never knew, invited me to go someplace with him.

If you are a… good at… as an athlete, there's something in you that has that sense of rhythm that's going to show itself on the canvas or… or on a drawing. It's going to be there, to a degree. I don't want to sound mystic or something, something works there. Something works there. And, and also, because when you see an athlete perform, really a good athlete, really, I mean, there is magic. Also, it's music by itself. But also, it's a drawing by itself. It's a painting by itself. Because it just, it's all one, it's all one, it all comes together. But don't, the negative part is when people doing things that's difficult for them to do, but they're doing it and they look horrible and they look sad and they look mad and they shouldn't do that, maybe they should do something else.

For me, drawing, for me, drawing was natural. For me, athletics was natural. There was no effort, you know? The coach said, 'Why don't you run a little faster'? I said, 'Coach, I'm winning'. You know? 'I don't have to run any faster, I'm winning.' You know? He was a nice person and he was also, I don't know what he was teaching but that time, maybe even today, they can coach and they have a class, they teach some class. And it's just part and parcel, you know? But the geometry teacher at Evanston High, he wanted desperately for me to go to his… his university that he graduate from and his son was graduating that year. But [U]SC and UCLA, they have such a big name, you know, in that world, that I had to get on a bus. It took about three or four days on a bus to come to Los Angeles. I remember I arrived in Los Angeles after three days on the bus, and my pants, they came all the way up here because of the way you sit and you eventually get all messy and everything down there is up here. But I wanted to come here because of the… really because of the athletics, what brought me to Southern California. And I can say, right now, that everything turned out to be just right. Because if I'd gone to the university that this teacher of mine wanted to go, I don't know what the hell, I probably would have ended up as a coach or… or some damn thing. But I felt that this is the place for me, California, because of the athletes. That brought me to California, yeah.

I got on a bus and came to Los Angeles. And I met some people, I don't know, maybe I knew some. Oh yeah, I knew some people, that's right. Oh yeah, there's a funny story here. I'm in Los Angeles and I have two addresses, and I'm just out of high school. One was to a place in Hollywood, you know, where people sometimes go to for whatever need or help or something? I don't know what the hell you call those people. Anyway, they were very nice to me and they say, you know, 'We want to do a favor for you because you seem like a very nice guy. And what we're going to do, we're going to buy you a ticket, go back to Los Angeles'. Well no, no way. No way. But they're going to pay my train fare, everything, to go back to Chicago. But I said to them, 'Thank you very much'. That was the first ticket that I got from my friend. The next one was to a couple of bankers, it was downtown Los Angeles. And I had the address and whatever, you know. And so I… I went back home and, no, are you going to use the… the second address? And the second address was a banker and the banker was very nice, it was downtown Los Angeles, and he gave me $20, so that helped. But anyway, I had $20. But he did tell me about a friend of his who is an artist, and I should go and see him. And that's the worst thing you could tell me because I wasn't that keen. Anyway, I went to this address and I looked around and looked around. And finally, I met the man, he was… he was a painter, and he liked my drawings. So what happened out of that situation is that I show up at 7:00 in the morning at his studio and I draw some pictures of the desert, you know? And then he took them, and I didn't know that. But he put his name on those drawings. Yeah, uh-huh. And I still had to thank him but I did never let on that he using my drawings, he's signing them, you know? And he colors them a little bit, and he was very good at that. But meanwhile I was meeting people and so I got in touch with people. And then they say, 'Oh you should come to Disney'. And I said, 'But how?' They said, 'We'll take your drawings, we'll show it to them'. So I gave them some of my drawings of the desert and stuff like that, and next thing I know, I'm at Disney Studio.

I never studied anything when it comes to films. I generally, what happens is I enter in some university, whatever, you know? And - or an art school… art school is more of an idea. And then you go there and by the second day I know I had it. So the most time I ever spent in the world of learning how, less than always two days. And then I was on my own again. But that's just me. Maybe for somebody else it's different. They need that. But I didn't need that and so that was that, you know? And eventually what… what came from getting a job at some place and then learn something on the premises. And that was the beginning, yeah.

The first job, I think, I would say, was Disney, the Fantasia, and they wanted me to do a storyboard on the Chinese dance. What happened, that some… some of my friends are working at Disney and they knew my love for animation because it has something to do with the world of dancing, you know? So I did that kind of approach even to my drawing. Instead of having one drawing, I made maybe three or four drawings and actually, you know, it ends up, it looks like animation. But primarily it was because I was in love with movement, and because of that, it propelled me into animation. And… and so that was the beginning of drawing. But when they promoted me to Disney and Disney saw my drawings, they hired me to do the storyboard on the mushrooms… on the mushrooms. 'Course that led into a lot of trouble because, by that time, Disney was almost finished with Fantasia, about 85%. So they had a couple of things here and there like the Russian dance, the Chinese dance, the mushrooms, you know? Whatever that was. So I had some drawings, so they hired me to do a storyboard on the Chinese dance, which was the mushroom. The mushroom was drawn but the people who were working that time on that aspect of a film, they never saw ballet. They just never saw ballet and they worked at Disney on Fantasia and that was a problem for me, with them, because we talked two different languages - the ones who have seen and one who have not seen. But the ones who have not seen, run the shop on… on this segment of Fantasia. So when I got into that world, naturally there was a certain amount of animosity because these people have been together for all these months and months and months and here they bring in a new guy - was me, to do this, because they had problem with the mushrooms, to create really a kind of choreography that would enhance Fantasia. So that was the first in into that world, you know?

I'm talking to them and they saw my drawings and they hired me to do the storyboard on the mushrooms. So that was the beginning and that's how I got to Disney, through my friends. And all that would have been very nice but you see, when you're a late-comer then you're always an outsider, you see? And because they'd been there like months and months, you see? And so they almost resented me to be pulled into this unit and it turned out to be a little bit of an ugly situation at Disney, for me, with these people. They resented me. But the whole thing was that, well, they've been together all this time and the fact that they didn't… do a storyboard or dance number, you know, which was the mushrooms, you see. So anyway, I stayed with them till the end, so therefore I never got any credit. But at the same time, it was something fresh I never knew about. So it was good, on that level, it was good, you know? Because now I got really involved into animation and many aspects of animation, you see? So I think that there… then I went on Bambi and then I went on others, other story. But Bambi was the next big one. And then came the war at that time. So next you know, I was out in Culver City with the Air Force as a Motion Picture Unit in that Air Force.

I did enjoy the place, I didn't… not necessarily enjoy the people I was working immediately. Because I could see that they had very little respect or knowledge or whatever of their studies, of animation or the drawings, you know? And I also, I feel that they resented me because I came in so late, you know? And because they'd been together already, like maybe a year or so. And then that was an unpleasant situation that never got any better. So I was really working against a group of people that said, 'What the hell are you doing here?'

When Walt was in the studio, everybody high-walked, you know? It was all... I remember first time I bumped into him and I said, 'Mr Disney, how...' He said, 'No, it's Walt' .Well, that's nice, you know? 'Okay, Walt.' You know? But the point is that he lived, he ate, he drank, whatever else there is about animation, that was his gut. He was not even a real person, he was so involved with that... that world. Everything was a dream world, you know? Or his dream... his dream. And at the same time, he's still was a nice person, he had his friends, you know? But... but in as much as he was responsible of all those early, good films, you know, still he never really took that big credit: 'Film by Walt Disney'. It was always a film of whatever but never 'by Walt Disney', it was something else. And also the... the people that he... see, when he came into the room to look at the storyboard and stuff, and he had three or four people with him, and they were all head... heads of department. But none of them ever said anything, all the time that I was there and I experienced that when he came in with his entourage, the four others, you know, they just sat there, they never said anything. Or nor would they dare to say, 'No, Walt', you know? So and… and you have to realize that this man, Walt, he really lives that world.
And he also did a lot of... look into what this is all about. In other words, what is the movement about? What is all this about? That... that the Disney films, at that time, projected. But as the majority of the talent who came there, they were just talent but they didn't have this love or feeling for movement, of what film is about. But Walt did have, he looked into it, he looked into it, he was thinking about it, you know? And so he was able to help the new people who came into the studio. He never hurt them, physically. I… I don't mean physically. He never hurt them with a word, or 'you're stupid', you know? That didn't take place. He simply explained to that person what this scene is all about. And so... so he had that going and he know where he is going. The majority of talent was just people who'd picked up a piece of something and they worked on it something and they put it in a pot and eventually it was a feature. But... but while they were working on that little piece, whatever that was, Walt would eventually look at the material, it was a yes or no or how it can be better. So... so he was meanwhile teaching them. But that was very interesting because very few people realized what he was doing. He was teaching them. He didn't bawl them out, he didn't have any bad words or anything like that. But he was teaching them and they learned from him. And this is very important to understand, they learned from him. And... and although some of the people that he visited their... their work, he never got angry or ugly with words or anything like that. If he really didn't like the damn thing, then the whole damn thing came off the wall, put it in a box and put 'em away someplace and let's start the whole damn thing again, up from all over... from the very beginning. That was Walt.

And also, I got to know Walt a little better. Because I mentioned that some of the guys… anyway, there was a frog in the sequence and I wanted the frog not to be seen. I wanted the frog to be heard only. And Walt didn't agree with me and he said, 'But no, we must see the frog'. Well, that was his way. And don't fight him, don't go against him. If Walt wants it like that, he's going to get it. So anyway, after the meeting was over, some of these guys came around and they said, 'Oh no, Jules we're with you, we're… you should have'. I said, 'Forget that, you should have said something when you were already in there, not when Walt is gone. Now you're going to tell me about this stuff, you know? But why didn't you open your mouth when you were in there?' All I said to Walt, 'I think it should be just a sound'. And he didn't bite me or anything, he just said, 'No, I must see the frog'. You want to see the frog? You're going to see the frog. That was the characteristic of the studio, nobody would speak up and we were all afraid of him, you know? But that was okay, he knew what he was doing, where he was going, you know? But they really, really wanted to say no to Walt. So that was, I think, to a degree, it was mistake. Even if he would change, even if he would say no, but at least you'll put another idea in his head. Or another way of doing something, he wouldn't bite you, you know? What the hell's the matter with you? But that was the texture of the studio.

They had a department called the Design Department, they would invent the characters and design the characters and give us the animators - the animator would be working with that drawing. But primarily, he was almost like a teacher on the job, you know? And he would get unpleasant, but not a kind of unpleasant that would be ugly. It's only unpleasant [unclear] when everything that you've worked on for 4 months, would come off the wall and junk it. And that's that, we've got to start all over again. Now, some people could take that. Some had a problem. Some would go out after the session and get drunk because they worked on that damn thing for 4 months, you know? Heavy work and they meant well, come from their gut. Out. The whole damn thing out. And they end up at the bar, you know? And the next Monday or so, they start all over again from the beginning. But at the same time, even if they were not aware, Walt was teaching them, you know? And they learnt. And some bothered and some didn't because they couldn't take it. It was rough when you worked on something like months and months and then he just says, it doesn't work. Wow.

I looked at the man as somebody who had an enormous talent and that's very private talent, it's not spread around. But he had that. He didn't flaunt it. He never did that. It was simply, he explained why things don't work. And I listened to him, I heard him and he was right. Because he had a way of thinking and that wasn't your way of thinking, that was his private domain. And that domain, no-one could press or push or shove. And from that domain he was teaching you. You gained by his… when he looked at the ostriches, for instance, in that number and they were asleep, you know? They were all curled up. And slowly, they came up, you know? And it was so clumsy, so ugly, that he told them, 'How would you behave if you're asleep'? You know? You would put his head down, you would come out of that, you make a [sound]  with your mouth, you know? He went through a whole thing: what an ostrich can do, how he or she would behave, you know? How much you could get from it. So he was teaching them at the same time and he was not even aware that that's what he's doing. It wasn't just a question of helping. No, he was teaching them. They knew from nothing. They could draw, but when it comes to this aspect of it, which is timing, and put this other stuff out in front of the world, they didn't have the touch. What gave them that touch? So to a large degree he was teaching them. He was not aware that he was teaching them, but that's what he was doing, yeah.

Bambi, I primarily did color stuff. Although, naturally, there was other little story sections but the important thing was, the director who was working on Bambi, he was the head of the Color Unit and he saw my color stuff, what I did for the other people on… you know? And he said, 'Once you finished that, then come over'. But what happened was, and I'm with a lot of people and somebody says, 'Hey Jules, they put you on Bambi'. And I said, 'What do you mean, Bambi?' 'Bambi is a deer'. I said, 'Oh shit, I don't want to work on an animal'. I said, 'It's not my bag, I don't understand that world. Next thing you know, there's somebody who wants to see me. So some bastard, you know, went to that somebody and said that I'm very unhappy because I don't want to work on animals. See how they have these guys, would run to somebody to tell them that you're not a nice person, you know? Whatever that means. Anyway, so I went to see this guy and he said, 'We would like to try you on a sequence in Bambi because it probably has more of what you've done before'. So I said, 'Okay, I buy'. So I worked on that one sequence on Bambi where Bambi meets the girl for the first time, you know? And that was nothing but movement, that's why they put me on, because there was just a lot of movement. Bambi chasing her, she's chasing him and so that was something that they felt I could handle. And then, what really sold me on this whole deal, was the music. I heard a score that was written for this sequence, where Bambi meets Faline and all of a sudden, they come chasing, which was a pure abstraction, you know? There's a lot of movement. So that was a big change and so that was when I came in on Bambi. But when I came in on Bambi, I began to do some color sketches, you know, because the sketches they had on Bambi was too real, was too real. In that the deer, or color of a deer is a kind of, whatever that is. And I said, 'This doesn't have to be just that'. So I made them yellow, I made them purple, I made them pink and they were running and stuff in all this color. It worked. It gave Bambi that texture that they didn't have because everybody was staying too close to the real stuff. And so that's when Bambi came and I was on it like that. But it was a good experience, you know?

Primarily, primarily, my biggest involvement with Bambi was colors. Because everything that I saw on Bambi was painted like a natural, whatever. Natural, you know? And when I first brought in a pink or red or blue deers running, because they heard a shotgun go off. That was beautiful, it gave Bambi another dimension, another presence. And I brought those colors in. Funny thing here is that no-one touched those colors because they always went to the natural. What the hell? When you're doing an animated film, you're already not natural, you're on other terrain. And a director, the person whose art is actually on Bambi, liked that. So when he saw my pink and red deers running for life, for their life, he thought that was good. It was good because there was a large sense of danger there. And the danger was heavy and big and you have the guns going off, you heard the guns going off. You should emphasize, you should push, you should be more inventive. So when the deers turned into these colors, that was a beautiful moment in the film. But again, it's, where are you going to stop? Or where are you going to above yesterday or above what was normal? There's nothing normal about animated film, you know? It's all invention but it's good invention. But that goes for all of the arts, to a degree.

He was, he was an awesome talent. Ward Kimball was an awesome talent. An obnoxious somebody, unpleasant in many ways, but he was a large talent, a large, large talent. And a nice, he's still a nice person but I felt a talent as he was… and he was good. He still stayed at Disney, no matter how they pushed him around, you know? And instead of going someplace which, any door would be open for him, you know? No, he liked it there. And I had no right to say to him, 'Don't. Move'. But I couldn't do that because it was up to him, you know? But, that's again when you deal with the talent. And he was a large talent and a good person, good person. But I somehow always had this little, tiny grudge: 'Dammit, Ward, go someplace, where you can just run the whole shop, you know?' But no, no, he stayed there. Even, no matter how Walt was whacking around or kicking him around, you know? But that's his life and he had a good life, yeah.

Ward Kimball, Ward Kimball would be one. Frank Thomas would be one. In fact, Frank Thomas and his friend, next week are doing a session at the Los Angeles County Museum. They are The Ten Old Men [sic], they call it, whatever. And these two is still around. They produce all those Disney books, they are the ones responsible. But I think next week they are performing again at the County Museum so this is the last two of that ten, you see? And they get up on a stage and they do funny things. They're not funny, oh they're not funny, they don't have it. They have it with the pencil, they have it on the paper, they're superb animators. Superb and all this and all this and all this. But for years they've been doing this, when they get on the stage, because of who they are. And then they have a scene or something, you know? They're so bad, it's incredible. But they don't know. They've been doing it for years. They're good with the pencil and they're beautiful people, but they just don't have it. That something that you can make a move and it has meaning, you know? They try to do all that, you know? Oh but they're so clumsy and so oh… oh. But they keep doing, but how're you going to tell them stop. Why should they stop? They're 85 or 86 or something like that. And the best of Disney talent, you know, because of all the books that they published. But it's just one of those things - you either have body rhythm or you don't have body rhythm. And they don't have body rhythm. And they have never asked me, I would never say anything unpleasant to them. But they're doing it again next week, you know? And it's gonna be, The Los Angeles Country Museum is going to full, I'm sure it's going to be a sell-out, you know? But if they're happy, if they love it, I'm all for it, you know, no problem. I get behind you and say, you're special. So there you are, you can deal in one medium and you can have rhythm. And then you have this other end of it, you don't have rhythm. So that's just part of the mechanics of aesthetics. But it works both in pencil or it works with that instrument. Or it just, even if you pick up a mouth organ and go... You know? All that, functions, right or wrong. And they are beautiful people. They are huge and good people. But they're lousy when they act, you know? And they want to be funny, they're not funny. But yet again, you know? One of those things.

Everything was good because now the union came in and all that was taken care of so it was a healthier situation because we people were working there 24 hours straight, 20 hours straight because they had to get a film out, you know? They'd been compensated, whereas before no way, no way. Either you want the job or you walk, yeah.
[Q] Were you involved in the strike in Disney? 
I was involved in a way but I was outside. And if anybody asked me, 'Jules, what should I do?' Say, 'You married, you have children - go in'. I didn't say that too loud, I didn't want that everybody would've heard me. But that was my honest feeling, if you have kids. I can stay out, I have no problems, I have no wife, I'm not married, no nothing. I can be out there and fight for you. But you have three kids, if want to go in, you go in. That was my feeling about the strike. But because 8 weeks is a hell of a long time for people who have family and no income, you know?

I stayed for a while and I think that's when the war came. And then there was the numbers in the newspaper, and you had a number and you looked in the newspaper and sure enough, you had all those numbers, all the people going tomorrow. And so mine, all of a sudden, I find my numbers and then I had to go downtown, you know? There was a very strange situation going on here because, in the first place, I wore glasses, you know? And the second thing, I had a bad shoulder that gave me trouble. So eventually they decided, these people, that they're not going to take me in the army. No way, not fit with the glasses and with a bad shoulder, you know? I can't move the damn shoulder. But then the office was almost closed. This woman was cleaning the place, I'm the only one in the joint, they don't want to take me but I had to join because all my friends, my God, how would I face them, you know? So they finally, okay, they're going to take me because the Air Force already asked for me because they were looking for animators. So because they know I'm not going to go overseas, they're going to stay put here and so they took me. So that was the big move.
[Q] And so you joined the army?
That's how I became in the Air Force, in the Air Force. Yeah.

They had a lot of, firstly there was a lot of maps. Map drawing - awful, you know? Because the planes are flying and you know, you had to have maps for them. That was one thing. The other thing was simply that the structure inside the guns changed. It got better and better and better. So we had to make drawings for this other unit, who could take those drawings and make the changes inside... inside the machine. But there was a… one very funny thing happened. I was doing these maps, you know, about this long and this deep and all that stuff, and I was second, I was not an officer, I was like a second-in-command, whatever it was. Anyway, so one day, there was people were coming from a very high… hierarchy and they were all majors or generals or what not. So they came up to the room where I was working with a friend of mine on the maps, you know? And it was very funny. This one lieutenant looks at my drawings and he says, 'Hey, looks like little Kandinskys'. Well, he knew art, that's for sure. And that funny part of it was that I know I was doing it like that because if you look down from high above, the whole thing becomes an abstraction, you know? Really. So this guy, this lieutenant says, it looks like an abstraction, you know? And they thought it was beautiful drawings. But I know what I was doing but I wasn't going to tell him that, 'Yes, you're right because…' you know? Well, that is one of those incidents, you know, when you're art. In a good position.

So you see, I was, I was drawing the Kandinskys and, at least there was one major or whatever he was, at least he had some idea that when he looks at shapes he doesn't just, 'Who-o-o', you know? What the hell it is? He really, at the moment he saw it he said, 'Kandinsky', you know? So that made me feel good, although I know why I was doing it, because when you're up there, 20,000 feet and you look down, believe me, everything is abstraction. But I think also somehow that aspect of viewing something from way above and become something else, I think that probably propelled me, to a degree, of looking at, as it is. Okay, this can be art. So, to a degree, it's possible that initially that thing in me, to look at that drawings from above, become an abstraction. And maybe there's a lot more of that. Or maybe there's a lot more of that without me going up there or all those other problems. So that drawing of abstraction, it came but it also came because it, to me, a drawing often have a lot of sense of movement without moving but then again, when that fellow took me to downtown Chicago and I saw painting, I mean, I saw movement for the first time. I've never seen movement like that, you know. That, plus the environment that they were moving about, was a painting by itself. And so, if I can just take that outside the theatre, you know? And I can then look with something very special, but I have not had the opportunity to see that kind of art, you know? I don't know why. I should have gone to downtown Chicago Art Institute, but that was too damn far to go. And I wasn't that hi-ho, at that time, on that. But later, later it happened that I could see there's an art form. And then I started to work like that and it came naturally and I remember, even Evanston high school, where everybody had to go out, two hours drawing the nature, you know? And I told the art teacher that, you know, 'I'm really not interested drawing nature'. She was, I don't understand, I don't understand, after all these years, why she listened to me. She said, 'No, you just stay in a room and do that. Everybody out'. You know? And that was the first time that somebody saw something I did and said, 'Okay, you do that and just stay put'. So I think she was a very bright teacher to work at that. So everybody was out and I was drawing my abstractions. To that, to a degree, that was the beginning of something. Came from the movement, from the art, in the world of ballet. And then when I started to really put things down on paper, they were squares or circles or lines and stuff like that. And for her to say, 'You stay here and do that. Everybody out', you know? So that, to a degree, was the beginning of something that dealt with the abstract world of painting and drawing. And from that moment in time, it was a natural thing for me, you know?  And even like drawing the mushrooms, they are shapes, they are objects, but they move. So again, it works. It's not that far from the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo, to a Chinese dance at Disney, you know? Because I propelled it into that situation.

I was transferred over to the motion picture unit of the airforce.  And it was one of those things where you land there and who walks by you but Ronald Reagan?  Who's now, he's only a second lieutenant, he's a nothing, but it's the place, that's it, and the way he moves his hand, you know.  Whereas I came from six, four weeks with an army, which makes a big difference, how you salute. But that was a whole other world, that unit.  Because everybody knows everybody and now they're in the army.  And now you're in the army and you're, let's see, a major.  Whereas, if you reverse it, at the studio, he was not the major, he was the janitor.  So you could you use that, whether you were a major or whether you were a first lieutenant because you had to go back into the studio when it's all over. And if you're going to use rank, push it around, you're going to have a little problem.  Because the people will say, remember him when we were in the army?  And he was such a shit, you know, and all that and all that.  And now we're going to tell him to go to hell.  I mean, it was there and it was very obvious because there was only one person, who I was aware, who was in this particular animation unit but he was not from Hollywood.  I don't know where he came from but he was second lieutenant.  Whereas the person who was the head of the department, he was a major, harmonising.  He was the head of the department.  Harmonising was a studio.  And he was a nice person and he was a major.  Now, a major, that's pretty big, you know. And we were with him before.  We knew him well, so there was no problem, you know.  But if people use the rank, that was stupid.  In fact, they always helped each other.  I remember we were lined up one morning because they were checking us.  And the head of the department and he would take notes.  And this guy said my hair in the back was too long.  And he said, sir, he's doing a film.  But hell, he was lying, I wasn't doing a film.  But you see, he took my name down in front of this man because this man didn't know me but he knew where I was.  So when the damn thing was over, I ran behind to the barbershop, I told them to cut it, clean me up.  Because he said, after he took my name, he said, please come and see me after the church.  So I went back and I sat down and I waited for him and I finally went to see him.  And he looks at me and says, I don't know what the hell he sees in you, you're hair is ok..  But that was Cal Arts.  That was Culver City and the Motion Picture Unit. And the first time that the army had a unit that dealt with flying.  They never had that before.  And that was all Hollywood.  And from that, you had to do night duty.  They put a belt on you with the revolvers, you know.  And they said, but don't touch it.  But you still have to have a revolver here, you see.  But when he put it on me and I went like that and then he said, oh, don't touch that, you know.  So it's 11 o'clock at night, now you are there at the front door and the guy comes right through, he doesn't stop.  I'm there.  He doesn't stop, he just drives right through the damn thing.  And I know who he was.  I said, I'm going to get that bastard after this war is over.  And sure enough, I met him about a month later.  I said, do you remember you drove through that morning?  He said, oh, you were there?  I said, yeah, I was there, I was the one that wanted to shoot you.  But that was Beverley Hills and Hollywood and stuff like that.

There were people who were flying all over Europe. But that's one thing which, I was in animation, so naturally, we had little of that aspect of it. But we had a captain and he was sort of gung-ho a little bit and he was a flyer, he's a pro. And he would [unclear], he says, 'You want to fly? You want to experience flying to people'? 'Yeah, sure'. So he took them off, he covered them over with plastic and then he does the loops and this poor bastard, you know, he didn't expect it to do loops, so he came down as sick as a dog. But the guy who was a captain, he was part of us, you know, animation, and he just did that to most of the people who wanted to go up for the ride. And he came to me - 'No thank you. No, thank you'. I knew what he was doing, he took you up and then, wow. While he was having fun, but meanwhile you were getting sick as a dog because he was doing that. But that world was, if I was in another army, it would have been a different… different experience. Here, you were at home, really. That was comfortable. And they were really, as ugly as war is and all that, but some people were really just already in the hierachy, they were bigger than the numbers, they were really nice. Nobody ever used… Remember the film where there was a little short guy? He was a big actor in Hollywood. He wasn't more than 5' 9”, 5' 11”, 5' 10”. And he was walking around with a stick with a nail at the bottom and picking up cigarette butts and he was a big actor. And he did one film, he was on a horse, he was going some place and then he gets in this bar, there was two guys, two sailors, you know? And he was short, he was a little guy and they began to push him around and his horse was outside, you know? And he was just taking that for a while. And then he got to the point where they were really pushing him around a little bit and then he let one go, wham. And that was beautifully done, he hits this guy and I mean, he lands it, and this guy just rolls and rolls, slides right through the damn bar and everything. And then he just walks out quietly, sits on his horse and drives away. Famous film. And he was married to a very important Hollywood actress and he was... But there he was, you see, he's picking up bits and butts and I'm upstairs drawing and having fun, you know? And he was a million dollar actor. And yet no one would tell him, 'Hey, you left a butt over there'. Forget it, he just went by picking up cigarette butts. But it was a joke, you know, to a degree.

After Bambi, there was something of - not Pinocchio, not - it came into another area of very popular folk art, folk art. And then after that, I just had it, you know? And also by that time, there were certain things me and my friends were beginning to push, to go for that studio of our own. And that's when Mr Magoo came about. Gerald McBoing Boing, Frankie and Johnny, all those films, came now from this organization. There's about four of us. We were after the job at Universal, we know it was open, it was there. So the idea was, we had to do three films, we got paid for it, you know? And if we can deliver three films on time, we got a contract with Universal - with the studio. So the important thing was, not the content but whether we can deliver on time. Now, we can still deliver on time with crap, it would be still okay. But if we delivered a day or two days later and we had a masterpiece, it was not okay. Because they didn't want it better and they didn't give a damn. You see, it was: make sure that we can deliver on time. So that's when we had UPA [United Productions of America] and that started a whole new world of animation. And it was very interesting because Walt - not Walt, but Ward Kimball, now here comes Ward Kimball. He loved the stuff we did at UPA, you know? And he ran to Walt and all those people. 'Lets do it like that'. And Walt says, 'No way, that's not me, that's them'. We had a studio right next door to the smoke house, and he says, 'That's to them, next to the river'. You know, he was talking about us. Oh, and also, he told long-hairs - that's with those long-hairs by the river, you know. But Walt was honest. You see, they wanted to draw like UPA. Walt is, 'What the hell you talking about? That's not me, that's them.'

The names that we walked into was John Hubley, [Herbert] Herb Klynn, [William] Bill Hurtz and myself. We were the group that around us - because I took care of background, Bill Hurtz took care of the layout, Herb Klynn took care of the whole studio. And the place was owned by [Stephen] Steve Bosustow. Steve Bosustow owned UPA [United Productions of America]. In other words, that means that when UPA came about, he bought more stocks from the previous owners. So Steve Bosustow became the president of UPA. And that was a sad story but we're not gonna dwell on that because we had 15 years of magic. We had the whole damn world at our bag. People from Europe were coming, and all that stuff because they've never seen anything like that in animation, you know? Like what we were putting on the air. But the studio - Universal did not like the stuff. They only wanted Magoos, Mr Magoo, that's the only thing they wanted. But the contract was such that we could do three films a year, anything we wanted to do, anything. So that's where Gerald McBoing Boing, Madeleine, Frankie and Johnny came. But that stopped eventually because the hierarchy of the studio could not take anything, it can only look at the Mr Magoo. I mean, that's Hollywood, that was strictly Hollywood. And Hollywood meantality that only [Mr] Magoo could satisfy their needs. But if you did something like Alvin the Chipmunks - not Alvin and the Chipmunks, but Madeleine and Frankie and Johnny, Unicorn in the Garden, those are masterpieces. And they're still running. And people buying them and running them.

The difference was immediate. The immediacy came through right at the very beginning when you saw the drawings. When you saw the colors, that was way-out. I mean, there was nothing like that ever in a commercial animation on that level. But primarily there's two things, but then again, when you think of story like Unicorn in the Garden, I mean, it's a beautiful story. You take Madeleine, you have a beautiful story. So it's funny but those things, to us, was normal. But to the majority of animation studios, that was not normal, that was so far-out that they just couldn't understand. The weirdest thing happened. We just finished Gerald McBoing Boing, we'd just finished it and we had a preview at Burbank, a Saturday night preview. We asked them if we could run a 6-minute short. And they said, 'Oh, why not?' So here we are, with Gerald… Gerald McBoing Boing, we give them the film. Saturday night, Burbank jammed, the house is full, jammed. They're running the film - it was as quiet as this moment here. During the film, and after the film. You heard it, silence, that's the way the film ended. It was a disaster. It was a disaster. So we were all in the lobby and we we're saying, 'What went wrong? What is wrong?' I mean, silence like that, even on the film was… and it's Saturday night, the place is jammed. Three months later, weeks later, we have a preview in New York, it blew the house. It blew the top of the roof of that place. People stood up, people applauded. Life magazine came out with three or four color pages. Time magazine came out with color pages, which they'd never done before. The difference was if you want something really good, don't go to Burbank. You've got to go to New York, change the whole aspect of what animation was about, what we're all about. But the difference, you see, when you're in Burbank and if you worked to that mentality, that's one thing. But New York is another thing. And believe me, the silence was deafening. During the show, and after the show. We just stood there, you know what I mean? You have no idea what happened. What happened? But it changed when it went to New York, that's a big difference. They bought that over there, they didn't buy it here. So that put us into a position where, then, things just happened and just came our way. And still we had other films like that but Columbia still didn't like it, all they wanted was Mr Magoo.

I think Gerald McBoing Boing is very important. You know, it's interesting, sometime you have a feeling. Now, I did the design, the color, because that was my job, you know? And I know when I did that, and please don't misunderstand me, I knew that we have something big here. I knew, I knew that. And I did the design, color and all that. And this was one of those things. You just knew. That's why the problem at the movie house was such a shock of the place is full with people and nothing, I mean nothing, you know? How can that be? So what that turn out to be? How can that be? We have to go to New York when you have something special. You see, not, not Burbank. What's the other little cities around Burbank, you know, and that crowd. So this was a shocker, you know. And at the same, it's funny, went to New York and pow! And then we had other, Madeline, I went by some store in Beverly Hills and I saw this book in a window, Madeline. I went in and I asked for a book and I bought the book and I said, 'Oh my God, this is perfect for us'. You see, when you're in a position like that, that you can do almost anything and then you go around and look around, here's Madeline, I mean, that's a massive piece. So I go back home and I tell Steve Basustow, Steve, we have to buy this, we have to make this film. You know, Madeline? So we did it, took whatever it needs to be done. And I'm at some Hollywood party and this lady says to me, 'You know what? I saw the most beautiful French film'. I knew, when she said, French film, I knew what she's talking about but I didn't let on, I didn't let on. I said, 'Oh really? What was the name of the film?' 'Oh Madeline, Madeline'. Oh, and I said to her, but nicely, I said, 'Lady, you know, it wasn't done in France, it was done in Burbank'. You know, I did that on purpose. I put Burbank on the map, you know? And she said, 'Oh really?' Oh, and another thing went weird because people would come to the box office and they would ask, 'When does Madeline goes on'? Now, that just killed 'em. They coming to the window asking for the 6-minute film, not the feature, a 6-minute film, when is Madeline goes on? So then people go and bought the tickets, saw Madeline and left and they walked out. But they wanted to see Madeline. So you see, you can do a film in a popular presence and go big and Madeline was. And then there was another one I saw. Damn, I always have a problem with the title of this film. I was somewhere in some store and they had those give-aways, you know, those little throw-away magazines. And there was a terrific story about, oh, it's called a Jaywalker. There was a terrific little story in there called The Jaywalker in this throw-away. And again, I went back home, I talked to Steve, I said, 'We have to buy this story'. And we paid something like $500 for Jaywalker. Beautiful story. It's about a guy who does that, you know? And eventually he gets wings because he's overdone it too often and now he's going up there, someplace in heaven. And so these things were possible at UPA [United Productions of America] for us. Other studios would have a leader and all this crap, you know? But at UPA we just worked things out. I said, 'Okay, that's a good, we should do that'. And it's a beautiful film, Jaywalker, great film. The problem was Bo, [Robert] Bobo Cannon who is really the great director and character animator and Bobo Cannon, he was special. He was the director on this film. And I don't know why but Bobo had so much problem with the film. He kept saying, he was almost quitting and I had to go and talk to him like a father, you know? 'Bob, no, you're doing great'. Finally we finished the film. It's a beautiful film. So actually, we did some incredibly beautiful things. We improved, we brought up animation into a much higher level, what that art can be. Because… Edgar Allan Poe, Tale of Hearts…
[Q] Tell-tale Heart.
Tell-tale Heart, yeah, that's a beautiful thing, incredibly beautiful. I run that for my students. I always run, during one time a year, a UPA program. And you'd be surprised how many students, they don't know that I worked there but in other departments, they're still chasing those UPA films. And they come and tell you, 'These are beautiful films'. They think it was done yesterday. I said, 'No, no, it was done 30 years ago'. 'Thirty years ago?' 'Yes, 30 years ago.' The quality of those films is timeless, it's timeless. They don't show time, you know?

The other interesting thing about UPA [United Productions of America] was the way we were [unclear] and worked with the animator, although you were not an animator. Let's say you were a story man, but you just walk up to your animator and he would ask you, because you're in the story, what would be a nice way to go, a good way to go? We had a kind of a relationship to each other, which had nothing to do with job. Either I was a lay-out man or a background artist because I used color or [Herbert] Herb Klynn did overall lay-out, [Robert] Bobo Cannon was the director. But we didn't have those walls. If I saw something that Bobo was doing and I said, 'Hey, Bob, I have an idea' and I'd tell him the idea and even if it was the last minute before the film was even, Bob then go and change things and make it work. But it's very rare, it's very rare. But the four or five guys that I mentioned, we could talk to each other. It had nothing to do with how much you make or how much I make. It was, 'Hey, I have an idea'. Boom. And then you make that work. And that doesn't exist, you know, in most places because you have always got, this is your position, that's your position. But I think when a studio gets bigger, it's difficult to maintain that kind of activities. When it's small, like UPA was, UPA was maybe 110 to 112 people, that's not a big number. And so… But we knew each other, even if we're not there. And there's a relationship between you and the next man, if you can work together, you know? And you know he's good, he knows I'm okay, we know him is okay, you know? But the talent was good, the talent was good. Because when you see [unclear] this one with guy who sees the giraffe in the park - outside the yard. What was that? And then he goes and tell his wife, there's an animal on the garden. Funny, I can't think of it, it's a famous story. There's an animal in the garden and she says, 'You're a booby, I'm going to call the hospital to pick you up'. And when the hospital comes, they're picking her up, you know? And I saw just the other day, I have a print or two prints of that and you look at it today, all this time later, and they're beautiful. They are absolutely incredible films. And time didn't hurt them at all, and that's magic. When time doesn't destroy you, then you have something special. And these films are just about that, they're just beautiful… beautiful. It's a beautiful art piece.

Oh, the difference between Disney and UPA [United Productions of America] is that, at Disney, Walt was the last word. In other words, Walt said, yes or no. At UPA there was no second thing. Although those four or five names that I've mentioned, they were all good, all good. But if I walked into the room and I saw something, and I would say to Bob, 'Hey, you know Bob, if it was a little bigger, maybe it's better'. And Bobo would look at it and we'd talk like that. Most of the studios, you can't do that. With Walt, Walt knew. I mean, you just had to take it for granted, he knew. And if you went against Walt, heavy. That was not a healthy situation. But he really, from the bottom of his heart, or whatever you want to call it, Walt knew. He was just... he knew. And maybe because he spent more time at thinking about things, which I think is a biggie. Because often they come at 08:30 in the morning and go at 17:00, and that was it. With Walt, he would be stewing about things, he would look at books, he's got tons of books. They went to Europe, they came back, I can't remember what was the feature, they came back, I would say about 50 or 60 books they came back with, they bought. And that was the material they would be looking at and use it. And no studios would do that, to build really a library , you know, like that. But at UPA, we were able to open the streets to you or to anybody else who was on the premises, if you wanted a change. And you went and you said, 'Hey, this would be better if it was red'. 'Why would it be better?' 'Because red would show better'... yak, yak, yak. 'Okay, do it red, you know, if you feel like it, let's go with red.' And very few places would allow you that. Now, the director at Disney, who was the director on Bambi, and I came in with pink, red, yellow, purple coloured deers running. Well, none of them would do it or even dare to do it. But there was a shooting and the deers were running like hell and I thought a lot of colour would be better. And luckily, the guy who's art director, 'Okay, that's good, go ahead'. And so we had the red deers or purple deers. But the situation called for it because of circumstances, you know, the gun fight, the hearing the gun. So they were running, so anything that you can move things, move the content of an idea, that's good. Especially when you're dealing with animation, which is magic anyway, you know? So you don't have to knock yourself out and stay with what you see... you see? No, I don't see. I see purple. How come you see purple? I only see red. Well, purple is better. Okay, we go with purple. That's UPA, you know? And that's very rare, when you have an organization where they trust each other. And that's beautiful, that's beautiful. But when it comes to Walt, you have to give this man the credit that he never really got. He never really got the credit. Those films should have been directed by Walt Disney because that's the way it was. And the poor bastard, he never got that credit. I wanted to give him that credit, but I was in no position to do that. But he was somebody who really loved what he was doing and that's important. He loved what he was doing. He wasn't worrying about 17:00 or 17:30, I've got to run to get to the car, you know? He loved what he was doing and eventually he just got... he needed other avenue, and so that became a Disney Park. In other words, I think he gave everything he had and now he had to find another something, you know, which is fresh and new. And that's what happened.

Disney did incredibly beautiful stuff and well done, but then came UPA, where even the Disney people, the faculty... not the faculty, the people who work at Disney, the top animators, telling Walt, 'Hey, look at UPA, why don't we go that way'? And Walt says, 'No way, that's them'. And at that time he called us the 'long-hairs' because everybody had a little more hair then than usual. He called them the 'long-hairs by the river'. But UPA opened a whole new world. When their faculty... when their people wanted to do UPA at Disney, now you know that you've made an impact, enormous impact on the industry in total, yeah. And of course, you take a man like Ward Kimball, but he tells Walt, 'Hey, over there, look what they're doing, why don't we'? They did one - Toot, Whistle, Plunk and Boom. Hey, isn't that incredible? How the hell I can remember that? And that was Ward Kimball's film. And Walt said, I was sitting next to Ward at the academy, and he was swearing because if that film would not win awards, Walt would never speak to him again. Luckily, the film won the best award ever for animation. But Ward knew better. Forget Walt, forget UPA, you know, just do what Walt is so damn good at doing. You know? So that's where we ended up.

You know, you know, forget the comment earlier about... whereas here in America, the direction of Disney was huge but I think it got even bigger. I think it was even bigger than Europe, because they are more aware of that aspect of it. Here, we are more aware of what happens. Over there, in Europe, it's also why it happens, how come it happens? Where are we going to go with this now? Now that we got stuck with this situation. We are we going to go? They go deeper into that aspect of it, which is, which is good. Which is something which has got little bit more rewards. But we're more involved on the surface and we somehow stop there. And so when UPA came about with this stuff, it was like a fresh air just blown into the, into the whole industry. And all it took is four or five people. But what it also took, it took a studio... they said, 'Okay, give me [Mr] Magoo and then I don't give a damn what else you want to do, but you can do four other films. Because I want you to deliver so many films a year'. So, so many film a year meant we'd do four for them and then even if we only can do two a year, but then we're going to do something very special. And we did it very special and therefore it's still there. It's still there.

Steve Bosustow's son, yeah, he's going to do a film on people who work in the studio. Yeah, he talked to me about a month ago. So finally, finally, which I've been pushing for a long time, to get a book out or something on Bobo Cannon. He's the man who really was responsible for all those films and nobody knows about him. Of course, to a degree, he was... Bobo Cannon his name, he was so... bashful. Bashful is the wrong word. But what happened is Los Angeles Times is going to come out and do a big article on Bobo Cannon because of the films. But anyway, here they're coming with all the equipment, big equipment and all that stuff and… but Bobo Cannon is missing. Where the hell is he? I know where he is. So I go outside the street and I look down this one street, the restaurant is on this street, this was the street, there is Bobo, he's running, he's running away. He's running away. I caught up with him, I said, 'Bob, the paper is here, the people are waiting for you, you've got to talk to them'. Sure enough, I took him back and this is what happened: 'No. Yup. Maybe. No.' And they stopped, they turned around and they walked out. That was the big spread of Bobo Cannon. You see what I mean what kind of person he was? That was a problem. And he never got that much in the press but I think things are happening now. I think they're probably going to have something on him, you know, in a book or a magazine or a large article in an animation magazine. Yeah, an animation magazine I was talking to and they're probably going to do an article on Bobo Cannon. No one knows him, everybody knows Chuck Jones. I mean that's just ridiculous, you know? But because Chuck Jones wanted to get that aspect of it, he wanted to get that aspect of it, you know? Bob never saw that end of it. He never saw it for that. He just did something, was something that he loved to do. And that's just beautiful you know, I mean, there's nothing better, you know?
[Q] Did you know Chuck Jones and do you like the work that he did? 
Well, no, he's good, he's good. No, I don't like him. I don't want to hurt him. You know, he's good, he's good, but... Bobo is... Bobo Cannon had this quality that Chuck never had. Chuck is loud and noisy whereas Bob is just the opposite. When you're looking at those films, like Madeline or Frankie and Johnny, Unicorn in the Garden, you know? I think he did 13 films in the time while we were in business at UPA. And also he was a wonderful human being, you know? There was nothing about him that… I want that, you know. But that's all yesterday.

What happened with Mr Magoo - that I had an idea and I think most of us had an idea, or some of the most of us. The famous American actor, Mr - you know, with the big nose-
[Q] WC Fields.
WC Field. I had that all about Magoo to be. And he was WC Field, short-sighted, you know, and a stick and even the voice. So when we came upon him, when we had our first film done and we were looking for voice talent, when we heard him, that was it, you don't have to go any further, that was it. And it turned out to be special, it was just perfect, it was just beautiful. And we had a happy life with Mr Magoo. Although WC Field was very unhappy. In fact, there was a very huge article in the paper at one time, he hated the idea that people would stop him on the street, 'Hey, Mr Magoo!' You know, he was so angry that he talked against it in the paper. That, you know, he's a fine actor and done all these things his life and now he's ending up with Mr Magoo. But eventually he stopped doing that, eventually he stopped doing that, of complaining, because he was doing extremely well financially, it was a big income for him. And for whatever reason, he slowed down and accepted that that's him. And that was a sad moment because it was the Los Angeles Times, this huge article about him crying out that, 'I've spent all these years to build myself as a fine actor and now, here I am a piece of paper, Mr Magoo, he's not real', you know? So that was the heavy story and a sad story because he could have just… do it, you know? It's a good job, it's a funny job. But he hated when people pointed to him and referring to Mr Magoo. Well, that you run into and he was very sensitive about that. I don't blame the man, I think maybe it was right for him. But it was so vicious, so big as a spit from him, it was so big. It was hurting everybody. But somehow he cooled it, he stopped. But we were just plain lucky because we were looking for the voice and I think it was the fifth or the sixth person that was trying out for the voice and he was about the fifth or sixth and he got the job immediately. And that's what we needed, we needed that, and he was just perfect for it, yeah. And we could fly with him.

And so we sailed on for 15 years, practically, when things were going down, down, quite a bit down. Then, because everybody was turning out such bad things, that almost all the contracts were not renewed. So there we were sitting without a contract, although we still had pretty good stuff but not as good as we did at the beginning. But we were enormously lucky because we didn't have a new contract and what happened, the building we were in, we were paid like $3500 a month rent or something like. And all of a sudden, we had no income. And then some people came, they wanted the building. My God, they wanted that building, it was a three-story building in Burbank and naturally we sold immediately. That took us off, we owed like a couple of thousand dollars. So we were on the street, but we were free and we didn't owe any money to anybody. So that was a good thing, you know. But we did extremely well, you know, because Mr Magoo still can be picked up by some studio and do well. But Universal, that we dealt with, they didn't like the films. They didn't like... regardless of it, there was the Unicorn in the Garden or Madeline, they didn't like it. All they liked was [Mr] Magoo. But we had a contract with them and the contract was such that there's nothing they can do about unless they change… just close the studio, let us go, fire everybody. And that's what more or less came about, came to. But by that time we had another deal, we had another deal. Now this is going to the pits, from all the things we have. Alvin and the Chipmunks. Well, what happened that there was a chance to get Alvin and the Chipmunks and we got it to a friend, a good friend, who was working behind the scene. And so we signed a deal and we were off on Alvin and the Chipmunks. And the good thing about Alvin and the Chipmunks was that we had a deal with Ross Bagdasarian. He owned the property, you see? And so what happened, we made a deal with him, which he did not know business. We had 25% in perpetuity. The 25%, whatever it takes comes, we got 25% from each deal. Now that was tremendous, tremendous. I mean, not only we had a job, we had to do 25, 24, half-an-hour show but what 21-, 25% perpetuity, beside of our pay, that we got. So that was a goodie. So that lasted for a couple of years. Then he died, his son took over and that was a mess. But still, even till five years ago, I was still receiving a couple of thousand dollar because they sold a portion of it always to somewhere, somebody. So that was our way to the end.

The ending was that we knew we were - something happened. After 13 or 14 years, something happens. I think maybe you've just given everything you have and nothing works. Or whatever is there, it's just not good enough. And it was one of those things where you, like a boxer who can't lift his hands anymore, you know, because it's getting heavier and heavier. To a degree, I think that also happened to us, that no matter what, it wasn't that good anymore. It just wasn't good. So the only thing that happened that eventually we looked for another place to go where we can maybe start all over again, what we did. And that was Alvin and the Chipmunks. Now, how the hell? I mean, from that high to go to Alvin and the Chipmunks, what? But that's an income, you know? Now we have a studio and we have 24 to half an hour to do and maybe something will come out. But things just didn't happen. And although we had 240 Popeye's to do at the beginning, 240 Pop - each 3 minutes long. So some portion of what went to New Zealand, people who were working in New Zealand, and I went to London. I had to do maybe a half-a-dozen films with the crew in Hollis Batchelor's studio. So that was in two places, Australia and London and then at home here. And after we finished that, that was sort of a - after that, nothing happened, so we closed the, closed the shop. They still owe me some money. But then let's not forget that some people are not with us anymore. That's a biggie. But it just - there were so many bad films were made at that time. So many bad, short cartoons were made at other studios that they didn't trust you anymore and so it just disappeared. It disappeared, you know? And we all found another job, or whatever, to do. But it just disappeared into, into a nothing. And we were lucky, like I mentioned earlier, that somebody wanted this building and so they bought the building. The rent, what we owed, they took over and then we all walked out and - friends. Of course you stay friends but that was it, yeah.

Somebody told him [Jacques Tati] that I was in Paris. Because, you know, I was from UPA, that was big, that was big, and Mr Magoo and all that stuff. And so they called me - and the interesting thing was, when I went over to his studio and I walked into the place, I didn't recognize him because he was tall. He was 6' 4”, 6' 5” tall, but he had so much weight on him and very exquisite clothes. Beautiful clothes, beautiful but you know, just excellent- it didn't look like Tati because he had to lose 40 pounds or more to do his next film, you know? Because you would - and I couldn't believe when I walked in there and I finally met him, he didn't look like Tati because he had about 40, 50 pounds extra on him. But when he was ready for shoot, then he was back to his yesterday and he lost the… all that weight. I don't know how the hell he did that but he... But anyway, you see, he had never had any actors. He maybe had one actor in all those films. So what happened… and next to his studio there was a… whatever it was. And they had windows, sometimes very low, the windows, you know? So Tati was coming to the studio and there's a girl was sitting, sitting on the - you know, when the thing goes up, you can sit there. So this girl is sitting there and cleaning the windows, okay? And Tati goes by it and he looks at this girl, this woman and, 'Will you please come and see me?' My God, she became the leading lady of his new film which ran for 2 hours. And she's the lead! She's the lead! And Tati just walked by, and she'd never acted before, nothing, she's washing the windows. And Tati goes by and sees her, invites her, next thing you know, she's on her way to make-up and everything. She's a lead. But you see, that can happen over there. It could never, never happen here. And I don't think if she - I don't know whether she did any other film, but that was a 2-hour film, a big film. I think that was Tati's… Tati's last film, I think so. But he was a wonderful person. And he was - he said to me, because he was on a, on a bicycle. He said, 'Look, if my friend's sick, I get on my bike and I go over there and I visit. If I'm sick, he gets on his bike, he comes and visits. Simple as that. Simple as that'. A bicycle, back and forth, you know? That was Tati. But to lose 50 pounds - or 40 pounds, like that, how he did it, I don't know. Because the next time I saw him, he was Tati, you know? It's one of those nicer events out of Paris.

Course, I never get a dime for my film. They make deals with you and they buy you and they sell you and when it comes to: oh you're going to get some money out of the situation? Forget it. Because they always have two books. One for you, one for them, you know? And this has been my experience with that world. Beautiful world, beautiful world, don't misunderstand me. But when it comes to the money, it's a question of which book is yours and which is theirs. Because in yours you're always losing money on a deal, you know? That's Paris, you know?

The interesting was that he's been working on that idea, on that film - this was his last film - for a couple of years, the script. And finally, his associate, his director or person who makes the show and the event, you know, possible, he finally said to Tati, 'Tati, tomorrow or else, I'm quitting', you know? And next day, by God, he showed up with his crew and Tati had no choice now, he had to go out and start a film. But this guy, who was his right arm, he was the guy who got the money for the film and he would come to Hollywood. But Tati did not owe anybody any money. In other words... I don't know how those things are made but the associate, you know, came back with money from Hollywood. What they had to give back, I don't know. But the money was there, and so they moved. But he was a fun person, an interesting person. But always odd a little bit. A little bit odd, you know? Doing funny little moves and stuff like that. Yeah.

The interesting thing about that world, that when you're doing you... no one asked me, 'Have you ever done anything like that?' They don't ask those things. 'You want to do a film? Okay, we do a film. You want to paint? We're going to paint', you know? Here it's different because here they ask you, 'What have you done?' You see, I was involved with a play... what is the name of this play where this kid goes on a war… very famous French literature...?
[Q] Le Petit Prince?
Is what?
[Q] Le Petit Prince
Le Petit Prince, yeah. So here we are, going to do the [Le] Petit Prince. And this guy who was going to be on the stage is from Belgium, fluent French, fluent French and he teaches school in Belgium and he teaches school at Paris and then he eventually became the head of the French Cinémathéque, was the head of that, yeah. And the interesting thing, we did that film, I mean, we did that play, Le Petit Prince. And again, it's one of those things, we did it, we ran for a month, you know, I didn't get a dime. I didn't get a dime out of it. I don't know what the leading man got because it's only the two of us, you know? But he was on the stage constantly, but I did all the artwork because it's a lot of animation in the film, in the story. So I did all that, you know, and more. And we worked... when the rehearsal, we worked whether I would tell him, 'Go a little faster, go a little slower', and stuff like that. But you can't do that here. No way. I mean, here was a guy, does a lead and I'm working with him and no one ask me, 'Have I done anything like that before'? You know? Just, 'You want to do it? Well, let's do it'. That's the beauty of it. The only other problem is, who's going to take the money home and who's not going to take anything home? That's just one of those things. But that's French, that's French, whatever that is, you know? But it's more in fun. It's fun, you know? You're doing something. And it's very interesting because a guy who did the lead, a very fine actor, and they wanted him for a lead of a particular play, I forget. He turned it down. He turned it down. And it would have been thousands of dollars for him because it played for three years in Paris. And he turned it down, he didn't like it. And it was a good play, a good play. It was something about that didn't fit his personality, he said, 'No thank you'. And the guy comes in and next thing he's offered three years in Paris on the stage with that play. A famous play, a very famous play, yeah. But these are the characteristic. And then you, when you go into that world, you have to be a little bit aware that you're not in Los Angeles or you're not in New York. This is, this is France. This is Europe. But this is French, this is French. And if you're comfortable, it's fun and you have a good time. But don't expect them to function or behave like we do here. It's not the same thing. They make an appointment with you at 10:30, you're lucky if they show up at 12:00. I mean… And they don't say, 'I'm sorry'. No excuses, you know? No nothing because they show up an hour and-a-half later. And that's, again, the texture there, you know? You have to buy that, you have to accept that and... So we lived there for three years and it was fun, but eventually I had to get the hell out of Paris. Because it's not today, it's yesterday. The lifestyle, the thinking, the buying, the selling, it's yesterday. It's not today. But you enjoy the place because it's special, it's beautiful, it's magical but I prefer New York today, what the world is, not Paris. Yes, Paris is beautiful, don't misunderstand me, but the texture is in New York, what today's about.

But that was one of those damn weird things. You know, on Vine Street there was an open… open stall with fruit and furniture… fruit and everything on, you know?
[Q] The Farmer's Market?
Yup, yeah… was on the street. Across from it was a place where Man Ray and Julie [Juliet Browner] was hanging out. And Max Ernst, Max Ernst was there. And this one day... I mean, drinking was normal, you know? Or Soulima ... Soulima [Stravinsky], that's the son of [Igor] Stravinsky. He was a biggie, he was a very good pianist. But he and Julie, Julie, the wife of Man Ray, you know? They got together and next you know, they were so drunk, they didn't know what the hell they were doing. The one thing with Man, he never drank, Man Ray, you know? He just stood in a corner and he looked and watched, you know? And he was there and he didn't try stop these two fools of doing what they were doing because he could have hurt her, you know? But they had a helluva lot of fun. And for me that was another world, that I knew about them but I've never been with them or around them that close, you know? So that was an interesting… Then when I got to Paris, I got with Man Ray often and Julie, we used to go out on Sundays, we would take a trip and just walk around. And the thing is that I still feel about that, what a stupid thing, for me, at that time, not to take any photos. Not to take any photos of Man Ray and Julie and all those people. And now I always tell my students, if I have anybody coming in to Cal Art [California Institute of the Arts] and they come into an office or place, 'Make sure you take a picture. I don't give a damn, just take a picture and then put it away because 20 years later, that will come so handy when you're working on a book or something'. And the reason I'm still strong on that, because I didn't take a picture of anybody. I didn't think like that. Until it dawned on me, 'Oh my God! You know what you have? You have all these people around you and you don't take a photo of them'. I took a photo of chairs because they looked interesting, but I never took a photo of the people.

Man… Man was at that time in Paris, you know, he was just somebody who was so quiet and gentle but at the same time he did… in a dialogue that we had… that if somebody's talking about the fine art, contemporary art, whatever, and they don't know what the hell they're talking about and then I go and I whack him hard. That's come from Man Ray, but I'll take care of the bastard, you know? And stuff like that. But he was a sweet man. Sweet. The problem with Judy… Julie, the wife. But if there was any liquor in the neighborhood, that liquor would be demolished because Julie would take care of it. Then she got so damn drunk that we had to carry her, you know? Man Ray never touched liquor, he never touched liquor. And he never screamed at her or he never scolded her, you know, when all of a sudden, we realized that she's getting pretty drunk, you know? Then we put a stop to get the liquor from her. But otherwise she was a nice person. But with Man [Ray], he was just there and he was with you. And yet at that time he wasn't selling but they still made some living and I think they had some people also help them make a living because Man didn't sell but he had a nice studio in the heart of Paris. So all that was good but there was no income, you know? But they had enough friends that, to a degree, the friends took care of Man Ray and Julie. So… so they had a friend down here in Malibu, a very good friend. So when Julie came out here she always stayed with them. And then they wanted me to take her to some parties. Well, no, no way. I'm not going to take her to a party, she's going to get drunk on me, then what the hell I gonna do? But she was a nice person and a smart person, a tiny person and a very elegant person, but once the liquor got going, then that was the end of Julie, you know? But I never heard Man Ray that he would scold her or say something, you know? He never, he never did that, he just let her run as she felt like it. So anyway, then they moved out here and then they passed away.
So Julie was out here, stayed with her friends. And so then they called me to take her to a party. I said, 'No way'. As much as I like her, just for the sake of Man, you know? Because if she gets drunk on me, I have a big problem, you know? And no thank you. And I think she was a little bit aware of that and resented that aspect of it. But that's life, you know? So that's Julie. Great people. They were very special but very poor, very poor. He didn't have that kind of accolades. After Man Ray died, he was selling like crazy, he was selling like crazy. And, you know, all of a sudden people say, 'Oh'!

I, I bought a Man Ray in… way before the... I was in New York with my friends and I always went to galleries, you know? And sure enough, I came out of the apartment on 83rd, make a left and there's a street - I don't know the name. Anyway, there was a terrific thing on the wall and I looked at it and, my God, it's a beautiful Man Ray print! It's a print, a litho. And I didn't want to let on because I had no idea if they are aware. At that time, this place had a lot of good stuff. It was a nothing of a place but they had terrific stuff. So I spotted this Man Ray on the wall. Now how do I going to get to it without giving this guy up? [Sic] So I asked, 'Oh yeah, what is this thing?' You know, like that? 'How much is that'? 'Eight hundred'. But I must have been mistaken because I expected him to say 25,000. But, you see, nobody saw this Man Ray. So I said, 'I think I'd like to take this'. So he takes the damn thing off the wall, I tell you, how long it's been there, and the New Yorkers never spotted. But when he took it off the wall, the frame fell apart. And behind the picture there's a much lighter wall than there's around. So it gives you some idea how long that painting's been on the wall and this is smart New York and nobody spots the goddamn thing. It's a Man Ray, you know, a beautiful print. Anyway, he takes it off the wall and it comes apart. I was afraid that they're going to say, 'Why don't I fix that for you?' No, all I wanted to do... I gave the check and get the hell out of that place before he knows what he's got, you know? Because my friends were just living around the corner and I stayed with them. So anyway, that's a Man Ray and I still have it.

I was influenced by him [Man Ray] as a person. Naturally, I knew his work because things were printed. But he didn't have the kind of presence that the presence became so big after he died. Because my friends had a painting by Man Ray, I think it was a gift to them. It was about four... it was about this long, of lips, of lips. That was just red lips on... this high, the painting, this long. So lips in the sky, you know, sky? Now, you see, they had that painting for a long time and they would have get maybe $3500 for it or something. When Man Ray died, that thing went to $40,000. And the poor bastard, all his life he never had $40,000. They were really, at times were starving, you know, if not for the friends who kept them going. But maybe there's a price on it, up there. And then three books came out on Man Ray and stuff like that. But you see how sad that is... all his life he has nothing. The minute he died, he became... well he would have been a wealthy man if he stayed alive. He would sell like that, you see? So... and he was a sweet person, sweet person. No fights, no problems. But say something stupid about contemporary art or something, then he'll get... he'll get to you heavy. So that's Man Ray a sweet person, you know? And Julie the drunk. That's a combination!

Well Carnival I was in... we moved to Paris with the two little girls and the two French poodles and all that. And I always wanted to do a film using Siné's cartoons. I always wanted to do that. So now I'm here at the right place. And I met one… one person who was also from America. So there was some contact, you know? And then… then what happened, I went to Siné [Maurice Sinet] I had a certain amount of money. And I said to him, 'I want to buy... give me eight gags', and I gave him so much money. So he give me eight gags that I bought. And then when I found out, a couple of days later, I could have gone to London and get those things for nothing. Because in Paris the same gag belonged to somebody from Paris but in London, the same gag, you know, by somebody else. So they stole from each other. So I could have gone to London and get it for nothing, you know? It was published, you know? But anyway, then I went to Siné and I was so surprised, he's a little guy, little guy. Very gentle, quiet. And yet, you know, when he had an exhibit in Paris, the doors were closed, you had to knock on the door and then you can go in and see the exhibits because they were so wild, so ugly, so over-sexed, you know? All that stuff, that the police wanted them to have the door closed. But if I knocked on the door and they looked out and I'm an adult, they would let me in and see the exhibit. But that was also the presence of Siné, you know, with his gags. And they're funny, they're good stuff. So the whole thing was that he give me eight gags, you know? I gave him like $200. Then I find out that I could have opened up the magazine and get it for nothing. But it's no big deal. The big deal was, I met Siné, you know? That was, that was good. And then I met somebody else who animated... So anyway, I put the film together. And so I remember the first time I saw the film at some event and the French were so happy because they finally felt that they have a funny cartoon, you know, that really belongs to Paris. And they didn't ever realize that belongs to me, you know? But the problem was, they wanted it to be French, you see? So forget Jules Engel. No big deal, I wasn't pushing that, you know? And the film was done and… and I was very lucky to bump into people that were so nice and kind and helped me. Because it was easy to buy a gag, it was easy to find somebody to animate but still the film had to be put together, you need to go to a place where you can use the machinery, you know? I met somebody else and they owned a good studio in Paris and so they let me use their equipment for editing and also for music and stuff like that. But all the time, you always run into problems. You know, the man who let me use his studio and use his place where I can edit, you know, he wanted credit as a producer. Now what the fuck are you talking about? I mean… And he was a nice person, you know, but... he wants a credit like that. I mean, no way. So you always had something that you had to jump over, you know what I mean? And then so then I need some more money... But Paris is funny. I went to somebody to ask him if he could loan money in order that I would have him own part of the film. Well, he gave me about 1500 or something, a Frenchman who hardly knew me, except from my past background, you know? And I left Paris, I never saw him again and he never chased me because he was so wealthy, that even the 1500 or 1800 he gave me, for a portion of the film, when it's finished, he never asked for that, or... you know what I mean? It was never a problem. But at the same time, it had a texture that we wouldn't have it in this country. A total stranger walks in and then you walk out with $1800, we'd never met before. I mean... what does he...? I mean, I could have left Paris and come back to LA and that would have been it. But that was the texture, that was the texture of that and still is, probably. You know, that's the texture. But because I had this huge reputation because of UPA [United Productions of America], that opened other doors. And then eventually you meet some people, they become your friends and stuff and you just carry on.

Carnival was something I wanted to do all my life, I guess because of the gags, of funny, funny, silly cartoons. Then I started to do like what Bill just mentioned… no sound... that is like the first film and then after that, everything was rolling. Because there was animation which I knew, I can put them together quickly. Then when I got a job at Cal Arts and I have all the equipment. All I needed was a camera, you know? And I had everything here and that was easy. From then one, it was just easy. And I wanted to do those films. I think I've done about 30, maybe. Yeah. About 10 or 12 is what I generally use if I have a showing, you know?

Well, that was a lot of problem, an enormous amount of problems. Not… the problem wasn't making it, the problem was, dear friends, how do I going to get my hands on a 35 [mm] print? Once I have my hands on a 35 [mm] print, how I going to get it out of Europe, you know? So that was a biggie. The biggest thing was, the fellow that I worked with, even that's a lot of credit I have just given him right now, he was not going to give me a print. You know, when we started, he was a young guy, he was in his very early 20s and he was going to take the total credit. He'd never made a film before and this thing came from the mayor of the village of Coaraze. And he wanted a film to be made on that because the poets came there every there, as a gathering. And they would be sleeping on the street, you know, and all that. So we finished the film and it was an incredible hit in Paris, it won an award and every damn thing. But, but he wouldn't give me a print. Now, our situation was that he can have the thing in Paris, in Europe around, wherever… and I can run it in America. But no, he wouldn't give me a print. Then he would tell me, 'Next week I'll give you a print'. But next week came and no print. And one day I'm having lunch with him and he has a call that the print was ready for him to be picked up. I heard that, finished the lunch, took a taxi, went to the place where the thing's being done, I paid for the film, I told the cab to wait for me. As I'm going out with this 35 [mm] print in my bag, he's coming in to pick it up. The cab was there for me and I paid for the print, so that was correct, you see? And I ran, I got home and I gave my film to the neighbor. I told him to take this print and just hold it because I didn't know what where the consequences. So then he called me the next day, he wants to pick up the print. And I says, 'Oh my God, you know what happened? I left it in the cab'. And I said to him, 'I'm going to phone the cab station to see if they find a print'. He said, 'Oh no, don't do that. They don't want to do anything like that we go to the police'. He said, 'No don't do it, don't do it, we'll find the print. Or you have the print?' I say, 'No, I don't have the print'. 'What did you take out?' 'Oh, that was my work'. So that lasted for a couple of weeks, of him chasing me, he wants the print back. But I wouldn't let him because he was ugly to me 'cause the whole idea was: I go home with a print, he goes home with a print. So anyway, then finally we left Paris. But before we left Paris, I took this 35 print and put it in a box and a lot of stuff around it, cloth and everything. And I went over to an American agency and they would take things from you because you were American and they would ship it. So I gave them the thing wrapped up in all those clothes and we came to back home and a week later, came the big box. I opened the damn box and there's my 35 print. You have no idea what a horrible month-and-a-half I dealt with, with this guy who was like 21. I'm making the film and I put his name on it and then he still wanted other credits. I gave him all the credits he wanted because I assumed that I have a 35 print, you know? But I would never have got the 35 print once the film got all this awards and accolades, you know? That was the end of it. But… Anyway, then some years later, I went back to Paris and I walked around his apartment. And he was married, had a kid - had a couple of kids. I was hoping to run into him on the street, that's why I went where he lived. I was hoping that he was going to meet me and ask me about, you know, whatever. This never, never, never happened. But that... it was one of those moments when you really go to hell, physically, you're hurting because of what he's doing to you. He's laughing at you. And he's not going to give me a print. There's no way he's going to give me a print. Because he had all this accolade, why should he give me a print? So, that was Coaraze.

The first animation that I ever made?
[Q] Yeah.
Oh, that should be an easy one but it's not going to be very easy. The first one I made, I think I did it without sound. And that is one of those things, that was the easiest way of doing something but the sound would be a problem. So there was no sound in our first film. Although it was very interesting because Bill [William] Moritz, at that time, had a showing at the Chinese Theater, for whatever reason and of all the films I had, he picked that one, without the sound. Which I wasn't really happy about. But Bill is Bill, you know? So we ride with him.
[Q] Okay.

I met him… no I met him [Herbert Klynn] in the army, in the Air Force. Because he was not involved with the army but he was involved because he had to come to Los Angeles and be part of that aspect where they would be doing the graphics for the… for the Air Force. And so, the interesting thing with Herb was that he came from, I think Chicago or one of those places, and he always had a hat on, a very elegant hat. And it was out of character with the rest of California. But he turned out to be a big, you know, a big asset, big talent.

I think the next film was Icarus Montgolfier Wright. Because that was still, it was done in the industry but it was totally mine. And it was very interesting with Herb [Herbert Klynn] because Herb and I, you know, were very close and all that. And he knew it all, you know? So he was away when I did the film and that was a good thing that he wasn't around because then he would have been getting in my way. So when he came back from his trip, he'd been in London, he wanted to see the film. And he saw the film and he couldn't move a frame. He couldn't take out a frame, he couldn't put a frame in the damn thing and I think that I surprised the hell out of him because he was a little bit too heavy on 'I know it all', you see? And although we were dear friends, I mean, he was like my brother, or whatever. But he was pushing, he was pushing me in a direction that I was not happy with. But I liked him and we've been together all those years. So this brought us more... But it was one of those damn things when the father wants to see what the son is doing and the son is doing so well that the father say, 'Oh shit, what the...? He's good, you know? But he couldn't change a frame. It must have hurted him for years. As good friends as we were, still, he was the father.
 

Making films came much later. It came into the 70s, into '75, around there, when I first made my film. I always painted, you know? But making a film, that was something else. And I think the first film came around '75. So since then I did about 35 films, yeah. And while I was living in Paris I did live action. But here I haven't… no I haven't done anything here in the city, of live action. Everything I've done, live action, was in Europe. And there's something about the circumstances were such, that I did live action when I was over there. And they had one award, that's a very substantial award, a Jean Vigo Award, I think, that I won in Europe as a live action film. Yeah. Actually, I did it for somebody else over there. But, you see, if they knew that I was working on the film, they would be disqualified. So, although I worked with this guy - a young guy - and everything had to be on his name because that award will only be given to a French citizen - I think it's called a Jean Vigo award, you know? It's about as big as the Oscars here. Yeah. But… And also, there's something about that world. Some place will push you to certain direction. Paris was more… was into what I would call live action films. Here it's more towards animation. I don't know why but… or painting here. Over there it was more for… more for film and because the texture was more propelled that way in Europe, you know? And also, it was much easier to do a live action film in... in Paris. With talent - no problem, lab - no problem, you know. I did one - what's his name, this tall actor, that actor- that very funny man- the French actor? Tati. Yeah. He was a wonderful person. Yeah, I did one film that he bought from me because all day, you know, when they have their feature, they should have a short with the feature. So he wanted me to do a short for him or if I had anything halfway finished, he would like to take it on and run it with his feature. Which he did. Yeah.

I think in '74, '75, my own films, yeah. And I think you mentioned that one of the dog running, that was - it's called what? 
[Q] Accident.
Accident. Why don't I remember that? Accident.  Ja, that was... that would have been right, the first film. And I did it in a building here downstairs. They had a lousy camera that Disney gave away, an animation camera, but it was perfect for me because you could stop it, you can move it, you can push it, kick it, nothing would hurt it. And that's where I did Accident, on that machine. So to a degree, it also tells people that it isn't always the equipment, you know, don't blame the equipment, you know? Because I couldn't have less equipment then, doing that particular film. And then I think the next one was Train Landscape. Have you seen Train Landscape? I mean, that was a second film and again, working on that bad machine, you know? But I was shooting for the first time, just shooting footage, you know? And then I figured I'm going to put it together as I feel it should work, you know? So I did shot a lot of stuff and some of it was... you know, when you do it like that so you're free, you know, and you're not locked in. The only way, then sometimes things can happen, and good things happen. But you have to have whatever it takes to judge, to understand, to feel, you know, what you're looking at and how it's going to work the best. Yeah, I think the second was... the film had a lot of problems because the footage was huge or small and for me was to cut it into one piece, and it turned out to be a good one. But I don't recommend that to a lot of people because it takes a certain amount of experience that you had, you know, with film and then you can play. You can play, you know? When I use the word 'play' I don't mean like you go out there and play in the sandbox, but I mean, still you're playing, you know what I mean? You're not dealing with murder scene, you're not dealing with anything like that. So, have fun doing that, you know? I'm lucky because both those films are beautiful films, well done, good sound, you know, stuff like that.

I knew Oskar [Fischinger] well. Oh no, no, we were friends. You see, I met Oskar at Disney, when nothing was going for him. And at that time I have some, maybe a half a dozen 8 x 10 inch, whatever I was doing. And he was so nice about it, he's, 'Oh, I must show it to so-and-so and so-and-so'. He was already running for me, you know, that he wants to more or less show my work to people. But Oskar was very, very, very special. Just a comment on Oskar, we used to... he wanted to go to see exhibits, you know? So, because we may know each other, and so-on. So he puts on his dark suit and his dark hat and his white shirt and we go out to the galleries on this particular days. And the interesting thing was, he wanted to go early because if he goes early, then he can go around in the gallery and say 'Shit, shit, shit, shit'. Oskar was deadly against anything that was not abstraction. I mean, just deadly set against it. And then so, as long as we were that early, you know, he could do this piece of athletics, you know, by saying that. And then he finally got through them, we'd just sit in a corner and watch the people, you know, come by and stuff like that. But he was so special because he never overwhelmed you and yet when he died, you know, then I understand he had 500 canvasses. You know how many 500 canvasses... how much that is? That's a helluva lot of canvasses that he painted. And I only saw him always what he was working on at the moment, you know? But he was a gentle person and apparently in Germany they have a place for his work, you know? So that's a good thing. But I just wanted to get on this way he was behaving when he... That's why he wanted to go that early because if there were other people there, he couldn't just say that. They might think there's something wrong with him. But he was a warm, friendly human being. And at that time, the missus only lived in the kitchen. From the kitchen to the dining table, and back to the kitchen. That was her life. And it was very interesting, you know, that eventually she became a real driver. And Bill [William] Moritz was driving all over Europe, you know, and taking her from place to place. And she kept pushing and moving. And she did a good job for Oskar, after it was all up to her. Yeah. And Bill was always there, Bill Moritz was very big on the scene because Bill really helped her function right in that world, you know? And also, what Oskar was… I think Oskar was... if he saw somebody do something like abstraction, like from my work, I mean he immediately took to that person because that was his world, you know? He didn't have a bad bone in his body or criticized you to destroy you, you know? No, no. Oskar was a real human being with a good heart.
 

Well, when I first saw Fischinger, that was, you know? I mean, I've never seen anything like that before. And it was just overwhelming. It doesn't mean that it's going to overwhelm everybody but it overwhelmed me because I just have never seen anything like that. And it was something that was just part of you but it sometimes takes an… some incident or something that brings certain things out of you. Or even incidents and such that they change you. But I mean good incidents… that brings a big change in your thinking. And with Oskar, I think, that came over to me, seeing his work and looking at your work you find a quality in that, where naturally he enjoys himself when he does that. I don't think I have to worry about that. But… but Oskar would see good anything that was abstract. And if it wasn't, then comes the other words, you know? That was sort of fun… go with him, yeah.

Train Landscape, I think that was the third, third film. But what I did with Train Landscape... because at that time, that was the first time that I'm making film. I just... I took some aerials and I shot, just shot it. I shot maybe 5 foot, 8 foot, 10 foot, 11, you know? I was, I was just shooting for footage. Then once I had the footage, then I began to look at the footage and I began to edit, you know, put 'em together. And that's the way... And I was lucky because it works, it works beautifully. Beautiful sound score, it's great. But primarily, at that time, I was just shooting a certain amount of footage and then I know I'm going to edit. And by editing, at that time, I'm going to put the film together, you know? And… and it worked. It worked. And then it got easier to go that way, you know? But I never storyboarded anything. No. I just had a… I started with the one drawing and I move with the drawing, one drawing and that develops, that develops, develops... and next thing you know, you really… you really go and you're moving. And you… But don't forget, by that time, I had at least 15, 18 years of experience with UPA [United Productions of America] and Disney and all of that. So… so it was not like you never done it, only that you never did a film. You see? But at least with all that experience, you knew how to edit. Edit is the wrong word, because that gets to the hierarchy. No, it is making a film, you know, and not worrying about… What is an edit, you know? I don't know what's an edit.

It's good to do the other which... when you deal with a lot of people. And then also it's good that you deal just with yourself. And naturally... but UPA [United Productions of America] as well it was very special because although I run the shop in that end of it, you see, but at the same time, because I'm like making my own film. I'm not making at UPA, I'm not making for Warner Brothers, I'm doing this portion of it and that portion of it is going to be me. That's why I always wanted that aspect of it at UPA. Let me handle the color, you know, because I know that's a biggie. The color is big. So naturally for me, that's a total artwork, it's like making my own film, you see? So that's the big difference. It's how much freedom you have and not have somebody come around and say, 'Hey, that's red, it should have been purple'. You know? 'It's red, it should have been green'. You know? And he runs the studio. I can't argue with him, 'No this is better', because I've got to keep my job. Or he takes such a dislike of me that he never speaks to me again. So when you work in the studio - unless UPA, which was almost abnormal the way it was put together and it was like you were walking into your own kitchen, you know? And that's the way it was. And that's rare because, at Disney, if Walt came in with his entourage and they look at a section of Bambi, I mean, he could change everything. And you're either going to shut up or if you don't, you can maybe lose the job next day, you… you know? But the big difference is that you need the one where you are totally yours, you're totally yours. Because you can spend a lifetime working on other films, for other people but there's nothing really yours, you know? And that's sometimes difficult, especially when it comes to doing a feature film. I mean, that's... now you're dealing with money, now you're dealing with something else, which has nothing to do with talent, to a degree, you know? But naturally, if you do a 3-minute film or a 5-minute film... even a 10-minute film, you can do it on your own, you don't need anybody's help. And that's good, you know? If you can manage that, this is all yours, you know? And that's when you put your head on the table, it will be chopped off.

People can say all kinds of things but it either comes out of your gut or if it doesn't, then it's a problem. And I heard people who've been doing people, landscapes and then they say, 'I changed over to abstraction'. No, you can't do that. It has to be there, you know? And it's there from the very beginning. And when people say, 'I changed over to abstraction'... Like somebody, I knew somebody who did it recently because he couldn't sell the portraits, stuff like that. So now he's painting abstractions. It doesn't work that way, because there's nothing you can do about it, if the person wants to make the change, they make the change. But it is something that's just there and you don't have to reach out for it, it's just there. Because I remember when I did my first, so-called abstracts, small pieces, you know? And I had no desire to draw people. That is a problem with the universities. You go there and then you have a class, you have to go and draw the figures, the figures standing up there. It didn't… it just never appealed to me, that's about the second thing, I had enough of that and then I stopped doing that. But no one told you what to do and what not to do. It's something that comes from whatever experience. And that experience with me goes back to high school, you know? So it's either there or it's not there. What happens, as you grow older, it gets refined, it gets better, it has more arms, it has more legs, whatever, you know, it's in motion... the work is in motion, yeah. But it would be very difficult to say, I did that because I saw this. And that... no, it wasn't anything that you saw or anything that you ate, it just… it just comes and there it is, you know?

It is beautiful, I mean, that that UPA [United Productions of America] a large presence. And again, you see, this is what's so weird about it, is where did that came from? I could say many things, but none of them would be really right. It just came and when I looked at other art works, naturally, the early Kandinsky's or looking at Kandinsky's, mostly Mondrian, was very simple but all primary colors, it's not… it's no big deal. But Kandinsky's was very... lot of complex, lot of problems and a lot of action on the canvas. And he was working with color. And you're aware of that. But not where you want to copy a Kandinsky or anything like that. But it turns you around, you know, in a way that you have no choice. And when you've made those turns, you know, it comes naturally. It doesn't come with... you're not forcing anything, it just comes naturally. I really don't have any way of talking about color because something horrendous happened that changed it all. It just came slowly and it was there all the time and then it's just a question for putting it on the paper. You see it but... Some people have a color sense and some people don't have any color sense, they just don't. It's like you either have body rhythm or you don't have body rhythm, it's the same thing with color, you know? And just recently a very dear friend of mine, very good animator and idea... you know, all that stuff is good. But everything is black and white, everything he was drawing, because he had problem with color. Now, what are you going to tell the man? How do you change that? I had one book and I had it for a long time. Pages after pages of colors and combinations of colors, so before he went back to Germany, I gave him that book. Because he could go… If he can make himself look into the damn thing and when he does his work, look into that book and find colors and say, this with that or you know... then he can, I think he can improve. But, to a large extent, you either have a color sense or you don't have a color sense. And you can work at it and work at it and get better. But it's like rhythm, you either have rhythm or you don't have rhythm. And color is the same thing. But with color you can borrow, you can borrow from other paintings. You look at other paintings and say, 'Oh, look at the color stuff, this is good, I can use that'. You can do that. Maybe with that you can grow, you can grow. But don't think it's going to come out of you if it's not already there. If it's not already there, then go for the books and look at this painter's work. Paul Klee is good. Paul Klee is, oh my God, he's a terrific colorist. And borrow, borrow, borrow.

Women have better color sense than men. Women, yeah, because of the way they buy clothes and buy the kerchief and something to carry things in and a hat, there's a lot of little bits and pieces. And some… you can see that some women will have that color working, you can see, to use maybe three or four colors, whatever shapes, you know, working. And then you see the others, it's so sad, they're just bad, you know? And then they don't have a friend who tell them, 'Hey, that's not good, that color doesn't resemble good', you know? 'Change that color.' But you can learn about color and you can learn about what to put next to one color, to another. But there's some people who never achieve anything because they just don't have that. So they stay with etchings, you know, black and white, stuff like that. And that's how they act. There's not a damn thing you can do about it unless they run with books and keep looking at and keep borrowing. And then you can eventually begin to add up what works and what doesn't work, you know?

I never have that difference because I'm painting or because I… it's going to be animation. I don't have…  I don't work it like that. For me, I just do it like I did whatever I was doing yesterday and I'm doing something today. But the color is going to come and move out and function as I think it will function because I want it to go that way, you know? But no rules. And no such a thing as this is the only way, you know? No, no way. No thank you.

That happens often and then I just put it aside. Just put that aside. No, that happens a lot. And the interesting thing is, when you put it away and don't try to solve it, because it should have been just happening, then you pick it up again and you look at it and you say, 'Oh for Christ sake, what was the problem? I don't see any problem, it just needs a little yellow'. You know? Then I'm putting it together. Simple as that. And you'll be surprised, often you come back on a painting and you see. How come I missed that? How come I didn't know what colour I need? It happened some years ago with a fairly large painting at the County Museum, the year-end show. And I had a fairly large painting there and a portion of it was a problem. And then I walked into the museum of painting and I come up to this painting that I have not seen for 2, 3months, you know. And I looked at it, I said, oh my God, I know what's the problem, I just want to take this damn thing off the wall, take it home and make the change. But you see, it took that time to be away from it, and then when you saw it, fresh, boom, there it was. It was no problem. You know exactly what was wrong with the continuity of the painting and all you wanted to do is just to get it home and open it up and make the change. But that's, that's painting, you know? That's just part of it, part of it.

I, I prefer paper, paper. If you're going to do something in oil, it should be at least 40 by 50 inch, you know, of consequence. But in general, I work on paper and that's big enough. I've… I've done a lot of painting, 40 by 60 inches, you know, stuff like that. But I just don't do that, I stay around 10 to 15 inches, 20 inches, you know? Or that stuff I showed you now, in the… stuff… You know? And it's more fun because all I need is a kitchen table. That's all, once I have a kitchen table, I can put something down, I'm off and running. Yeah. But no more 60 inches for… 40. I had oil exhibits 60 inches. Or Acrylic, you know, oil. Yeah. But of course it's fun to have a large painting and it's good. It's very exciting. But the small ones that I've showed you, they're exciting also and they work well. And I can do it in a kitchen, I don't need a… a studio, you know? It's always... I don't know why some painters have to go down to a studio... it's not going to make them a better painter, you know. Because if a kitchen is big enough to eat in, cook or whatever, it's big enough to do a masterpiece on the... you know.

Everything that you see, it's on paper, all the films you have seen, yeah. But when you deal with animation, you know, then you're working on a much bigger level because although everything is 2 inches, 3 inches, but you project it on a screen and it's 85 inches, you know, big on a screen. So you can work the 2-inch object. But when it's up on a screen, if it's a film, that's the other kind of huge presence. And then the color also works a little different than if you're looking at a canvas which is 2 foot, 3 foot, you know? I don't mind. But… but to work on for a film, it's fun. Because you can get some incredible images and also because you're in motion, this is something very special. And I enjoy animation because when it's up on the screen, you can't tell whether it's this big or that big, you know? So that's just part of staying with an art form and this art form would be animation in motion, you know?

Sometime you have a problem. The guy who did the sound on Accident, he did an incredibly beautiful sound… sound score. So I had something for him a little later and I trusted him so much that I even sent him all the money for whatever I'm going to pay for the thing. Well, when I get the stuff back from him, it was so bad. It was so horrible. It was incredible how anyone can be that bad after doing like Accident. He had to be drunk or some damn thing when he was doing that. Because I showed that to some people at the studio here and they said, 'Why don't you ask for your money back'? And I said, 'Oh no, hell with that'. No, I don't want to do that because I don't want to get him on me, you know? And when you deal with film, you will run into people that are a problem, they are problem. And you have to understand that and you have to run with that or play with that. But that's part of making your film, you know?

Oh the sound, the sound, the sound, the sound. Generally what I do when something is finished, I call some of my three friends and I say, 'I have a film for you'. I don't tell them anything, what they should do, or should not do. I trust them implicitly, they've done films for me and in general, 98% of time that I get back, will be 100%. I also had composers where the film came back with the sound and just didn't work. Absolutely just didn't work. And then, all I can do, apologize, 'I'm sorry, but I can't use this stuff', you know? I generally pay at least 50% for them to even doing as much work on it as they needed. And then I give them some money, you know? In other words, I don't run away from them. But… but in general, I don't want to do anything about music unless I'm very specific what I want. In other words, what I want… I want him to give me something. Like what they did on Landscape... no the dog running... Accident. I just… I just told them, 'Just do whatever you want to do'. I didn't tell them anything because I was hoping, I always hope when I give it to one of the composers, that they do something that I would never think of. Because in Accident I had something about dogs running and barking, you know, woof, woof, you know? But no... there was a sound there, there was terrific sound score. I never, never could have think of that, no. And so I like to, if I have two or three composers, I give the film and I say, 'Just run with it'. And in that case, because I know their work. In that case, I mean, nine out of ten, it will be 100%. But I don't like to think about it but at the same time, I want it to be right but without me… to tell him what he should be doing. No, don't tell him what he should be doing, let him do what he wants to do and then bring it to you and you say, yes or no. But if you're that anxious that you have to… you must do that, that I think is wrong. No, let him do his part of that, you know? Don't be such an ass. Don't be an ass, you know?

Oh, live action is fun. I mean, that's a, that's a piece of cake. Now, I'm not talking features, you know? I don't want to give the wrong impression. I stop at 12, 14, 15 minutes about a film, you know? Like the one Paul Jenkins film, Coaraze? I did about 14 live action films. They all get awards and stuff like that. But live action is… when you go to live action from animation, it's so beautiful because whaa! You don't have 150 drawings in front of you. Now you have to go with 150 drawings and put a dot here, you know what I mean? In other words, it's a lot of work. With live action, if you have a good camera, you know, or a good cameraman and you go out, either on your own or with him. All the films I made, I had somebody shooting, I didn't shoot any of that stuff on live action, no. I was in Paris had a guy do a score for me. It was horrible. Then I went to another one in Paris and he did a beautiful score… score for me.

Oh! The Paul Jenkins film, that's color, that's all color. But then I was shooting a painter, you know? Huge painting, 40 by 50 inches, 80 inches, 90 inches, you know? Canvasses and the way he was moving about. So that was color. All the other stuff is... I like black-and-white films, you know? Especially the kind of content that I had, like in Coaraze. You don't need any color there, it's there. It's really black and white. But you're right, yeah, there's a couple of others, they're all black-and-white. I think I like black and white when you deal with sculpture. Because sculpture is generally... they're not exhibiting colors, they're exhibiting shapes, you know? So that's the way to go, you know? But Paul Jenkins, that's color, that's all color. But when you deal with animation, when you deal with paper to paper, number one to, this is 50, this is 150, this is 200... and then you go out and shoot a live action. That's, that's fun. That's, that's really fun because you don't have 200 drawings that you have to go back on to put on the line, each piece of paper, so it's good. It's just like breathing very fresh air, when you deal with live action. Because one shot of a live action can be magic. In animation, one shot of piece of white paper, is no magic, in no way, but one shot in black and white, you know, and whatever shoot, it can be a massive piece of imagery.

I start with one image and then that moves. In other words, the one image is enough for me, that I know where I'm going. Because other people would do a storyboard. But hell, I don't need the storyboard, you know? I just... I have an idea, start with an image, I just move right through the whole film, from beginning to end and there's no edit, no nothing. But don't forget, I've had a number of years in… on… working on animated films. So when you get to me, I had a certain amount of background, it wasn't anything. Except the first one... this one film, you know, the funny film with the character? I always wanted to do a Siné film and it's funny.

It's just that you have an idea. You, you simply just have an idea and you do it. So it isn't a question of coming back or not coming back. I have something over a year and a half, halfway in, halfway in and I'm having a problem of taking it up and... take it from the middle and finish the damn thing. Yeah. Because it's there but it's not finished. But some of these things are… are normal or an instinct, you know? And sometimes it comes a little later, sometimes it's there right away. But I had enough experience in the, in the medium, that timing was something that makes the film, for me, it makes the film.

That is the big problem with people because they always feel they're tired. You know? I have this student, you know, I think he's in his early 20's, you know? He's out now for a couple of years. And I call him and I say, 'What have you been doing? Have you done anything new?' What do I get back? 'Jules, you know, I'm five days at the studio and I'm tired'. But hell, at your age how can you be tired, you know? But, you know, they don't do anything. So they make a living, make a good living, all that is good and it's important because they have kids. But they say, 'I'm tired'. Well, that's [unclear]. Only out of the hundreds that I had as students... they're big talents, they're all over the place... there's only two girls, three girls that are doing work. They're teaching and they're still doing their own stuff. And they're all good, they're very good. But that's a tiny number. Three out of about 1500 or something like that. But they will all say, I'm tired. Well, what can I say? If she tells me she's tired then I think, that's it, you're finished, you know? To a degree. But, naturally, if you see good talent, you try to push, you try to talk to her or him, as I do. But if they physically not up to it, there's not a damn thing you can do. And that's what it's all about. Why I do have this amount of energy? I don't know. But I have no problem of performing. As… as I do, I produce as much as I did 20 years ago, everything. But when he says, 'I'm tired', what are you going to tell him? There's nothing I can do.

The reason I'm here is because of her, you know, Anaïs Nin. Yeah. Funny, I'm glad you mentioned that name. What happened... I don't know how it happened... she knew about me because I was exhibiting, you know? I didn't really know her. I remember this woman coming to some of the exhibits and she was very elegant. And she always was out place, I think she just get back from Paris. She was always very specially gowned and you could see that it was somebody very special. Then, of course, if you read the stuff that she wrote and all that. Anyway, so I had exhibits by then and she knew me. So I don't how it happened or what happened but I was in touch with her and somehow she said, 'Oh things going to be in the Valley', and yak, yak and, 'I'm going to take you and introduce you'. So anyway, I came out to the Valley and she was waiting for me some place. And then she took me over to one of the two men who opened CalArts [The California Institute of the Arts], you know? The one of them died but this guy was the one that... what was her name again? No, I mean her name.  [Q] Anaïs Nin  Anaïs Nin. She introduced me to this man. And that was very interesting because I hardly knew... I didn't know her that close. Well, my God, she knew me better, what I was about, you know. I knew who she was but I was not as aware of her. Anyway, she took me over to Mel's place and introduced me. Now, at that time, I'm putting you back in that time of me, if there were three people in the room, I couldn't open my mouth. If there were three people in the room, I could not open my mouth. That was me. So when she takes me over to this guy, and what the hell is he doing? He's hanging curtain. And he says, 'Talk'. Whoo! That was my biggest problem, I couldn't talk. Couldn't. And he's going... putting up the curtains, he's just moved in, Mel, you know. And he says, talk. And that time I was very fond of this French film-maker. And luckily, as I was beginning to, 'Er' whatever, you know, because that was a big problem, I thought of the Frenchman. And luckily, the fact that I talked about him, whatever I knew, that was it. Because his son, his son, loved that French director. So I hit a point of chord here, you know? If his son liked that guy and talks about him, and I walk in, as a stranger, and I'm talking about it, that put me ahead. But I was not sure that that took place. But his son, later told me, was a great fan of this French director. Anyway, so that's when the first establishment between them two and me came about. And then they saw the film, Coaraze, you know, which won that big award in France, you know, stuff like that. So somewhere I hit a soft spot in them, the people I was talking about. But it was very difficult. And then I met the other guy, the partner. And the Coaraze was the one that won him over. So next thing I know, I'm the head of the department they're putting together. You know, so that's the way the whole thing started. But it started with her. And I didn't know her this well but she knew about me because she took me by the hand and helped me meet this guy who was responsible for CalArts. They were responsible for everything that you see here. And that's the way I came into the position. It's very interesting because it had nothing to do with this place, nothing to do with anything, except these two American men who's responsible, get the money to put the building up and put the place in motion, you know and of course, her. And by then she also changed because I think she got married or something close to marriage and she was not what I saw her 10 or 5 years before, this elegant lady. What the hell is she doing in this exhibit that we were visiting? She looked out of place, you know. But then she cooled down and became normal. But her books, by then, were beginning to sell and she was beginning to have a large presence, but that had a lot to do with me to be here. Her, you know.

I was on my way back to New York, I had friends. That something that I was getting work in New York. But then somebody took me by the hand, took me all the way to meet one of the members, who was responsible for CalArts [The California Institute of the Arts], two people were responsible for CalArts. And they introduced me to them and then they saw my film. And especially when they saw Coaraze, that did it. So I was made a head of the animation department, because that's where I from, you know, from that world. And so, there we are. I mean, and CalArts is in good shape. I mean, it looks big into the world because the stuff that's coming out of the joint is very good, you know? So that's where we're at and that's where I am at.

So after a while, it comes onto teaching and I've been very lucky because I've been working with CalArts [The California Institute of the Arts] and students come in from all over the world. That's a plus. And so, to a degree, this is one place where students come and you'd be surprised how many of them go back and they become teachers which is good because then there's a way for a new talent to find himself or herself, has some place to go at home and don't have to travel. It's a big… big deal. But so far, for me, teaching has been good and comfortable and it's something that some people can do and some people push too damn hard. Or they want to make themselves look like giants or, you know, they're something very, very special. But I've been very lucky at CalArts because, I don't know why, the people come our way, they are just some very wonderful people. Of the many years that I've been running the shop, there's only maybe two incidents where the incident is unpleasant, you know? Where the portfolio that would be viewed was not his. Because what we saw come from him on a piece of paper that has nothing to do what he showed us, his portfolio. Recently we had this wonderful woman... I think that she… they moved to Iran... no, they moved to Paris from Iran. She was in her late 30's, very attractive lady. And I look at the portfolio, wonderful stuff, good stuff, yeah. Now, I came to look at her drawings and stuff, I knew we had a problem. We had a big problem because that stuff was not hers. Now, what you going to do? I mean, you're dealing with an adult, you don't want to embarrass her. So I figured, what the hell, I'll stay with her and see if I can... because she had some drawing talent, you know, but not what she showed. If I can work with her and you know, just help. But nothing really helped, because the stuff that she was putting on paper was bad. So eventually we decided: no. Either we're going to tell her, we don't believe this is yours or just forget the whole damn thing. Let her go, we give her a diploma and all that.
Six months later she shows up because she's going to apply at USC [University of Southern California] for a Masters degree. You know? I was laughing hard inside. I didn't show the surprise. But there she says she's going to apply for a Masters degree at USC, I think she already entered and she needed some paper from CalArts to qualify her, you know, whatever. So you see, there you are. So you run into stuff like that. Then I told her my assistant would take care of it so this way I could out the front door. But her, she had a lot of nerve. You know, I mean, without any problem, she just wanted this big signature because she was going to apply for a Masters degree and she wanted us to sign the paper that she's qualified. No, there I had to draw the line. I said, my assistant will talk to you. I don't even know what happened, but I'm sure she went back and she signed it herself. Because she did that while she was at CalArts. So that was one of those times when something very strange happened, because she was not stupid. She was not dumb or anything, she was a very elegant lady. And they lived in Paris and that was not her work, and now she wants a Masters degree. So you run into something like that, but nothing heavy, nothing really ugly, you know?

When they come into the school, we're looking at the work and when they're looking at the work, I say, 'I'll take her'. In other words, this is my way of doing this whole thing. If you want somebody, although three of us will say no, and he'll say yes, he can have it. In other words, nobody has to be everybody's vote, you know? Because I might like somebody's vote… somebody's work. You don't, he don't, you know? But the point is, I like his work and I'll take him against their wishes… this is my idea… because if we all have to agree always on who we take, we take one of a kind, because we all agree? No, forget that all agree, I want this person, I'll be his mentor, you see? You guys don't want it? That's okay. But I think… It happened so beautifully - I'll go back a couple of years. This guy's father was teaching at CalArt, so naturally he got in and all that stuff. And he had a portfolio, he had a portfolio, and they looked at it and he was going to go out, no way. I looked at the book, the portfolio and I find one out of 20 pieces of painting that I like. On that one, I took him. There's no question, this one. Three, four, maybe five weeks are going by and he's in the room, you know, and somebody came in, he's got his picture in this new thing, and he needed an animator. I said, 'Go with him, this guy, go with him'. Three months later or two months later I saw the film that he did. Beautiful job, he did a beautiful job and his father was the one who was the composer on this film. And he became a terrific talent, a terrific animator, he made some good living, he's good. But it took me just this one out of 20 pieces of paper that I said, 'I'll take him', you see? And it turned out to be a beautiful situation, he makes a good living, he's done well. He did two other films while he was there.
Well, this is something that you have to deal with. Don't just say no, you know? If I find one piece out of the 18 or so, that is something, I'll take him. I'll take him. And it works. And sometimes they don't know what to send in so they maybe settle on all kinds of junk, you know? That's wrong. But… and also, when you look at the work of a talent that comes in, don't hate him. You know how sometimes these students, they want to show how smart they are. And they eventually already throwing at him, you know? Don't do that, no, don't do that. If I like what I see maybe I'll find something in that bag that I'll say, 'I'll take him, on this premise, what I see here'. You have to have that feeling that when you're looking at work, out of 18, one looks good, but that one is good. You go with that. But in general, we know each other and if I see somebody right now, you know, we gonna… looking at the work, I'll take him. And… but we don't all have to agree, that's crap. The art school has 22… 20 teachers sitting around when the people are coming in and they all have to agree on taking this one. That's dumb. That's stupid. They shouldn't have to have 20 to agree. One, just one. But the point is, if you like, take him, you know? And so far it's really always worked out beautifully because I don't know everything and I'm not afraid to say, 'I don't think, what the hell? I don't understand, why don't you go and see Bob, he's more in that way, I'd like to see what…' You know what I mean? We have that going like that. And that's good. You see, some of the schools, you would be so protective of your people that you don't let him or her go out and talk to other faculty. You see, if you talk to this [sic], go and see him, he might have more to give you than what you get from me right now. But you don't have to be afraid that you're going to lose him, you know? That's no big deal. Because what you do is, you trust him and he trusts you more. Because I sent him there because they can help you, even if I, in this moment, can't help you, but I think they can help you, you see? So there's a relationship immediately between you and him and all... You see, that's good. But too often at the schools, they fight for a talent and then they kill him by protecting him like that, you know? So that's dumb. But, no, I feel you should be able to find one out of 18, whatever drawings, that's any good. And then you work with that, you know? That's the way I handle the situation. And so we don't all have to agree on him or on her, you know?

Eventually it turns out to be something very special because it's not overwhelmed with the numbers, you know, you know? And you really get to know each other better. And the most important thing, that they trust you, you know? And that's why you don't have to have any scare techniques or stuff like that, you know? Just be comfortable. If you don't find it working for you, maybe this other person can help, you know? Which happens, you know? I had a girl from Yugoslavia two years ago. I have no idea what the hell was all about. I have absolutely no idea what she's doing. I think she knew what she was doing. I couldn't, I just couldn't. So I finally said, 'Why don't you go and see so-and-so'. So, so-and-so took her around and the relationship was better, it was good, you know? And she not only, she actually wins first prize in New York. They give an award every year. Then she goes out there and she wins first prize, you know? And at the same time, I did well for her by not forcing or telling her, 'You're stupid', you know? No, go to Bob, I think that he can help you. And as long as you have this relationship, it's healthy. That's healthy. But don't try to be a giant, you know? No, you're not a giant.

But the most important thing I tell students, you know, see it. If you can afford it, see it. If you can't afford it, that's a problem, that's something else. But if you can, see it. Because if I ask the students, 'Hey, you're doing something like reminds me of' - and then I ask him, 'Have you seen of'? 'No, who are you talking about?' I said, 'Oh then you never see... next time they come around, why don't you go and see it?' You know? It's a way of... the word teaching, I don't like that word, teaching, because it isn't a question of just teaching, it's sharing, it's sharing, you know? I know more about this thing than you do, so I can tell you a little bit about it. But then, if they come back in the city, go and see it, you see? But I open the door for you by saying, 'By all means, see it'. You see. So when you're talking about teaching, that word sometimes is very misleading because it's not really that. It's that other thing. When I say, 'Hey have you ever seen a Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo'? 'A what?' 'Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo.' 'No? You never?' 'No. Next time they're in time, if you can afford it, by all means, you see it.' You see? Now I'm helping him, you see? And it's not like teaching. I think teaching is very important when you're going to be a doctor. Then you better know what the hell you're doing because you can destroy a person, you can kill a person, you can just accidentally hurt him that he never recovers. But when you deal with art, you don't have that problem. But go and see this anyway. Whether you like it or not, see it, it's going to help. So there's a way of approaching a person and it has nothing to do with that word. Because if that's all you know about, then you have a problem of helping other people. The only one thing is medicine where you either know or you don't know and you deal with life, total life, you know? Just recently a doctor was doing whatever on a person who doesn't need that and it went bad. But you see, when you deal with art, you don't have that problem.

Most of the talent, the young talent, want to see films. But if they want to go beyond that, they should see performances of dancers and stuff like that. Because that is what... you move, you move, you move, you move. And you've got to inhale that somehow, that aspect of it. So that's in you and you're not going to get it out just from still photos that the movies made. But I'm not against it because there were are lot of good films made with dancing and dealt with movement. But the talent generally would not see that. Especially if they're young people, they don't see that. They never see a play. And I encourage people, this is something that I know they would get something out of it, if you can afford it, by all means, see that. And of course, the problem is, the movie's much cheaper. It's no big deal but the ticket $45 and you go way up there, you know? Ninety bucks maybe, you're coming up for that. That's a lot of money. So when I talk to my people here, the young people, I'm very aware that we're talking money also. And it's easy for me, go and see the Ballet Rouse the next time they're in town, you know? But the cheapest seat is $45. So, you see, you have a little problem. So you have to be a little bit aware of that aspect of it. They don't have the money, you know? And so it stops there. But I try and push them into this other terrain, that they have never been exposed to before, you know? And so that's... I do that and sometimes it costs me money.

No animator finishes a film. There's no animator's film. Each has three or four animators on a film. So the only person who can really claim some credit is the director, who's responsible for putting the whole thing together. But… but when you're dealing with animation from an industry, not today, like yesterday, that would be like MGM [Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer], Warner Brothers, Universal, you know, and stuff like that. Each film has at least four or five animators working on it. So there's no such a thing as a film coming out from the industry, with one animator. No. One director on a short, yes. And he gets all the credit, generally. But the people who do the actual animation, drawing, and all this and all that, their name is mentioned, like, animated by... and then you have all the names. But in the industry, the animator… the director is the only one who gets credit on a film. Whether that's right or wrong but that's the way it works, you know?  When we had UPA [United Productions of America] … we had UPA and we had one film... even there you had two or three people animating. Because John Hubley was a big name because he was really responsible for some film before he moved to New York. The other person was Bobo Canon, who was totally responsible. But Bobo was responsible for at least 13 films. Hubley was responsible maybe for two before he moved to New York. But… but there you really deal with two huge talents, Bobo Canon and John Hubley. Oh, and then there's this guy from Warner's... sure he just put a picture of him on the sidewalk a… a year ago... I mentioned his name a couple of times, I can't recall him now.  [Q] Chuck Jones?  Chuck Jones, yeah. So he's big, Hubley is big, Bobo Canon is big. But the only person people really know is Chuck Jones. Because he was out more times and he was after it, whereas others were not after it, you know? It just that didn't come to them. And that's what I'm trying to do now, to get Bobo Canon… and things are in motion, you know, that he should get a book. Because when you talk about UPA and all that stuff, 85% is Bobo Canon, you see? And it would be nice to have that happen.

The big problem, that they don't exist, as far as the industry. When we're talking industry, they don't exist. I mean, Oskar Fischinger with all the films, he doesn't exist. He exists when you go to another terrain of a lifetime and he functions in that way, which has nothing to do with the industry, which has nothing to do with Warner Brothers or MGM [Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer] or Universal. Nothing… it has nothing to do with that. But here you have those people who wouldn't even watch a Fischinger, would not know. Would not know. You see? That's how the industry is laughing to themselves. And when you're talking about a man like Oskar Fischinger, that doesn't exist, they don't know who the hell you're talking about, you know? I'm sure John Hubley would know, Bobo Canon would know about… about, you know, Fischinger. But in general, the membership at large in the animation world, is not beyond where they work at the moment.

Animation... animation as an industry and as an art form, sure. And that's where a man like Oskar Fischinger and Len Lye would be, you know? But in the industry, no one would know them. They would not know who the hell you're talking about if you're talking about Len Lye or Oskar Fischinger. They just don't know because… now we are getting into some very strange terrain, they're really not interested. It's a job. And in the industry, in a studio, where maybe one or two person might know about Len Lye or Oskar Fischinger, but in general, they would not know who the hell you're talking about. So that is the situation. And then when you go to the magazines, the art magazines and you have some of these people in there, the people will just turn that page over because it's not Bobo Canon and it's not Chuck Jones. So they don't function on that terrain. If one out of two in a studio, which had maybe 150 members, or 200, would know who these people are, I would be surprised. But then again, that's part of the… that world. Which is animation at the studio or the animator away from a studio, where he will function as an artist performs his art. An animator in a studio doesn't perform his art because he performs the art of the director. Because he's not going to get any big hoopla, the director's going to get the big hoopla. Not the guy who's working and he's not a director, you see? So that's what the industry's about.

So, if we're dealing with the industry, and then you have the industry, and then you have the outside, the outside animators, you know? The thing is that inside the industry, the majority of the animators don't know anything about experimental animation. Or don't know anything about people who... even Oskar Fischinger, who's really been on the scene many times. They saw him in magazines, they saw him in books, whatever. Maybe some will get something out of it. But in general, the majority of the people in the industry are not interested in Oskar Fischinger. Because they're interested in making a living. And the only living is that they're going to work for the studio and get a salary. And the fact that, when we had UPA, with the Gerald McBoing Boing, Madeleine, Frankie and Johnny, Unicorn in the Garden and all that stuff. That was a dream, it wasn't even real, it was so far out and away from what the industry is about, that it doesn't exist. So you don't have them and us or they, you really don't have that. Because the majority of the people in the industry, they come there at 08:30 and leave at 17:00 and that's it. You see? So when you're dealing with these other people like Fischinger, you really have to be a little bit special in working... you have to work because you have to make a living. So that's normal, that's normal. It's not necessarily normal that they should fall in love with Oskar Fischinger, you know? But if he falls in love with Oskar Fischinger and he brings that to the studio where he works... and the guys might say, 'What the hell you showing this to me?' I mean he might get an answer out of question like that. 'What the hell this guy got to do with me?' You see, it's another world. It's another world. The only people that maybe have a tentacle out for all these other things are the directors. Maybe they are this other level of people that are in the industry, you know? But in the industry, it's just... gotta make a living.

I don't recall [Henri] Matisse's work. I… I recall [Pablo] Picasso had some sets he designed, yeah/ It's funny, I don't recall Matisse at all in that world, that world. But then, on Picasso, they had a lot of books and stuff on Picasso and the ballet, you know, and the design. So that you were able to buy and be aware. But in that world, I never ran into anybody else who come from like a painter, like Picasso. Yeah.
[Q] Picasso and Matisse – was their work an influence on you?
More, more Picasso, you know? But I really can't say that because if you say that, that means that your work would look like that, but I don't think that has ever happened, yet, you know? With my output, you know? Because I'm very aware of that. And although you admire those people and they're very important and it's important for you to know their work, you know? But it's better if it doesn't show in your work. Oh, that's a Picasso, that's a Matisse, you know? Then you… if it's there, then you have a problem, you have a problem.

It's not Orson Welles. That I know because they making… I don't understand why he's always the number one pick of the Academy, the Citizen Kane, you know? It's horrible. I mean it's not…okay it's a tough word. But when you go to the end and all those actors become all much older and stuff, it's horrible, it's awful. And then the time he has gone with his wife, sitting up there like a stage, you know? That's another one of those things. Look at the stage, I'm watching a stage, I think, being photographed. I don't find that real, I find it like I'm watching a play, you know? But that doesn't take away from him that he's still a great... Although, although I liked him better when he did this one... he did just on television, on television, it was the very famous story, I think, from Finland or some… or some place...
[Q] The Never Ending Story?
No, no. But I've been chasing that. Maybe I was hoping I would find somebody who owns that property. It was on television, so imagine, you could only have heard it... Oh, but that was beautiful.
 

Generally, when I travel with my work, the reception is always incredibly good. That's always a surprise that comes to you, that people are out there and they say, 'How come we don't see this? How come we don't see this?' Well, what are you going to tell them how come they don't see it? They don't see it because the majors are not making them and they have nothing to do with that. And simple as that. So they have to have a way of finding out where this show, this kind of exhibit, is taking place. Like Cindy that's running the CIO… CIO… CIA? I mean, she started with nine places, nine cities or countries, now that's up to 40. Forty different cities, countries and places are asking for the film. Now that's incredible. And they already… Because they have about two or three from yesterday, starting with Oskar Fischinger and people. And now it's got to the point where they want it tomorrow. And Cindy doesn't have that many prints, you know, to send it all over. But the response is enormous. Absolutely enormous. Out of six, the first catalogue, the first brochure, had about six stops, now it's twenty. Twenty different countries are waiting for… for the next print, which is all animation. And that's where it is today, so that's good. It is good but then it still doesn't come out of the industry, it comes out of the individual. But the individual… but then you'd be surprised how a short life they are. Some might be there twenty years or so, but in general, all of a sudden they disappear. And often it happens when they do a film. One film. You see, the second film was a big problem. So they've got two or three. Kathy Rose in New York is a good one. So she's constantly in motion and those things. She's good and she's inventive and then it's a question of people to go over and she gives a concert, you know? And when she gives a concert, the house is full, you know? But she is one. And there's two others, two other girls. But they're doing films, they're making films but they need about, let's say eight or ten films to put on a real program, you know? If you have about eight or ten films... because they're short, maybe six minutes the longest, eight minutes the longest. But if you have at least eight films, you can have an evening of animated film from a single person, which had nothing to do with the school.

I think the only direction it's happening, we'll be getting from the East Asian world. I don't personally, like that style of drawing, personally. It's too cartoony for me. Too damn cartoony and fast. And the scenes are very short and fast. I think that's easier for them to function that way than make… throw it down and let it be a little longer. You see, but they are not longer, they're getting shorter and shorter because it's easier to get something quick. You hit, I'll hit you, you know? And this is what's come across in a lot of the Asian animation. But some of it is beautiful and it's good. But they're also rushing, rushing the scenes because I think it's easier to do something good in a shorter moment. I prefer… I still prefer some of the early Disney's. They're beautiful things. But the Asian things, it's good, it's good stuff, but for me, it doesn't quite work. It's too fast. Every scene is so fast, you don't have a chance to, who the...? What...? Woah. But that's from that world. But they're doing incredibly well, the Asian films. Big animation deal, hour and a half, two hours, you know? A new world's come from Asia, into animation.

It's a question of it just happened... you're… you're aware. And it eventually becomes... It's just part of you, it's just part of you and you… you have it, you have it. And if you want to use it, sure, you can use it. It's no problem, nobody will sue you or whatever. So you can, you can. But it's what's the total… what the total experience that you have, is what you take with you, you know, to your studio and to your thinking. Because you say, 'Yeah', to yourself, 'Yes, sure, I remember that in Petrushka, there was such and such a scene happened', you know? Okay, I can use that and put it right into this moment that I'm working on right now, you know? And there's nothing wrong with that. But I knew every dance scene, well anything that moved, that danced, I knew. And I went and I saw that. Not once, not twice, but as often as I could have afforded, you know? But at the same time it helped me with my thinking, my work, yeah. But it's very important. Course when you live in New York, that's something else. Because everything is there, everything is in front of you, it's all… the city gives you all that. Well, today in Los Angeles, it's a hell of a lot better because all those people now come to Los Angeles. This is now a place for them to come because the population and all that. But you have to see what the hell is out there and who's doing what and that takes more than just one trip. You have to do several trips to find out. Also, either you enjoy it or you don't enjoy it, you know? If you don't have a feel for it, then just leave it, drop it, don't push it. Don't do it. But it's not going to look good, it's not going to look right, because you're fighting it, you know? And you shouldn't fight it, it should just fly out of you. And eventually it will do that. Also, it's easier than talking to people, because you're just looking at somebody else who deals with movement, you know? And movement is important, it's part of us.

The Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo was a very big thing in my life. That turned me around completely. When you get people like [Henri] Matisse and [David] Lechine. Then you have Tamara Toumanova, [Irina] Baranova, [Ria] Bouchinska, [Alexandra] Danilova. I mean, they do some things to you or for you, you know? And that's part of, also, that you've been digesting and it's in your gut. And then, of course, there's Martha Graham and all the others, you know? But you're looking at the best and some of that's going to rub off on you and there's no other way. But when you're talking about filmmaking... and painting, you know, it's a canvas. But when you do a film, then you're dealing with something else. Because how long can you go the one direction? You have to have... you have to... this has got to be this long, this has got to be this long and this is going to work. And that eventually happens, you know? That you have to have it from inside.

I remember Martha Graham. At one time, I remember, when they were performing downtown at the square in Los Angeles, she was actually bent, you know? Let's say this is the... but she was that much bent. And you said to, you said to yourself: why the hell does she stays off the stage and work with the dancers and run the shop, you know and everything? But she had to be on the stage and believe me, she was bent. And you saw that and you felt sorry for her, it was ugly. But it was what she wanted to do, you know? She wanted to get on the stage and it was quite late. Eventually she give up. But even that time she was bent and it was obvious. I mean, you can't hide that! You're on a stage and you're bent! But Martha Graham is important, very important.
But there were a lot of others, you know? There was a group from Switzerland and I can't recall their name but they were something special. Anything that moves, I would go and look at. So that's, that's what I'm trying to say. And that was a beautiful group. Oh, The Green Table, that was the name of a ballet that came from the Swedish group. That was beautiful, Green Table. And then other companies took that on and performed The Green Table because it could be done by any company, you know? But that was very special. And there was another group from Switzerland, they came once or twice and then they disappeared and they were eager. And if… if it moved, I saw them. To me, it was that important. And also, it gives you a presence, you know what the hell you're talking about. But the Ballet Russe from Monte Carlo was the one that opened the door for anything and everybody, you know? And that was part of you. You had to... I went five times out of six nights, you know? So sitting down there and I'm in up there, high. Later, when I made a little more money, I could sit on the first floor, makes a big difference, visually, you know?

Tamara Toumanova, don't forget you're dealing with somebody who you see is, she’s 14 years old. Fourteen years old and she runs the show. I mean, she's a big ballerina and she was with the dark hair. She was the really truly a Russian looking person. She's 14 or 15 and beautiful face, incredible face. But she is Russian… Russian. Her face, and that helped. And then I... At that time I was still where I was afraid to make a move, you know? Anyway, I wanted a photo so I went backstage and I went upstairs. And in that upstairs was her dressing room and she always had her mother with her. And her mother was probably five foot, two, you know, about that tall. And I was hoping... I congratulated her, you know, and I was hoping that she has an extra photo. And she was so nice, she said, ‘Oh, by all means, you come back this weekend, whatever and I'll have a photo for you of myself’. So five day - three or four days go by and I go backstage and I'm standing in one corner, backstage, and there she is over there, in the middle of the stage, surrounded by all the males, all tuxedo, black tie, you know, and I'm standing over there and my God, she spotted me.
[Q] Yeah.
She spotted me. And she told this man to wait and she ran across the stage...
[Q] We’re still rolling? We’ve got a minute left. Oh, we’re still rolling? Oh I’m sorry Jules, keep going. 
And she was in the middle of the stage and she spotted me. And my God, she said… and she left all those people in tuxedos, ran upstairs, got the photo, came down with a photo and she give me a photo. Now, that's really something special, you know? And then she went back to the man in the tuxedos, you know? But, was that nice of her to do that? I'm a nobody, she doesn't... you know? I just wanted the… just asked for a photo and that was something I had to do.

I use it when I need it. In other words, that would be the simplest way for me to explain, I need it. If I need that particular shape, whatever I'm doing, that's it. That is it. But there's nothing mysterious or difficult or something that you can't explain or you don't need to explain. It's a shape and this is what I need at this moment, so by the time you have all the experience and you have all the exposure to the world of art and the world of theatre, the world of dance, you… you get a hold of something that is part of you and you can always reach into that bag and take something out. And also, you do have books, you know? You buy certain kind of books. And sometimes you just need to go through and just look at things, you know, when you're stuck. And when you're stuck, then stop it, don't do anything, just put the pens down, put the brush down and forget it. And give yourself a couple of weeks. You come back and all of a sudden it's there, it's there.

When you do a film... let's take, let’s take Disney studio and let's take something like Bambi or something. The problem is that not one person does a film. If you have four animators working on Bambi and you have one who’s the color director, you know, and then one who's called the layout man. And then you have one that might have something to do with color. So… And yet you only give credit to this one guy who is called a director, you know? Which… which exists, you know? It's there. But unless the animator or... you see again, it's a problem because the animator has to rely on the director. Then the director better be pretty talented to know how to help the animator. Because it's the animator who's going to do the scene, who’s going to do the character, who puts in the timing. And this is where Walt came about. Walt came big. Because when he saw the dance of the hours and the way those people got up and move about was almost... he got angry at how stupid it looks, how ugly it looks, how wrong it is, you see? And then he would get up and make some moves, Walt did. And talked to the key animators, you know, the talents, that this is what it's all about, this is how it moves, you know? Then you can say, ‘How come they didn't know about that’? Nobody's hiding anything. Why these animators were that clumsy of having this ostrich from asleep, grow, stand up, you know, start to move... they were bad, they were bad. And Walt gets up there, he's not a dancer, he's none of that. But he talks about how it happens, what happens, what it should look, you know? So when you're talking about animation, it's a very strange field. Who is really responsible for all the good stuff in that film? And of course, there are talents which is then good. It's mostly a single talent who does a single film, where you really find the talent, you know?
