katharine.whitehorn

A distinguished journalist and renowned author, Katharine Whitehorn (1928-2021) has written for The Spectator and Picture Post. She was the first woman to have her own column in the Observer and was their star columnist for the best part of 40 years. Educated at Newnham College, Cambridge, is recognised as someone who has transformed 20th century women's journalism. She took a keen interest in social welfare issues, was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine and was the first woman rector of the University of St Andrews.

Well I grew up in a school more or less because my father was a master at Mill Hill. And a house master from the time that I could remember. So I was never in what you might describe as a normal house with a normal kitchen. And then during the war his school was evacuated to Cumberland, on to another school. Which was perhaps slightly less like a school but not much more like home. But I do remember that I went to a day school in London to begin with, half way down a steep hill.
I either walked with terrifying dogs or my mother drove me down in our old car, which I don’t know which was the more frightening thing really. But it did mean that I grew up without sort of natural neighbour children. And one of the reasons that I hated school so much, I think, was that I didn’t really make friends easily at all. But I suppose I never made any friends... proper, serious friends, until I was about 15.
And now having girl grandchildren I know how crucially girl friendships matter to little girls. I can see why I wasn’t particularly happy.

I wanted to go to boarding school because I’d read, you know, girls boarding school books. And they sent me... were going to send me, anyway, to a very good school called Downe House in... which was in Berkshire. And I went there for a term and a bit but it was by that time the war was on. My father’s school was in Cumberland, and they sent home all the girls whose parents were in the North in case they got separated by the invasion.
And my parents couldn’t think of any school anywhere near that was academically any good, and unlike too many parents in those days, it never occurred to them to give me a less good education than my brother. So they sent me to Roedean which was evacuated to Keswick. And there I was deeply miserable for two years, and finally got a... but they evacuated into a hotel. So there was a huge relief map of the neighbourhood on which I could plot the 30 miles or so across which I did in the end mount my bicycle and ride home.
And I realised I could never have lived down Roedean on Fleet Street, if I hadn’t run away from it, but people tend to keep starting with it, as you did, so that I wish in a way it was expunged from the entire record. Because after that, I went to school in Glasgow, to a day school, and really I’ve been perfectly happy ever since. 

My mother was totally Scottish, and my father was half Scottish. Non-conformist, professional left wing, all of it, which when I came to marry Gavin Lyall was rather lucky because so was his... exactly the same.
My father had been... he was a school master at Mill Hill as I said. He’d been a conscientious objector in the First World War, and it’s quite interesting. In the mid-‘30s when... I can’t remember the year, but the Oxford Union voted that this house wouldn’t vote for king and country, well what was he to do in a school which had a flourishing OTC and was a bit…? This was Mill Hill. And what he did, I only learned about... somebody mentioned it at his memorial service. He went round the class, this was sixth form, not little boys, and asked each of them what they thought. And then he made them all go away and write an essay from the opposite point of view. And that’s the kind of teacher he was.
And my mother’s family was very Presbyterian ministry. Indeed, so was my father’s brother was a minister too. And my grandfather, my mother’s father, was a Presbyterian minister who’d served as a padre in the First World War, been absolutely horrified by it all, was one of the people who was involved starting the Peace Pledge Union, and he was the moving spirit of the person who started the Marriage Guidance Council. Because he’d written a book called Men, Women and God, and got an awful lot of people writing to him, and he realised that there wasn’t anywhere, this was the ‘20s, where you could refer them.
And so he and several others started the Marriage Guidance Council, and that... they were all, I think, involved in professional charitable do-gooding things. Didn’t really, on my mother’s side at all, particularly involve with anything... well, nothing that made a lot of money anyway. Much money, any money. But my father’s father had been a jeweller, and that was a bit better. But again, heavy morals had stopped us being rich, because he ran Collingwoods [?], and when he turned it over to his successor, successor actually vamoosed with the money, and my grandfather went back into the firm, put his own money in, and paid off all the creditors practically entirely.
[Q] So have you had a sense of, kind of, right thinking all your life then, do you think?
Oh well, everybody gets cross at what they perceive to be bad, don’t they? It’s just a question of what do you think is bad. You know? I suppose that sort of background gives you a view that money isn’t everything and I hope to goodness one’s kept that.

Cambridge was hard enough to get into. The women’s colleges were all women, as Newnham still is, and we were girls straight from school. But this was 1947. So all the chaps had done national service, and many of them had served in the war. So whereas we were immature girls, we had real men to relate to. And all the people I was involved with while I was at Cambridge were considerably older than me and very interesting people.
That one of my closest friends was son of a Jewish refugee from Vienna. He married my best friend from school and I know them all that long. Another was... the guy I was engaged to had been in the army. Well everybody had been in something. Because if they were of an age to be at Cambridge at all after the war they would have been in it. It was... I think one of the things that was different then was that there was still the ethos of us being very good girls. We weren’t, naturally, of course. But there was... and Newnham has suffered fairly badly from the general ways the world looked during the war. Everything was a bit seedy, the food was a bit mere.
But the men’s colleges, of course, immemorial grey stone. In any case, full of men. I had far less of a feeling that Newnham itself was important. Being at Cambridge was important. And I just see that it’s been voted the best university in the world. I'm not surprised.

London was... I got a job in publishing, sort of dogsbody job, read... being the first person to read. And that was considered very good for an English graduate, it’s what we all thought we wanted. And I lived first of all in a bedsitter. And then... ghastly bedsitters. First one was out in Streatham and men weren’t allowed anywhere near it. So if anybody came to take me out they had to pace up and down the road in the rain while I was getting ready. That didn’t last long.
And then I was in part of a converted house in Notting Hill Gate where I was on the ground floor in, fortunately, it was a sliced up very big room, and I was fortunately in the slice with the gas fire which I could turn on without getting out of bed. So that was nice. But the kitchen itself was downstairs and the Polish landlady used occasionally to emerge lugubriously when I dropped a tray and say if I washed up rather oftener I wouldn’t break so much each time. Which was true.
It was rather a dead-end for me, I didn’t see... I wasn’t particularly good at publishing. I did a bit of teaching English to foreigners in the evenings and I had a very, very good friend, who remained my closest friend all his life, but he wasn’t actually the man I wanted to marry. And it was a dead-end in that sense.

I put in for a job not run by the British Council but they did the appointing for it, and went off to be... a curious thing in Finland, called a teacher’s secretary. It was running a club in Finland.
The point was that after the war the Finns who... at the end of the war they were on the wrong side, of course, which didn’t help. They were quite good at English insofar as it was what they got out of books, but they hadn’t had the chance to speak it, and they also wanted to ally themselves with Britain and America more than... I mean, the one person they really, really hated was Russia, that was all right. And so there was a sort of network of these little Anglophile clubs dotted all over Finland.
And I was sent out to run one of them. And it was, I suppose, fairly daunting, because I didn’t know a word of Finnish, and I was the first person in that town... I mean, I wasn’t taking over an existing club. It was... I was to start it up. And I arrived at the platform in Mikkeli and I didn’t know any Finnish and they... nobody around knew any English. And there was nobody there to meet me, and nobody knew I should be there. However the station master started ringing round desperately and finally somebody came and retrieved me.
And it was very good because as there wasn’t a club there, I built... had to decide all my own way. And it was a mixture of teaching English as a foreign language which I had done before, and also running social events. And it was the first time I’d ever been able to run anything, you know, run something for myself, and it gives you a great feeling of power, you know. 40 serious Finns running around the room making funny noises in order to learn English.
And you know, we put on scenes from The Begger’s Opera and all kinds of... and it was great, and the Finns were very uptight to start with because they, you know, incredibly shy. But once you got to know them they were marvellous. And, I mean, all this was ’53 to ’54, and quite a lot of the people I knew, of course, have died, but I'm still in touch with two of them. And I learnt not to ski particularly, you know the overland kind which is easy, but to skate... began to skate. And sauna, which the whole world mispronounces, it is... Finnish is a phonetic language and it’s sa-oo-na, sa-oo-na. And the whole world says sauna.
And when I was trying to record the book for BBC they stopped me when I said sauna and said, you pronounce that wrong. And I said, 'I haven’t pronounced it wrong, the world pronounces it wrong'. But we corrected that.

At some point I was putting in for a scholarship to go to America because in those days you had to have a reason to go to America at all. Got a visa and I got an English Speaking Union scholarship and a Fulbright travel grant, that was the way they did it in those days. And it was... well, going to America in ’54 was an absolute revelation. It was a completely different world. No more war-torn Europe. And of course we’d all idolised America, you know, we loved their songs and their movies and everything like that.
And I mean even when I was in publishing I made them do the first edition of Dorothy Parker stuff for years. That kind of thing. And I shared a house with five other post-graduates who were three Americans, one of whom was sort of more or less Chinese in origin, a Philippina, a Finn, and me [unclear]. And even now, only one of them has died, and I'm still in touch with them, all the other four. 
And having been in America at that time, it gave you a completely different slant on Europe. I sort of came back saying, well this is a goldfish bowl, I can do this. And I had a broken heart though. I tried to... I was... my boyfriend at the time was rather unfortunately the oldest son of my mother’s closest friend. So everything that was going on got relayed back to Scotland. However that couldn’t be helped. And I desperately wanted to marry him but he didn’t want to marry me. And honestly, every time I think about this I sink to my bony knees and give thanks because if I’d married him I might have been a tolerably happy academic wife, but I’d never have been me. So you never know what’s going to turn out right, do you?

[Q] What were the things that really struck you in America? Was it the food, the cars, the clothes...?
Well some of it... clothes, of course. Marvellous, marvellous clothes. No food shortages. I remember sending a photograph home of a picnic I was at. And of course, you know, picnics with tables, that sort of thing we never had in Europe. And the thing that really shook my family was the enormous size of the banana that I happened to be eating at the time. And I think an awful lot of it that was still very wrong with America in those days, I didn’t know about. Because one walked around looking at the Lincoln Memorial and the Jefferson Memorial and thinking this is the ideal place.
And... simply didn’t know about all the stuff that one was aware of with the civil rights movement, you know, the blacks who couldn’t vote and this kind of thing. It was still heaven on earth as far as we... okay, naïve, but a lot in it too. And it wasn’t just... it wasn’t just the affluence of everything, it was also the, sort of, openness of people to other people. Sort of cheery friendliness of it.

If I’d had the kind of visa where I could have stayed I think I would have done. It was just absolutely the place to fall in love with.
But I had the kind of visitor’s visa where if you even asked how you might be able to stay you were instantly deported. And this very nearly was my undoing because you were allowed to go out into Canada and back again, that didn’t count. And I wrote a letter to the Student Employment Bureau in San Francisco saying I am going to be over there and get a job... I want a job for the summer.  And I wrote to the visa people saying can I go in and out of Canada... and I put them in the wrong envelopes.
And then I wrote the most difficult letter of my whole life, however. The visa people were just baffled, said thank you very much for informing us of your plans. It was all right. But you know, it was a narrow scrape. So I came back to London with a broken heart and determined to be a journalist.
[Q] Where did that come from? Was there just one day when you suddenly thought this was going to be...?
I can’t quite remember. People ask me that and I don’t really know. I’d done a little bit of journalism, reviewing books for John O'London's Weekly when I was in publishing. And I liked writing. And I think it was partly that of the seven summers out of Cambridge I’d succeeded in not working through most of them, and that I thought I’d like an unsettled life, and if I go on like this my father had sort of more or less said, look, you can’t go on like this, I’ll never rise... And I wanted an unsettled profession as it were.

As soon as I was a journalist... you know, I had a flatmate at one point who was an architect. A particular sort of architect, she was very good archaeological reconstruction. And she once used the phrase, 'This is what I am for'. And that’s absolutely what I felt about journalism. And the first job was not particularly inspiring, but at least a first step on the ladder. I worked for a thing called  Home Notes, which was a funny little paper, you know, about the size of a Penguin book, printed on really awful paper. Well, I suppose it was still quite... I think we still ... probably still had paper rationing, or something.
And I had to put the headlines on the real life love stories which came in in batches of six from hardened professionals. And I always remember, and missed no chance to say, how they did the horoscopes. Because the thought that people actually believe in horoscopes fills me with great gloom. It was a girl called Chrissy who used to come around and say, 'What’s your sign, dear?' So you’d tell her. She’d say, 'What would you like to have had happen to you this week?'
And from there, through, oh, well meeting people who... meeting people who were already better journalists, senior journalists, I got on to Picture Post.  And the thing that clinched it was somebody in... that was the tenant of a friend of mine, worked for Picture Post. So I said, 'Look I’d love to work for Picture Post, can you... can you help?', you know. And he said, 'Well it won’t do you any good if I recommend you because I think I'm on the way out', which he was, 'But I’ll recommend you to Bert Hardy, the photographer'. And Bert used me as the model in a picture series about being lonely in the big city. And took a picture of me standing, looking forlorn with a suitcase in a station, and sitting looking extremely gloomy in front of my gas fire. And that photograph follows me round to this day.
Anyway, with his help I finally got a job on Picture Post. But that photograph, which first of all they rang up and said, after Picture Post folded, it was in the Getty Collection, the Houghton Collection, somebody rang up and said they want that photograph for Lucozade, do you mind? You get a fiver. Well, a fiver is a fiver, sure. So here was this huge poster of me with the thing, 'Feels like crying, yet all she needs is energy. Drink Lucozade'.
And the next one... they said they want to use this for what was then called the Society for the Unwed Mother and Her Child. I said, 'No'. But it’s been cropping up ever since. Usually... and no permission from me, and certainly no pay. And the last one, somebody used it as a cover on their novel and it got a huge poster in the Underground, but it was so long ago that nobody except my own son recognised that it was me. So that’s the passing of the years for you.

Picture Post was absolutely marvellous in every way. You went in the office... you didn’t know whether you were going to spend the day doing the letters page or were going to be sent down to Cornwall to interview a couple who were about to set out going round the world with their baby on a ketch or sent up to Northumberland to interview somebody who thought she’d got a rare disease or... And then, one of the best bits was I... there was only one other woman journalist on the paper at that time, Venetia Murray, and when they... they were... Picture Post was actually going downhill, we didn’t realise it properly, and it was changing editors with rather a lot... as most people change their underwear... and when they sacked Lionel Birch he went off to the South of France, and the only other girl on the paper, Venetia Murray, went too.
And so there was nobody there to do the Paris collections. So he said, 'Would you... you’ve got to go and do the Paris collections'. So I remember buying two hats with the taxi ticking over at the door and going on... and the thing was, in those days they were terribly, terribly secretive about the collections. And they... you had to have a card, and the individual invitations. And I had no idea how I would get this. But I had a bilingual boyfriend at the time, a very distinguished journalist, now dead, called Edward Behr. And he said, 'Oh, I think I can fix that'. And he rang up the couture people and he said, 'Yes, that’s all right, we got it fixed'. And I said, 'How on earth did you do it?' He said, 'Well I pretended to be the rédacteur en chef of Picture Post'. I said, 'What’s rédacteur en chef?' He said, 'Editor'. I said, 'God'.
But anyway, that worked out all right. But in those days they were... only the national newspapers were allowed to print photographs right away, and the magazines had to choose what they wanted photographed and then come back a week or a few weeks later to do it. So I chose the clothes and I chose models. And Edward fixed up... I thought it would be good to photograph them in the Musée Rodin and so he fixed up that I could do that through a friend of his. I found the letter a few years ago when I was writing autobiography which said that his friend had done it, and he’s spoken to the head of the museum and he said all right, and he will no doubt ask the statutes if they find it all right. And I photographed the clothes with the statutes, and they were jolly good pictures too.
But before that... horror. I was supposed to meet the Picture Post photographer, and he didn’t turn up. It was not a regular guy, it was a... So what on earth, just report back home? No. But I'd met a photographer on the plane, he'd tried to get off with me, and I rang him up and said, I had... must have... I had his [inaudible]... I said could you do this? And he said, 'No, I can’t, it’s not really my sort of thing, but you better... what you better do is go to Magnum, the photo agency, and ask them if they’ve got somebody'. So I did that and they set me up with Frank Horvat who had not up until that time done fashion much and became a world famous fashion photographer. But this was, I think, his first one.
Then I told Picture Post that their photographer hadn’t turned up and got a telegram back, 'Seek photographer at Magnum'. And one of the best moments of my whole life was cabling back, 'Have already sought... got photographer from Magnum'. And they’re pretty good photographs too, it was great fun. And so I did that.
[Q] Sounds wonderfully glamorous thing.
Oh, it was terrific.
[Q] Paris was really Paris in the ‘50s.
Oh yes. And it got more difficult, you see. Because of this, there was a delay. So we had to switch the thing from whenever... I think it was the Wednesday we were going to do it, or Thursday, to Saturday. And some of the girls couldn’t... so we had to redo the permissions at the museum. We had to... some of the girls couldn’t work Saturday, had to then choose new girls. And they were, of course, not necessarily the same sizes as the original ones... had to do it in new clothes. I’d never done any of this before but it...
Somehow or other  that kind of thing, this overheated fashion world, you know, at the end of it you feel a tremendous sense of... oh I’ve done this, you’ve cured… you’ve saved the world, you’ve cured cancer. And it was just... fashion is crazy, but it is enormous fun. It’s exasperating but it’s terrific.

Picture Post was actually on its last legs though I'm not sure how much we realised it. And they kept swapping editors and trying this and trying the other. And by this time Edward Behr had gone, he’d taken, he’d... by this time Edward Behr was in Paris, and he came over.  And I remember Gavin and I went to a press opening of some stuff called Norway Sild. Why we both went to it I can’t think. And I remember sitting in the park with Gavin and saying, 'Oh God, he’s going to come back. I know he’s going to ask me to marry him. What am I going to do?' And Gavin said, 'Well you can’t expect me to be disinterested'. And I said, 'What do you think?' And he said rather slowly, 'Well I think you’re a girl in her late ‘20s who wants to get married'. That was certainly the truth.
Anyway, we then went back to Picture Post, and to be told it had folded. And that was it. And actually Edward didn’t propose because I’d left my passport behind and had to go back for it and come the next day and he was so fed up with this. But when I said, 'Look, I really think we should call it a day'.  And I'm amazed I was so sensible, but what I felt was that if I didn’t have a job I’d become far too dependent on him. And he said, 'Would it make any difference if I asked you to marry me?' And I said, 'No. Because the kind of person you want me to be isn’t the kind of person I want to be'. And he resented what he called my do-gooding side which I thought I probably would have rather more of. 

So that was it. Picture Post folded.  It took a long time to wind itself up, and during that time Gavin and I did see a bit more of each other. And then it was a... we were paid off quite handsomely. And the idea was that... Gavin had decided he would go tootling around the continent. And it was actually the sort of thing I’d done quite a lot of. And he said, 'Why don’t we go together?' Well I didn’t want him to trot along being told by me what I had... what to do. Because I had kicked around the continent a bit together... by myself.
I don’t know that I put this in, but the summer after Cambridge I hitchhiked around France by myself. And you know, I’d been abroad a fair bit and he hadn’t. He had been on a film shoot to Libya in which he had actually been the first and only man to beat Sophia Loren at ping pong as he said brutally, 'Because I was the only man fool enough to keep my eye on the ball!' So we arranged that we would meet in the South of France, and where did...? Suddenly having to think of a place where you’re going to meet somebody in several weeks’ time in the South of France... the whale in the Monte Carlo Museum.
And I, sort of, trickled my way down going through... seeing friends in other places, and there we met up there. And moved slowly down through Italy, quite a long time in Florence, a shorter time in Rome. Down through Italy, and then across to Athens. And then we deliberately chose the island which had least said about it in any of the brochures, which is Sifnos, and that was where we, sort of, got it together completely. And then we... but I was waiting on the island and I sort of... for him actually to propose. And he was thinking of doing...
I’d said, 'Don’t propose in bed or what'd we tell the children?' So he thought, right, I'll give her a proper... I’ll give her a proper proposal. So we waited until we were at Delphi at dawn and he proposed there. And then there was a question of writing to tell your family what you had done, and I was able to write, you know, a long and fulsome letter about the whole thing. Gavin said, 'Tell her I’ve got the chest of a boy of 14 and the lungs of a man of 90'. Well I didn’t. Tell her... what was the other thing? 'Tell her I'm ten feet tall and half an inch wide', which was nearly true. Unlike practically all of my other boyfriends he was actually good and taller than me. And he went home fairly quickly, and I trickled home rather slower. Spending... first time I went to Venice. And that was at the end of the summer and we got married the next January. It had to be early January because... had to be in the school holidays because of using the school premises.
My father by then was teaching at Marlborough and the school premises in Marlborough are pretty nice.

We got married in a little parish church in... Preshute church in Marlborough. And Gavin came from a Quaker background, and Quakers don’t christen. They reckon you can’t decide you’re a Christian until you’re grown up and know what you believe. And Gavin certainly wasn’t going to get christened just to get married. But the clergyman of this little parish church managed to dig out some church rule which said... I suppose it had been devised for missionaries in the field, that a Christian could marry a heathen all right, so long as the heathen understood the meaning of Christian matrimony. My father said, 'Doesn’t mean he has to like it, just has to know what it is'. You know?
So that was fine and we had a honeymoon in the West Country... Dorset and places like that. And then went back and had a flat in London. And by that time Gavin was working for the Sunday Graphic and I was working for Woman’s Own, which was not a particularly choice experience but it was nice to be in work. I was supposed to be an assistant editor filling in for somebody who was having a baby.  And it was run at that point by a really deranged man called Jimmy Drawbell, who I think wanted to keep a tremendous atmosphere, like Fleet Street, you know, crisis to crisis, simply I think because otherwise it would all be far too calm running a woman’s magazine.
But he wasn’t a nice man to work for at all and I had a perfectly miserable time. And then I... by the summer I went and said, 'Well look, I can’t stand this any longer, I want to resign'. And he said, 'Oh Katie, so disloyal... what do you want to do, what would like to be?' So I said, 'I’d like to be a part time feature writer'. So he said, 'Well you can be'. So I was put in a small room at the end of a long corridor with quite amazingly... Jimmy Leasor, who was later a brilliant thriller writer, and Bill Barnett later known as Correlli Barnett, a very distinguished military historian. And what either of them were doing on Woman’s Own heaven knowns.
And then the next November, Bill Barnett and I were sacked together, five hours’ notice and a week’s pay. Which you could do in those days. So there we were. I was out of a job. And Gavin was actually coming unstuck from something else at the time. And it was a kind of miserable moment. But I don’t know, even that, you see, was a good thing in the end, because supposing that... just supposing that I hadn’t been sacked from Woman’s Own, and had risen to be a editor of women’s magazines, do you think this would have been as much fun as the life I’ve had? No.

I had bits of freelancing here and there, and I taught in a charm school for about six weeks. It folded. Nothing, not... nothing to do with my efforts, it was because the backer skipped the country.
And during that time, two things happened which in the end turned out to be absolutely just what should have happened. One was somebody said, well come to a party at X’s because you might meet somebody there who’ll help you get a job. I said, 'I can’t, it’s the anniversary of my old friend, George Grun, from Cambridge, whose...' He was the Viennese refugee whose father had stayed on long past when he could have got out to help our refugees out. 'I can’t miss that'. So I didn’t miss that, but at that party I met somebody who invited me to another party where I met Alan Brien, and I... at that point Alan Brien was on the editorial side of The Spectator as well as writing for it, and he edited a little 400 word thing called Roundabout.
And I said, could I do the cat show for Roundabout? And he said, 'No, I'm afraid somebody else is doing that'. And I said, 'Well, you know, I would rather like to write for it'. So he gave me something else and I... that was supposed to be 400 words, and I wrote it and I wrote it a bit longer... and I wrote it a bit longer, and by the summer I was writing it at about 750 words length and trying desperately to get a job on The Spectator. And I did. But not before... I had... still so brainwashed by the women’s magazines I thought slipper warming [sic] was what I ought to be doing, and Gavin, sort of classic event, Gavin...
It was when I went... started to make my own bread that Gavin finally cracked. And he took me up to the top of Hampstead Heath, sat me down on a bench and said, 'This nonsense must cease. Get a job'. So in fact I was hoping for The Spectator job and I got it. And I got... what I was doing was not only the Roundabout column, and I still don’t know, I knew exactly what I wanted to do with it. I had... not the Roundabout before but something more... it started with an event or book or person or something, but it then broadened into have some different meaning. And I was also editing the back three pages of this, sort of, consumer bit of The Spectator, and that was having... that was great fun. 

The Observer was looking for a woman’s editor.  And this is of more general interest because the point was David Astor had a lot of time for psychology and for women’s interests and family and so on. And up until that point the women’s side had been done brilliantly by somebody like Anne Scott-James as really mostly clothes and cooking and so on.
And David wanted far more in the way of human interests and things like that, which newspapers simply didn’t do at all at that time. And he hired a man from The Guardian called George Seddon.  And The Guardian was memorable at this point because Mary Stott, who was the great kick starter of proper women’s journalism in that century, she had been chief... she’d been a sub-editor which is not... is not the deputy editor, it’s the person who makes the things fit. And you know, corrects the spelling and that kind of thing. She was actually, oddly enough, she was the daughter of a woman... another woman journalist. Anyway, she was very good at it, on The Guardian, Manchester Guardian as it then was. She was so good at it that she’d written a little pamphlet which was required reading for anybody who took it over. And then they said, 'Oh well, Mary, we’re sorry, we’ll have to put you over on to the women’s page because we have to train up the deputy chief sub-editor to be the next chief editor, and that of course has to be a man'. So you can imagine what this extremely able woman felt.
But well she went over, and she resolved to make the women’s pages something completely different. And she did. Because they had everything in it that hadn’t been in women’s pages before... might have been here and there in magazines. Things like education, health things. An enormous amount about human relationships, marital relationships, children, this kind of thing. Far, far wider. And George thought, when he... George Seddon thought, when he came to The Observer, that he was just doing what Mary Stott had done in The Guardian. But actually he took it even further because he wanted to make the things that you do when you're not working as important as the things that you do when you are working.
And one forgets this completely, just how arid newspapers used to be. They weren’t arid in the sense of not having scandal stories and that, but they... serious papers had things that were of interest to busy men. Which meant business pages, politics, hot news, foreign news, sport, and, of course... lots of sport. And you know, things like how marriages work out, that wouldn't have shown up anywhere except in the legal pages, the divorce, something like that. 
And George thought the features pages ought to be all the things that you did with your... the rest of your life. And he sort of expanded the woman’s pages that weren’t woman’s pages, they were under titles like 'Ego' or 'You' or something like that. And he was really the father of all these women’s pages that aren’t women’s pages. And even more, I think, helped to kick-start what Felicity Green, who was doing the same thing on the Mirror, different... doing different things, she was far more design-oriented, of what she calls the feminisation of Fleet Street.
Because if you think about it, any newspaper now has masses of stuff about what goes on in real life, and in detail. And... doing this, you know, people say, well you know, were newspapers so dull in those days? Well, don’t you remember that wonderful line from Blithe Spirit where the man tried to make conversation with his wife over breakfast says, 'Anything interesting in The Times this morning?' And she says, 'Don’t be ridiculous, Charles'. And the whole scene has totally changed now, and Mary Stott and George Seddon and Felicity Green, and of course the time was going that way.

David Astor thought that nobody who could do fashion would have enough gravitas, those were his words, to do all the other side of it. And George... we all put in to be women as editor of The Observer, and nobody seemed to fit the bill. So George said would I like to come... he’d admired the column I was doing for The Spectator, would I like to come and do the gravitas bit. And I didn’t want to leave The Spectator, I was having the time of my life, marvellous people there. So I said, 'No'.
And then Anne Scott-James was supposed to be doing the fashion bit. And then Anne... I now realise putting the bits together, Anne was offered a column similar to what I ended up doing at The Observer, for the Daily Mail. So she backed out of doing the fashion. And George said, 'Well look, would you like to come and do the fashion, because...' he said, 'You could do that part time. And therefore stay with The Spectator'. And I thought, well do I know anything about fashion? Well not much, but I’d done the fashion... the Paris collection for Picture Post. I’d actually apparently done them for the Sunday Dispatch once. And I had taught in the charm school so... oh well, let’s give it a go.
So we did. And it actually changed fashion pages because I wasn’t going to write about, you know, what the collection said and what this... I wrote about... well real clothes. I mean, I remember one which my mother rather treasured called Trousseaus for Him. I said, why is it that girls arrive with this mass of fearfully wonderful clothes and a man arrives with a huge carry-on of disused RAF thing... RAF implements and uniform. And you know, one and a half pairs of pants and no idea how to get them washed, and you know...
So it was called Trousseaus for Him. Why don’t we have trousseaus for men? And it was huge fun and we changed it... and it’s worth recording that it was enormously popular with the readers.  But the advertising, who... we normally had Marshall & Snelgrove and Harrods, which were the top of the range. And they complained bitterly and they said, you must take this girl off fashion. The advertisers don’t like it. And this was one... for example, you know, ten days before Christmas, you haven’t got any money, you realise you’ve got a party. So I featured a wonderful little black velvet suit from C&A that cost 6 quid.
This was not what Marshall & Snelgrove wanted. And David was about to move me from fashion and Anne Scott-James, who talked to him about lots of things, they were great friends, said, 'Don’t be stupid, if the readers like her the advertising will come round'. And of course they did.

I found a letter to my mother, I kept it... she kept every letter I’d ever written to her, which was very useful when I was writing my autobiography. And she found a letter I’d written her, I said, 'Just had an interview with the manager, the general manager, and the person who edits the colour magazine, and they want me to do, predictably, something every week for the colour magazine, and I don’t want to do it. I won’t'.
And they said, 'Well what do you want then?' And I said, 'I want a baby and a column'. And the point was that I’d had two miscarriages, and they said if you keep on at this pace you’ll never hang on to one. And I was getting a bit old. So by this time all my friends on The Spectator had, more or less, left and so at that point I stopped doing fashion and they switched my Spectator column over to The Observer. So that I joined The Observer in 1960, did fashion for two and a half years... three, I can’t remember exactly... but produced Bernard James Lyle in 1964.
And Bernard Levin’s comment on this name, Bernard Levin was a great friend, not exactly named after him but that was the idea, said 'Yes, scores... three:nil. Two goals scored by Jim Lyle. Praise Highlands for Sir James Lyle. Bernard James Lyle, do you feel...? Do you plead innocent or guilty for this...? Yeah, I think this will do as a name'. You know?
And from then on I did the column not quite non-stop because I stopped to try and do a bit of editing, but it didn’t work very well... but more or less non-stop I was doing that from 1964 until they stopped it in 1996. And I did other big things as well but the column was the absolute... Gavin regarded it as the tree on which I hung other  things. You know? So...
[Q] What was the...? There was a particularly famous one, wasn’t there, where you started with...
Oh, the sluts one, yeah. Well, it was all part of this change in women’s journalism, you see? That all women’s journalism had been very... telling them how to be perfect, telling them how it ought to be done. This is the fashion, this is how you ought to raise... Even when they started talking about children it was how you ought to raise your children. And I knew that real life wasn’t like that in the least, and I wrote a piece, and interestingly She magazine, which was supposed to be the liberated women’s magazine in the ‘60s, it folded in the end... I had offered She magazine an article on Are you a slut? and a quiz. And they turned it down. They said they might take the quiz, they didn’t want the article.
And I remember going downstairs from... we had... our flat was a, sort of, atticy bit in an old Victorian house... going downstairs, picking up the post, and coming back crying because it was the rejection slip for that article on sluts. Which was the thing that everybody still now remembers. So anyway...
[Q] How did it start, the article, can you remind us?
Said have you ever taken anything back out of the dirty laundry because it’s become relatively the cleaner thing? How many things are there in the wrong room? Books in the kitchen, cups in the bedroom, whatever it was. And how many on the floor of the wrong room? You know? And a few other things. I said, if you can answer yes to any of these, you are one of us, the poor, beaten down and misunderstood Army of Sluts. Because the sluts are the people who’ve tried terribly hard to be clean and tidy and organised and they just don’t seem to be able to make it.

The thing was, and I put this in the book actually because... because of sluttishness, as I say, I’d written it for She, and then I wrote it again, and Gavin said, 'You really can’t print this thing while you’re still a fashion editor'. So I reluctantly put it on one side. And then when I wasn’t a fashion editor I thought, well this week I don’t have to write a piece, except that I couldn’t find it. Had to write it all over again. So, I mean, that was the absolute mark of the slut.
But it’s become a sort of signature piece. And then it got the most fantastic response from the readers who wrote in and said, 'Yes, yes, I'm like that. I’ve always been there'. 'Oh God yes, I remember, I found myself wiping the kitchen table with the kitten'. And one woman wrote in and said she found two Dutch caps she had in at the time, and someone else said it was the opposite trouble, she had six children to prove it. And somebody else said, 'I am the only woman... My baby is the only baby in Ruislip that has blue nappies'.
You know, and from then on, at one point we had... goodness knows why, we had a sort of... panels of Observer readers who were supposed to consult about things. And I remember that when... going round to interview people, used to be, you know, she’s from The Observer, and they’d sort of cleaned and tidied up, and as it was, they kicked the dirty laundry out of the way, they went, 'Oh come in, you know, you’re one of us'. It sort of changed everything. People felt I was one of them.

[Q] Do you think you changed women’s journalism or...?
Not me personally, but I think... well, I was one of those who helped change it, and I think women’s journalism is totally different now from what it was in the mid ‘50s. It really is. But all kinds of things, apart from this, have... one of which is simply the vast size of papers, they’ve got to be filled with feature stuff. Because there isn’t enough hard news anyway.

I think one of the things that is enormously different is the number of women who are not just being able to be journalists... there always were terrific reporters and so on... but who are able to write authoritatively, but as women. I mean, The Times has Libby Purvis. They’ve got Camilla Cavendish, who pretty well singlehanded got the children’s courts open to that. Nobody gives her credit, especially not The Telegraph.  But it was of course a woman who uncovered... an American woman at that, Heather Brooke, who uncovered the scandal. And I... there’ve always been one or two wonderful women reporters. 
There actually were women reporters in the 19th century in America, but what it is now is that there are women’s columns which are taken quite as seriously as anything else. I think you could say, and I dare say people do say, that there’s been an explosion of too many columns, male or female, but the lifestyle column can be deeply boring if you haven’t got anything to say. You know? What somebody, you know, called watching the paint on the cot dry. But I think that... that the whole of Fleet Street and magazines... well, magazines are different... but the whole of Fleet Street has become far more personalised, and therefore actually far more accurate about the human condition, I think. Not just scandals and so forth.
I think there are things I don’t care for, the sort of celebrity culture, which is, I think, tiresome. But I think what’s there is much more important than what isn’t there. And what is there is that for one thing, don’t ever anybody really say our press is rotten when we’ve still got national papers that have six or seven different points of view in them. I mean, we’re not financed by government as, sort of, Eastern Bloc things. We’re not entirely run by the one paper in a local district.
I mean, one of the things that Thomson did in Canada... had a long chain down the west... the east coast of Canada. And he looked at what actually made them pay and it was mostly the small ads. So in fact what he did was to sack half the journalists, get an awful lot from the wire services, from Reuters and PA, and rely heavily on ads and so forth. But who there would have been able to uncover the corrupt mayor, the police chief who was sleeping with the wrong person?

The way in which newspapers are managed is also important, and I don’t know much about it. You can go and interview somebody who did. But I mentioned Heather Brooke the other day. She left America because she is fed up with the way that multimedia... the whole linking of the 'net' and printing and television and so on is all... that the editors spend half their time in conferences with the other bits, instead of actually, you know, head down, smoking cigarettes, working on what’s the news for today.
And she was fed up with this totally corporate commercial culture... came to Britain... but she said, the Americans are much better at finding out things people don’t want them to find out by using the Freedom of Information Act. And British journalists who dig... but they are... do it much more on contacts, people are prepared to spill the beans behind the door. And so she was the person who actually blew this. And at the Press Club lunch, I was going to say last year but heaven knows when anybody will be listening to this... the Press Club lunch in 2009, the editor of The Daily Telegraph did the speech. And he did the whole of his speech about what a marvellous thing they had made of the scandal of the expenses, and he never once mentioned where the information came from. He used the phrase, 'We heard there was this dossier going around'.
Well fortunately several people put him right before the meeting was over. But I think there will always be a bit of difficulty, not so much about women getting the credit, but the right person getting the credit, whoever they are.

And I'm a huge believer in the Freedom of Information Act. One of the most disobliging photographs ever taken of me is with carrying a banner for the Freedom of Information Act in Trafalgar Square. Well, there are demos and demos, aren’t there? The only... the most recent one was one to try... a local one, I live in Camden, and they were trying to stop our GP practices and turn them all into polyclinics which are lousy for the old because all old people have a lot of things wrong with them and only somebody who knows them well can spot when this one matters, as opposed to all the others which are chronic.
And there we were, gathered under the statue of Camden at the Mornington Crescent end of Camden Town. You know, that statue of Camden with... always has a pigeon on its head? And we had huge t-shirts over our coats and we were carrying banners saying 'Keep NHS private... public'. Sorry. Awful slip. Can you cut that out? And a policeman appeared, I said, 'Well you’re not going to get much trouble from this lot, are you?' He said, 'We’re here to stop you getting run over'. And we went down the inner lane very slowly because only the first bit was one where we were going to see a lot... a lot of people were going to see us. And there was a policeman saying, 'Shuffle along, ladies'.
So there we are, that’s the... nowadays, you see, I'm not so much crusading for women, I'm on the side of 'the aged'. They are my parish, as it were. And you know, they can demonstrate too.

I suppose we always drank a fair bit, but so did an awful lot of other people and it wasn’t a problem. In the ‘70s Gavin was switching over from doing one kind of book to doing another, and there were various tricky patches at that point. Maybe I was working too much. I mean, it certainly didn’t work when I was going into the office all the time. And then he had a health scare, towards the end of the ‘70s, early ‘80s and not... It was fine for a bit, everything was fine. All kinds of things. He switched to a different and more successful sort of book, and we got our boat, which was the most... the happiest thing we ever did.

In the ‘80s things were pretty good up until about ‘85/’86. He was writing... so Gavin had three sort of generations of his books. The first lot were sort of dashing young heroes, most of them flying planes. He tried in Venus with Pistol one where he didn’t like the 'I' character, just to see how it came. Then there was the 'Major Maxim' books which were great success. But then he had to abandon those because the Cold War came down and... sorry, the wall came down and the Cold War stopped.
And so he went back to the very start of the secret service, 1913. But unfortunately that was the point at which Tim Hely Hutchinson took over his publisher, Hodder, and they had one... they had a very small... I suppose I had better on the net, say this, fairly circumspectly, they had a very inadequate publicity arrangement. And I will not give you the name of the woman into whose image I am sticking pins to this day. And they didn’t do much about the publicity for this book and they didn’t succeed so well, and okay, they probably weren’t quite as good. They were still a damned sight better than most people’s books. And by the end of the ‘90s Gavin regarded himself as retired. And when I left The Observer, I wasn’t fired, I... they took away my column and what they had me doing afterwards was very disagreeable so I resigned. But we both really sort of regarded ourselves as retired.
But the point was that by the end of the ‘80s Gavin had been diagnosed with sclerosis and for a week he thought he was dying. And he didn’t believe me when I said that... not necessarily. His GP finally persuaded him that if he never drank another drop he’d be okay. And he lived for another 13 years. And he really didn’t drink another drop. I mean, he would spit out a liquor chocolate. And I can do a bit of proselytizing here because I have one friend who did die and another who is rapidly heading  that way, because a French doctor said, 'Just the occasional glass', meaning a glass of champagne every other week, and the serious drinker thinks it means, okay, no more vodka for breakfast and I can drink one in the evening as usual. And so the... didn’t last long.
Anyway, Gavin was brilliant, but of course the trouble was that when he wasn’t drinking he noticed every single drop I drank and they weren’t mostly singles. Quite different patterns. He would drink gently drip, drip, drip all day, in my case I drink too much when I'm with people and I'm having a great time and I just go on drinking. What you might describe as rather old fashioned Fleet Street plan. But that used to upset Gavin a lot.
So in a sense it isn’t just us... it isn’t just him, it’s me. But somebody once said, well wouldn’t it have been better if you’d been teetotallers? And I say, 'Absolutely not!' Because all the highs of our joint life were accompanied by it too. And you know, pretty damn good highs they were. I don’t think that there is very much that I would have done differently on that front.

Of course there are things I wish I had done differently, particularly... especially during Gavin’s last illness. Because I did all I knew how to do, but I now know more about things, in particular.
He didn’t sleep well at all for the last few years of his life, and he had… he was prescribed Temazepam which was... I did not know until later, nobody told me, can be a depressive if you take it constantly. So he didn’t need that, did he? And also, it... after a time it didn’t work too well. So for the last few years of his life he was having awful trouble sleeping. Depressed for the last six months when he was ill.
Now I don’t sleep too well. I have a regime of sleeping pills which I have orchestrated brilliantly. I know exactly what each one does so that I don’t take too many of them and so on and so on. And if I’d been as clever with my... with his pills as I have been with mine I could have made his last six months so much better because I know a bit more now about the despair you get when you haven’t slept. And I was dutifully doing what the doctor had said, and even when the kids were in school I was much more inclined to take the school’s view of what was going wrong, and Gavin fought the boys' corner much better than I did because he wasn’t... oh, I don’t know whether it’s being a school master’s daughter. I tend to think that they perhaps know best. And they don’t. But as far as drink goes, yes of course, we do drink too much. But a lot of people in that era did and they were great times to live in and yes, we could have handled the end decades better, but do I wish we had always been teetotallers? Well I’ve met some, you know. They don’t have much of a good time.

[Q] Did you have a large response? Again in the book you talk about the personal experience of losing a loved one, called it an amputation at one stage. Did you find that touched a nerve with people? Did people respond to that?
Well, it was... To the book, yes. But much more I wrote about being a widow in The Guardian and in Saga. And to those I had enormous responses. And it was super because people said, oh I was there and I thought I was the only person who felt like this. And that’s so much more this kind of journalism that I do... is people thought they were the only person who, you know, scratched behind their ears at dinner parties, or, you know, took things back out of dirty clothes, or felt like that.
And it cheers them up so much to realise that not at all, it’s quite general, other people feel that way too. And that we’re not monsters or particularly unusual.

I'm agony aunt for Saga Magazine for the aged which I’ve been doing for a dozen years, which is extremely interesting because it’s other people feeding you their experiences, and fascinating. And people say, well how...? How do you think you can be an agony aunt for that, what do you know about it? Well, the answer is that three-quarters obviously is common sense, anybody but the people concerned could see exactly.
Some of it I can’t do, but you can discuss the problem and then maybe people write in and talk about it. And the other thing that is an enormous help that I discovered since very early on is the extraordinary number of self-help or particularly dedicated organisations to people’s problems. I mean, health problems, I don’t do health problems, but the problems of people who've a son or daughter said they were gay, or somebody who’s been wrongly accused of shoplifting or somebody who doesn’t know how to run their finances, who do they go to?
The incredible amount of help out there. And I mean, I’ve often said that, you know, if you had a Burmese lesbian grandmother with ingrowing toenails, there would be a special help just for her. And sometimes, I mean, the one I'm doing at the moment, I'm... I had several people over the years writing in and saying, my son or daughter is not actually my child, I don’t know whether to tell them. And I had to judge really on the circumstances and how old the people were and so on.
One of the best was somebody who wrote in and said, I'm in my 80s and I’ve got six sons, one of whom isn’t mine, but we decided to bring him up as ours, and my wife died and... but I'm going to die soon so should I tell him? And I sort of thought, well, all these people are in their 40s, if it had been talking about a 20 year old, yes, probably, he’s forming his identity. But as it is, you know, does that mean that the grandchildren are going to say the grandpa is not their grandpa? So we decided, bit of correspondence about it, okay, don’t tell.
Then he wrote to me again and he said, well actually I have told because my son... six months later, I thought you might be interested to know this... he asked me directly, am I your son? So asked direct, yes, you’ve got to tell the truth. He then told me one fact that he hadn’t said before. Because he didn’t... he hadn’t told me that his five brothers were all dark and that this one was blond to a fault. And he was able to tell him, well actually that his father had been... I forget what, but something charismatic like played football for England or something.
And of course, considering the way the footballers lay themselves around that isn’t amazing nowadays. But it is a big question. So at last... I’ve actually asked him, I’ve said, look, I’ve been tackling this dilemma, there’s no real answer, I would like to hear from people who were told or not told. And I'm struggling at this moment with quite a big post bag of people in what some cases it’s been a relief, in many it’s been a failure, in an awful lot of cases they wanted to know and then was it a good idea or not? Interesting problem.
That’s part of what I do. The other half is things which I write when people ask me to write them. I write stuff for The Guardian. I review books for anybody. I'm... even for the oldie who, you know, pay you with a half bottle of weak white wine at the best. No. I... that’s not quite true, only nearly true. I’ve been doing odd bits for The Observer again which is huge fun. I sort of feel I’ve rejoined the family.

You know, we were talking about fashion earlier on, and one of the things which happened about 18 months ago was that The Observer thought it would be amusing to send me to Paris with their fashion people to see... to do a 'goodness, different in my time' piece which I did. And they were absolutely super because there’s two ways in which people can be nice to people my age. They can either be very solicitous, you know, watch out that you don’t fall downstairs or whatever...
Well actually they still have to watch you don’t fall downstairs because the other way of dealing with it is just to treat you as one of them, in which case you may very well need a little help going down the stairs. But these people were marvellous, they treated me just like one of them, and I had a great time, and it’s of course very, very different nowadays. I mean, all this stuff about secrecy has gone out with the mobile phone. Everybody sits there taking photographs, you know.
In my day, a girl was seen to be drawing in Dior and was not only flung out of Dior, she was banned from all the other shows, you know. And I said, 'Martine, why are you crying?' 'I drew in Dior'. Sad.

I do the stuff for Saga, I do book reviews. People write to me now, they ask me to do things about being old. And it’s all right, I'm happy to have a constituency, and if it’s the aged, well there are a great many of them and it’s a growing population.
No, actually, the real answer to that... I’ll stop being flip about it. Still writing something is still energising more than anything else that happens. I’ve got, thank god, a super family, but the son who lives near, well he comes and, you know, fixes too high lightbulbs and, you know, copes with my computer troubles. Don’t... Let’s skip six paragraphs. And the other is in California, they’re lovely, but they’re not my social life. I’ve got lots of other friends and people.
But it is enormously nice not to feel that I’ve left the real world. And I think that for an awful lot of this generation of people living much longer than they expected to... and the interesting thing is, what are they going to do with all this extra time? I mean, they’re not just going to sit there and... I mean, you can’t spend what Richard Nicholson called 30 years of sabbatical, it’s just not on. You can’t spend 25 years watching telly and failing to cut the lawn.
And I do now think that the question of how we cope with old age... I'm perfectly certain that the absolutely first thing, and nobody can tell you differently, the retirement age has got to go up, and I think people talk very negatively about this. They talk as if we were still in the age where people began at the bottom of a firm and worked up to the top, and the people have got to fall off the top before the people at the bottom can move up. Look, we live in a short contract culture. The old also create jobs. There’s a good statistic that people... two good statistics. One is that start-ups, the ones that the women do have a slightly better success rate than the men. Probably because they had to agonise so much longer before they did it at all. And that the start-ups done by older people have a very high survival rate. So the old are not just dross.

Since you have unwisely given me this pulpit, one of the things that has got to stop is this idea that keeping people alive come what may, however much they want to die, however frightful their lives, is a good thing. It is not.
And the Dignity in Dying people, I’ve got a lot of time for them, but they’re far too much focusing on, oh isn’t it frightful when they’re going to die in three weeks that we can’t let them go now. That’s not the problem. If you’re going to die in three weeks all you have to do is suffer for three weeks. How about being blind and paralysed for five years? Would you enjoy that? No. And I do think that it’s a serious thing that’s got to be tackled... is that now that we can stop the end of life happening when it naturally would, we’ve got to rethink the end of life the way we absolutely have rethought the beginning of life.
And Catholics say, no, no, no, we haven’t, you know. You say, you don’t think you have? Because you don’t approve conception? Okay, what about saving very premature babies? What about IVF? Surrogate motherhood, whatever. We simply do not now leave it to fate. And we’re going to stop having... leaving death to fate either. And I'm much more concerned to be involved in this discussion and try and make sure it’s done the right way. And there are good ways of doing it.
I did a long thing on Oregon for The Guardian, and it’s very interesting because people tell great lies about that. For example, they made an enormous fuss two years ago because one of the strict things that you have... that in Oregon they have to do a psychological test on anybody who’s going to use their assisted dying to make sure they’re not just depressed. And two doctors had fallen out of line and not done it. So this is being used as a reason... do you think two doctors who had actually given the wrong medicine would mean we would stop giving medicine to anybody? And that’s the logic of it. The other thing that they got completely wrong is that they... and this is much more serious and much more sad... the presumption is that if you allow assisted dying, hospice care will deteriorate. And there is a question mark hanging over Holland. Oregon is the second best state in America for hospice care. They do it in a rather different way. Hospice for them doesn’t mean just the building, it means palliative care. And they do a great deal of it in people’s homes. The only thing that’s wrong with it in Oregon is that they’re so hedged about the safeguards that far from wiping out the poor, the unwanted... the poor and the unwanted haven’t a hope of getting it. It’s the educated and the white who manage to get it, but that can be changed. And I really, truly think... I didn’t have this thought, but I think it’s dead right... people are going to look back on the way we keep our very ill patients alive and miserable, the way we look back on the way we put the mad into Bedlam in the 18th century. So I think this is going to be one of the big issues. What you do with older people, what they do with themselves is going to be an issue. And oddly enough, I seem to have shifted into another mainstream area.  I think there’s a lot to be done in it and it’s interesting.

The Oldie had me review a book on governesses which told me a lot of things I hadn’t quite known about just exactly how badly women used to be treated. How few opportunities they had. What... the governesses for example, one of them was unwise enough to get married to somebody to try and get out of being a governess, because there were very few jobs that middle class or women who aspired to be ladies could get, except governessing. One of them unwisely married.
Until the Women’s Property Act... and no, I can’t remember the date off the top of my head... even if she moved away from him and earned her living again, her earnings would still belong to her husband. And those... you know, you can make fun of the suffragettes, and interestingly somebody said, well you know, all these women tying themselves to the railings and throwing themselves under race horses... the British being the British, of course, were far more concerned about the horse... they say that didn’t help at all. There were these sensible, quiet committee women proving what they could do.  But I think Mary Stott herself said, 'No actually you needed both'. Because the quiet committee women would never had got the attention if it hadn’t been for these. And ditto with the civil rights movement. And we had it long before... small feminist rant coming up now. Are you sitting comfortably?
One of the few things I thought Mrs Thatcher said absolutely right, was when somebody said, 'Do you believe in women’s liberation?' And she said, 'Some of us have been liberated for a very long time'. And we have. My aunt went to Cambridge and chose her own career in the ‘30s, she didn’t think it was odd because her aunts had been to college before the First World War. And I talked to one woman who started a thing which used to be called the Women’s Employment Fund Foundation until people thought it meant housemaids so they changed the name. And she’d been at Edinburgh University before the First World War. Her father had been reading Darwin with her when she was eight, she’d read zoology. She said, yes, we did get the same, except when it came to human anatomy, gentlemen and the ladies were dealt with in different rooms. I think it was rumoured that there were bits of the gentleman that the ladies never got. But you see, I was at the end of the first wave of feminism and my mother wanted... she... because she had spinal meningitis when she was 16 and was half deaf all her life and so on, didn’t get to Cambridge where she had a place, she did have a year at college, you know.
But she wanted to bring me up like that. And when I was going through some of the earlier stops and starts that we were talking about earlier on... and I found when she died a note among her effects which was the pros and cons of having another baby at the end of the war. You know, the cons was would it be right to have a baby with a deaf mother and so on. One of the ones was another chance... a con... a pro, another chance to bring up a girl. Con, but it might work out no better this time. Well fortunately I didn’t find it until I knew she was enormously proud of what happened to me.

My generation... all the people I was up at Cambridge with expected to have both husbands and families and careers. Now I think not a lot of them were as successful in doing this because the great lesson is that bits of a society move at different rates. And I had people write to me like in the ‘70s saying that until I was talking to their school they had never met anybody who didn’t think that getting married and raising a family was all that women did. And if you had a job it was just a little typing job that you did until you found the right man.
And you know, there was this huge wave of women getting into things. And I think interestingly and importantly, I think that women who got into various jobs and positions because of the war were not pushed back into domestic roles anything like as much as the Americans were. Because, you know, the Rosie the Riveter, the post... Rosie the Riveter was assumed to be about to give up her job, and the world that Betty Friedan wrote her book, first... you know, the ground-breaking feminist book, Feminine Mystique, about, was the one which all these intelligent women, college educated women, very often American women better educated than us, had been thrust back and told...
And I met when I was at Cornell, a variety of women who actually said, I'm here to get my 'Mrs' degree. [Growl]. Well no wonder there was a rebellion brewing about that. But you see here it all happened in what the Americans would regard a much more limp, and we’d regard as a much more measured, way. But it didn’t stop. And I think I was an incredibly lucky generation because as I say, educated as good as my brother, except for my own efforts not to be, but that’s another story. Half my college paid for by... publically paid for. It wasn’t the state, it was the county, but same thing. Health service that worked. All this women’s revolution in journalism I’ve been talking about, you know, it was an unbelievably lucky moment to be alive.
[Q] Lovely.
I suppose the next thing that I'm working on is trying to make it a rather more better moment to be dying. How about that?
