ken.adam

Sir Kenneth Adam (1921-2016), OBE, born Klaus Hugo Adam, was a production designer famous for his set designs for the James Bond films of the 1960s and 1970s. Initially, he trained as an architect in London, but in October 1943, he became one of only two German-born fighter pilots to fly with the RAF in wartime. He joined 609 Squadron where he flew the Hawker Typhoon fighter bomber. After the war, he entered the film industry, initially as a draughtsman on This Was a Woman. His portfolio of work includes Barry Lyndon and The Madness of King George; he won an Oscar for both films. Having a close relationship with Stanley Kubrick, he also designed the set for the iconic war room in Dr Strangelove. Sir Ken Adam was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 2003.

I was born in... Berlin in... 1921, into a sort of upper-class German Jewish family, and a great family, because there were four children, my father and my mother, and...we had… our early family life was wonderful. Of course, when Hitler started and came to power things changed and... I mean, I can't go into all the details because we can make a film purely about that side of it. And... I had a much older brother who was studying in Clermont-Ferrand in France in 1932 when he saw what was happening in Germany from the outside, and he came back from his studies, he said to my father and mother: his two younger brothers and the whole family has to leave Germany. And my father, who considered himself a very good German and had been a very much-decorated cavalry officer in the First World War, was very difficult to talk into that. My mother immediately took the side of my older brother.
And then in... 1933, or... I think it was 1933 or '34, my father was arrested. Nobody knew why. We had a place in the country and the police came. And... he had a sort of big sports store in Berlin – famous, it was part of Burberry's, I think – and he was released, strangely enough, through one of his ex-employees who by this time had been an SS-Obergruppenführer, and so he was released with 48 hours. But that gave him the push to decide we had to leave. And I left with my younger brother first, in the beginning of '34, and then the rest of the family came later, in June - July '34.

My older brother had been here, studying at the London School of Economics, and we also had discovered a distant English aunt who was very... quite famous here.  She had the most famous secretarial college, and her name was Mrs Hoster.  And she facilitated very much our coming here, which was not easy, you know, because even though we took some of our furniture and one or two good paintings... but my father had been so German that when Hitler came, made an order that no German was allowed to have money in Switzerland and so on, he brought all his money back to Germany and we lost every penny of it.

My mother opened a boarding house in Hampstead which became very famous, and I often think... I learnt more about life through sitting at a table of 26 people every night for dinner, who came from all parts of the globe... who obviously were refugees, but I learnt more during those discussions at dinner than I learnt in any school, and... I never regret that.

Through my aunt, Tante Connie, and my mother, we were accepted by St Paul's School, and... I went to that school. And that's strange, because St Paul's had a very high standard of education which was very similar to the Französisches Gymnasium, the French school, which is still in existence, which all the three boys went to in Berlin. And so it was easy for me to… I had to first learn English, and then I had a very good art teacher, and... I think when I was 17 years old, and I passed my London Matric [London Matriculation Examination] I think it was at that time – he said, 'You're to study more art, either art or architecture', and he pushed me all the time. And... that's how I studied as an external student at the... Bartlett School University College for about two years, something like that, and at the same time was... working for an architectural firm called CW Glover and Partners.

I very much enjoyed my schooling at St Paul's because it was a very liberal-minded school, and of course sports were very important, which we didn't have at the Französisches Gymnasium in Berlin, but in many ways it was… it had a similar standard of teaching and education as the school I had left in Berlin. Of course, I had to learn English, but I was very attracted to the British way of sportsmanship and all that. I mean it came… it was fantastic, and we used to play games, and... I was never a great soccer player or rugger player, you know. The first time I was hurt in rugby I had enough, you know! But... and I did fencing too, for St Paul's, and it was... all that and the extraordinary high standard of teachers who became your friends, really, was... something which was wonderful and very similar to that very special school that we had been in Berlin, you see.

We were all friendly aliens at one time at the outbreak of war, and then after Dunkirk, we all became enemy aliens again.
And they wanted to intern me and my younger brother and... within two hours, in fact, and my mother was… she said, 'But what's the War Office saying to that? What's Captain Glover saying to that? Why don't you ring him?' And I rang him, and he said, 'They can't intern you...you're working... too important'. And they unfortunately took my younger brother, who was barely 16 and could hardly speak German, too, and interned him on the Isle of Man... but eventually I got him out. And... then I got pretty bored with illustrating air raid shelters and masks and so on for my boss, Captain Glover, and I wanted to do something more active.

Being at the University I tried to get into one of the university air squadrons, but they wouldn't have me. And so I joined the military... Auxiliary Military Pioneer Corps, which was a military formation which had been formed by the War Office for people like me and a lot of older refugees from all over the place, and we were stationed in Ilfracombe in Devonshire. And since I had two stripes from my OTC [Officer Training Corps] days at St Paul's I became a training staff corporal. And... the most amusing part was that when I went to the recruiting officer with the two stripes, he said, 'You're just the person I want, because we've got some French Foreign Legion who have just been kicked out of Narvik, and we want to send them down to Ilfracombe, so perhaps you would take charge of them?' And here I was, barely 18 years old, no experience at all, with some French Foreign Legionnaires who I think had been at Verdun, some of them, in the First World War, and who certainly had to be treated with a lot of diplomacy, you see. But that was not my life; I wanted to fly, in any case.

I kept... applying for the air force, and was always turned down. And then one day, much to my surprise, in 1941, I think, I was accepted, and then started training, first of all, you know, in the elementary stuff in Scarborough and Harrogate, and then at Perth in Scotland where we started flying on Tiger Moths, and then I was sent over to Canada to complete my training there. And since I had never been to the United States, and also at that time I had a girlfriend in New York, I thought it might be nicer to train in America. So I managed to get on the Arnold Scheme, which was a General Arnold, and I trained with the Americans in... first in Florida, then in Georgia, and finished my last advanced training in a place called Dothan, Alabama, which was unbelievably primitive, you know. They still had, of course, the colour bar, and you couldn't... you were not allowed to mix, you would have been immediately sent back, and so on. But it was a very good experience for me.

On my graduation leave I went to visit an uncle in New York, and he showed me off everywhere, you know, with my silver American wings and the RAF wings. And I came back after some time to Dothan, Alabama, and the commanding officer called me in and said, 'I don't know what to make of this, but this is a' – I think it was a telex in those days – 'from British Air Staff, Washington, saying: pending further investigations, Aviation Cadet KH Adam will be... will not have a commission, but will be a Sergeant Pilot'. And you know, we never found out why. In the meantime, somebody wrote me a letter saying they thought it may be that I wasn't able to do the oath to the King, and all that sort of thing.

I went back to... England, and... did some more training on Masters and Hurricanes, and then in October 1943 joined the top-scoring fighter squadron in the... in 11 Group at the time, which was 609 West Riding Squadron, motto: Tally Ho! And of course they were all heroes to me, those people – and flying Typhoons, which was a younger brother of the Hurricane, and had just been… come out and didn't have a Rolls-Royce engine but had a 24-cylinder Napier Sabre engine and was unbelievably powerful and fast, but had certain temperamental problems. But for a time we just flew straight fighter escorts and so on.

The air force decided that we should change to air-to-ground rockets because, you know, the Typhoon at about 8,000 ft could fly straight and level at about 450 miles an hour, which was really incredible. And it was so big and powerful, it had that 24-cylinder Sabre engine. And so they equipped us for the first time with air-to-ground rockets, and we were all very excited about it. Little did we know how dangerous these bloody rockets were, not only for the enemy but also for us, because we didn't have a proper gunsight, we had to use our... the normal gunsight of the four Hispano cannons we had on the plane, and... so we used to scream down... we were training at Fairwood Common or somewhere in Wales, and so on and... it was very difficult to hit a target without a gunsight, you know? But eventually – I looked at my logbook some time ago – my average error was about 50 yards, I think, which is not bad but of course we had eight of these rockets and... each one had the sort of explosive power of a 6-inch naval gun shell.

When we were… we became Tactical... the Second Tactical Air Force attached to the army... to the Canadian and British Army… and we also had... a lot of losses... The danger was that you built up too much speed coming down [to attack] and then you had to really slow away, because if you did too fast, the Typhoon had a nasty habit of stalling, a high-speed stall and went straight into the deck.
Why we wanted to get out as quickly as possible – a) the Germans had incredible flak but also that we weren't hit by our own explosions. So our losses, certainly from May, April '44, to, I think it was October '44, were pretty high, and... though there were lots of pilots at Lasham, I think, waiting to fly on operations, but they didn't volunteer for the Typhoons! So they finally decided to give us, every four weeks, 48 hours off. We flew our own planes to Gatwick or Northolt and had a two weeks' [sic - should be two days'] holiday here.

I was still not commissioned, so I was really getting pissed off by this time, you know. And I had a fantastic group commander, who was called – we called him Scotty – he was Group Captain Scott, a New Zealander, and I often used to fly No 2 to him, and I said to him, 'Scotty, if I don't get my commission this time, I want to be transferred to a Coastal Command Squadron with Sunderland flying-boats where they get eggs and bacon for breakfast!' And so he said, 'I couldn't agree more'. And he had a friend, a tennis partner, who was Sir Anthony Eden, Foreign Minister at the time, and through Eden and various other things I finally was commissioned, I think in October '44, and then had to go back to England because I had a double hernia and had to have an operation. And after the operation I rejoined the squadron which was in about February of '45.

First of all, we didn't see many enemy aircraft because by that time, which was… I mean, 609 had just celebrated its 200th victory, but that was October '43, and of course I was very keen to get on some of these shows, you see, but then found out that the one or two times that some enemy aircraft were sighted, the CO [commanding officer] or the flight commander were the first ones to get after them, you see.
And... you know, the whole thing at that time still was treated like a sport, and we had really fantastic flight commanders and squadron commanders who... quite a number had been in the Battle of Britain and so on, and so it was, you know… Even eventually when things became very nasty, you know, and we had big losses, if I look at my logbook, the language I used, you know: 'Woody shot down in flames, went into the drink; tough luck'. Things like that, which isn't me at all, you know, but it was a sort of defence mechanism against me getting too emotional. So obviously once you got back on the ground, you know, and you saw that some of your friends were not there any longer it had a… you know, a very sad effect, particularly since sometimes you had to write to the families left behind. And since I was, I think, I was already then a sensitive, very sensitive person, whereas we had Australians and New Zealanders who were really, you know, tough, but I was more sensitive, and... so maybe I felt more these things that were happening around…

I think, it was the only way I could really do something for the war effort, because I would have been useless in the infantry or in the Commandos or something like that, and in Bomber Command, you know. And I used to have long talks with Ossy [Oswald] Morris the cameraman, who was a Lancaster pilot, twice decorated, DFC [Distinguished Flying Cross], and used to fly Churchill after the war. And I said, 'You know, Ossy, how you flew these Lancasters… because I had to be by myself, and if anything went wrong, it was... I had to cope with the plane, so I couldn't blame anybody. And there also was this fantastic feeling because you and that plane became one, really, because, you know, whatever control you... the plane reacted to it and it wasn't like a bomber where, you know, everything had to be careful and slowly done, and so on.
So the fighter pilot – the flying fighters – did appeal to me, except the first time I remember I was shot at over France, and I knew everybody was shooting at me, because I was alone, flying! I didn't like it very much, you know, because you remember when you did skeet shooting or pheasant shooting, and here I am sitting like a duck, you know, with everybody, very effective flak sometimes, shooting at you. But basically, flying in fighters and the most powerful, certainly at that time, was something I liked very much.

It was a very sad experience. We were still straight fighters stationed at Manston, and I was very keen to get on what we called a show, which in this case was to escort some American B-52s, I think, were about to bomb Abbeville aerodrome, and... I was the last one to run out to my plane – I was the oldest plane in the action. But I was the new one, remember, and the plane didn't have long-range tanks, but I was very keen, and I took off with the rest of the squadron, and we kept circling above Beachy Head where we were supposed to meet the Americans. And we lost, I think, 12 minutes or 13 minutes before they turned up. And then we went straight across the Channel, and as we were crossing into France my engine cut on main tanks and I had to switch over to reserve tanks. But now the reserve tanks are smaller than the main tanks, and so I rang up my squadron commander, who was a brilliant man called Thornton-Brown, and I said, 'You know, I have a bit of a problem. I'm flying... I have no long-range tanks... I'm flying on reserve tank'. And he said, 'You bloody fool', because we were flying at, what, 20,000 ft or pretty high up. He said, 'Reduce your revs, get a homing from Manston, and without... try to go straight back to Manston', and so on, which I did.
And on my way back to Manston I heard all sorts of chatter on the radio, and what had happened, that we had a high level cover of American Mustangs or Thunderbolts, and they had never seen a Typhoon before, and they went down to attack. There were, I think, five men left. They shot down Thornton-Brown, they shot an American pilot who was a famous ice hockey player – he was shot down, but thank God, managed to get a forced-landing, and another one was shot down. So we lost three pilots because of bad recognition – well, friendly fire, as you would call it today. And from that time on, incidentally, the black and white stripes were… and when Artie Ross was well again, we sent him to every American fighter station to show off the Typhoon.
And it was very, very sad, and years, years later in films, about six years ago, maybe seven years ago – don't want to bore you with the length of the story, because this is quite a long story – when we were night-shooting in New York with an English cameraman who was living in Brighton and he was telling me, you know, I'm very friendly with a woman who writes very nice poetry, but she had a terrible time because her husband was shot down by friendly fire. And that's how I found out that she was the wife of Thornton-Brown, and the moment I came back here we got together. She married again and had children, but she's never forgotten Thornton-Brown. And the sad part was that it took a long time before she was informed really what had happened to him, you know, so you've got those things too…

We didn't have any proper airfields, you know – the engineers just  rolled them. First of all it was a sort of wire mesh which was unrolled  and then they got something which was called Summerfield Tracking, which  a man, a gentleman – I suppose he was a German refugee, Mr Summerfield –  had designed, which was these interlocking pieces of metal which are  still used sometimes today.
And you remember, they had to build these airstrips in no time at  all, but the problem was that we lost quite a number of pilots who on  take-off used to have a flat tyre, get a flat tyre, and before they  could pull the aircraft into the air they rolled on the flat tyre which  then came off and the strut of the undercarriage dug in and the plane  turned over, and we were sitting normally with our head in the blister  to see where we were going, you know. And... but normally that accident  meant that you broke your neck, and you'd had it. And after that  happened, the Air Ministry said we have to try and take off blind, in  other words, with our seat right down, so that if the aircraft turned  over, you know, you were hanging by your straps but your neck wasn't  broken.
So that was not very pleasant, you know, because one had to deal with  a lot of these situations, and that was the first time also that we  lost a lot of our friends that we'd share tents with and so on.

There were two strange things that when I'm talking to you I  remember. The one was when you were flying, attacking in formation, and  one of your friends was hit and the aircraft maybe burst into flames or  whatever it was, your immediate reaction was, 'Thank God it isn't me!'  But after you landed, then the other reaction came in, and you know...  it was not a nice reaction, obviously. In some cases, one had also to  inform the family, and so on – it was awful. But the strange thing is  that the first reaction was one of self-preservation, really.
And the other thing was that we had invented a system which was  called Cab Rank, which I think he was writing about, too. When you had a  section of four Typhoons sitting at the end of the airstrip, and I had a  sort of map over my knees of the local area – you know, a grid map, and  the ACP or whatever he was called used to fire a red thing up and we  used to take off. But remember, the Germans were not more than six or  seven miles away from us, so you had to circle to your operational  height, which I think was 8000 ft or something, above the airstrip, and  I had a map on my knees, a sort of grid map, and then a voice came over  – it used to be either a controller in a forward tank who used to say,  'In 10 seconds there will be yellow or red or blue smoke' – whatever it  was – 'go down and attack'. And you had your grid reference and you just  flew to that... but you couldn't even... normally those tanks were  hiding in trees or… so you didn't really see them until you went right  down and then you attacked them. And you know, sometimes we had to fly  two or three times a day doing that, and the German anti-aircraft  became… and their 88mm guns became more and more... better even though  they were, I think, pretty scared of the Typhoons, and... we had big  losses.

I remember a Canadian pilot, Buck, telling me – they used to call me Heine, because… and I can show you a picture of... in The Daily Sketch in which I am Heine of the RAF – you know, taken at the time, and Buck said to me, 'Heine, watch out! You know, when you try to get out after an attack, don't pull out too fast, you know, because you might go into a high-speed stall, and that's it'. The same day Buck was killed by pulling out too fast and going into a high-speed stall, you know. So all these things, you know… and then the courage of – I think it was even written about in the book – we had a... I don't think it was in my squadron, but one of the sister squadrons, a Canadian pilot called Piwi Williams, and I could never understand this unbelievable courage of some people. And when you noticed a thin trail like white coming out of the aircraft you knew that aircraft had been hit in the cooling system, and was a glycol leak, and I saw that Piwi… this thing came out of the aircraft, and he was heading straight for the enemy positions at a sort of reasonable descent. And I called him up and I said, 'I think you've got a rad leak, and, you know… he said, I know, but I'm paralysed. Order me a late tea. And that was it, you know.
[Q] A late tea?
A late tea, yes. And when we found him, eventually, he was able to work the toggle switch for the radio, you know, but he couldn't fly the aircraft, really, in the sort of… and he just flew straight into the ground. So he knew for several minutes that he was going to die, you know and then to say, 'Order me a late tea', you know? And those things, they were - you know, while I'm talking to you, obviously I come up with more, but... there were things which had... made an incredible impression on me.

My greatest friend was an Australian, Norman Merrett, and he always used to volunteer for the most suicidal... jobs, you know. For instance, one time they said, we need one Typhoon to fly at ground level, because at 8000 or 9000 ft you can't really see, you know, so that he can be sort of like a pointer, and he volunteered for it. And I said, 'Norman , I mean, how long do you think you are going to last that way? You're crazy! I would be shit-scared'. He said, 'Well, I'm not shit-scared'.
And we were very close, and when Paris was liberated we both drove to Paris, and he met an ex-girlfriend of mine and he fell in love with her, and he was very scared of that relationship! But when we came back, he was, you know… and he did some of... he did some silly things as well, you know. He was, got very much decorated in no time at all, and came, from one of the battles was promoted to a... Wing Commander pilot, or something like that, I don't know, and... he was finally shot down. He was supposed to go on a weather recce so that the whole group… you know, always somebody had to go up and say what sort of weather it was, and he, with a No 2, went up. And I wasn't around – I heard about this – and he saw a train, a German train, and everybody had been warned that by this time the Germans had flak-trains. So he went down to attack, and it was a flak-train, he had quite a lot shot out of him, but he went down a second time. You know, climbed up... told the No 2 to stay there, and went down a second time. Also, so silly, because with rockets against, you know, a flak-train, you're not going to do very much. And the No 2 saw him make a forced landing and run away from the plane, and I found out that he was very badly injured, and when he was, arrived at one of those cages, prisoner of war cages, and died that same night… But he always said to me when he had his .38 sticking in the flying-boot, that they're never going to get me, Heine! Never get me! It was a joke, you see. And that's probably what happened, you know.
So there are a lot of those stories, too, you know. But you see, I got… I wasn't afraid to admit that at times I was very scared, but he said, 'No, I'm never scared'. He was scared of the girl, but he wasn't scared of the enemy.

And there was a tremendous spirit, you know. And the other thing one noticed, of course, that people had certain superstitions, and so on. I remember one Australian who used to vomit against the tailplane before we took off, it was a sort of thing… And, you know, I had a golden signet ring which was for my mother and my father made into a signet ring, and since I didn't believe in praying or anything like that, my thing was to turn the ring three times before take-off. So that was my superstition, you see. And very funny, I gave the ring to Letitzia when I met her, and she's still turning it three times when we take off in a plane.

You know, a lot of Germans are asking me, well, how did it feel like, killing Germans, you know? And I said, well, I didn't have any sentimentality on that level, because I lost a lot of my family in concentration camps, and so on, so that... did not affect me. And the other thing, of course, is that you really are not in contact with the individual, like an infantry or commando would be. So... when we flew over the Falaise Gap and... where the Germans were, they couldn't get out... and... we caused an enormous amount of havoc there. And the next day my squadron commander, who actually was Scotty, said, 'Why don't you take a 15 hundredweight with your flight down to Falaise, and you'll see for the first time the damage that you did with your flight', and so on. And it was a terrible trip because the tank battalions were all trying to move forward, and it was like a traffic jam on the M25 or something. It wouldn't move. And the smell was terrible, you know, because there were dead animals, and so on. So we all put handkerchiefs in front… because you couldn't get back, or… you had to go forward. And what impressed me more than anything was the number of dead horses and dead cows. I didn't think the Germans used, you know, horses for their transport, but they did, and they were all lying in rigor mortis, you know, with their legs up like that, and of course the smell was terrible. And once we were in Falaise you saw, you know the various people who had been killed, and so on. And my flight talked me into… there was a German VW, you know, and they thought maybe, if it still works, it might be nice to drive it back to the Wing. So I drove it back to the Wing, but the smell was awful, and we used every form of disinfectant – we never got rid of that smell of death, and it's something that really stayed in my mind. And several years ago I wrote a small article about that, because you were not really that close in contact with the enemy, like anybody in the infantry or tanks, or something.

We used to miss a lot of targets, or we didn't destroy as many targets as we thought. But, you know, diving at about 550 miles an hour without a proper... using your gunsight, you know, you were pretty happy if you got within 50 or 60 ft of what you were… And the noise these rockets made! I mean, the Germans were shit-scared of the Typhoons, and there were some reports, too, that some of the pilots who had baled out were shot at, you know, so there was no great feeling…

We used to have an annual reunion at Duxford, and it was amazing that with all the pilots who were still alive, you immediately – I mean, I had been in films for God knows how many years and that, but you immediately had a rapport which you never had with anybody else; it was unbelievable, you know. And they called me Heine, my nickname, and so on, and Pinkie Stark was my squadron commander, reminded me of a lot of things: that he'd stayed in my house with my mother in Hampstead when we went to Johnny Baldwin's wedding – forgotten all that, but they were still living in the past, really.
And the sad part is that there's nobody around any longer, you know, so there's no sense in my going to Duxford, you know. There's one pilot of 609 Squadron, who is Sir Joe Atkinson, but I never knew him – he was during the Battle of Britain, and he was shot down over the Channel and he got away with it, you know, even though he was for six hours in the water. And he's one of the… he's 92 or 93, and one of the most educated, nicest men… I didn't know him at the time when I joined 609, but we are very friendly, and I invite him down to the RAC, my club, you know. And he's the only one left, you know? It's unbelievable!

When the war was over, we did all these victory flypasts in formation, and all that. And then the Command, or whatever it was then, decided that I should be placed in charge of about 10,000 ex-German Luftwaffe prisoners who were... supposed to... build bigger runways where we were stationed at Wunstorf, and I was in charge of that whole operation. So I got a sort of temporary commission another... for another year in Germany, near Hanover, and in charge of these Luftwaffe personnel. And the one thing that I do remember... because when we heard about what happened in Belsen, I brought the whole officers' staff – because they were still in their uniforms – to Belsen. I hadn't been there myself, and... looked at that concentration camp.
Now, all the inmates by this time were billeted in the SS barracks, but some of them came around with us because they were almost proud to show the horror of this place, and... I must say these German officers which were with me were absolutely speechless. They knew that concentration camps existed, and they knew that some not very nice things happened there, but they'd never thought to come face-to-face with what they found there, you know. So that was quite an experience.
[Q] And you were how old now – 22, or something, I suppose? 21, 22?
Yes, something like that, yes.
[Q] It was quite young, isn't it, to be dealing with that sort of thing?
Yes... yes.

It obviously affected me... you know, all the war and everything. Even though you tried to be press on regardless and so on, and you had these great friendships with people you were… But you know, I was a more sensitive person than a lot of other people. But the film gave me another, you know… I noticed, you know that my Aston Martin was sold for £2,800... £2,800,000 the other day? You know, I was invited to the RAC to show off the gadgets, and all that sort of thing, so obviously, you know, I had very fast cars after the war.

The thing that amazed me is this completely different relationship that you kept... one kept going with people you had flown with... you know? And there are very few... I mean, I get now letters from a Canadian pilot who enlisted in Canada, and he was in 609, but the courage of some of these people is unbelievable. He was... he joined 609 Squadron quite a time before me, because he flew a Hurricane from the deck of a convoy ship, you know. And all they did, they had a sort of catapult, and when a German aircraft or something came over the deck or a submarine, they were catapulted into the air. But they... you know, they either had to bale out, which was dangerous enough, or they had to ditch the plane and come out that way, and that's what they did. And then, instead of having had enough, you know, of having had to ditch the plane, he joined 609 Squadron, and after three or four weeks he was shot down over France, and we didn't know what had happened to him, because normally you followed somebody down. And he was picked up by the French Resistance and lived in Paris in quite great style and was in a film by the Germans as a... French... you know, extra, or something like that, until they found him out and then he was shoved into one of the concentration camps. But there was… the war was nearly over by that time.
And so this is the… but you know, I would have never had that courage, you know, first of all flying from a bloody boat, knowing that you can't get back because, you know, baling out is not that… we didn't have ejector seats.

The problem, of course, was we didn't have ejector seats in those days, and if you… baling out of a plane was not that easy, because... in a single-seater... because you had to turn the plane on its back, jettison the hood, and try and kick… undo your straps... try and kick the control column forward so that you were really like catapulted out of the plane. And the reason for that was because a number of pilots got hit by the tailplane, and of course they were... So… and you know, you could never learn that on the ground, there was no way of practising it, but that was a way to try… and then the other thing which is also sad, because I remember on one show when we lost quite a number of pilots, one of the first ones was a stupid thing. We had to attack a radar station at Bruneval near Le Havre, and we lost, in my squadron alone, two pilots, and one a Belgian whom we called Junior, had baled out successfully. And I was the last man in and I sort of circled round, giving 'Maydays' to… and I never saw him come out from underneath the parachute because, you know, what you ideally should have done is when you were about 50 ft or 40 ft above the sea, is to release yourself from the parachute and drop into the sea. But of course the danger also was that if the sea was calm, you misjudged your height, you might have released yourself at 300 or 400 ft, and so on, but... Junior, this young Belgian pilot, we never found. So even... baling out you had to think of all these things, you know. It's all right if you have a pretty rough sea, you can judge more or less how high you are, but sometimes the sea was very flat and very calm, and you can't judge. And, you know, the parachutes in those days were enormous, you know. It was like... I don't know, but I used to do a lot of boating... have you ever been under a sail when you go…? It's not a very nice feeling, you know.

The ending of the war... I was another year in Germany to supervise these dienstgruppen who were extending the runway, and the airfield where I was commanding these dienstgruppen became the main supply route in the Airlift of Berlin, which was in fact unbelievable how they managed to… because I was making a film later on in Berlin and saw how these Americans used to fly. They flew from Münstdorf because the runway was concrete and they had more modern equipment.

After the war, I... visited all the film producers and directors that I had met during the war who had promised me everything, and they said, 'Well, Ken, you really ought to be in a union'. I said, 'Well, I'm perfectly willing to join a union'. They said, 'But you can't join a union unless you've worked for six weeks in a film studio'. And you know, it was... I was very, very depressed because all these people who when the war was on had promised me everything, you know. And so I was fooling around a lot, you know, going to... try and amuse myself, and… until, and that was very strange, my sister at the time was working at the American embassy in the publicity department or something, and one day a little man came in. He was a buyer of a film studio, of a film, and he said to her, 'Can you' – it was an American film – 'Can you help me in getting some American weapons and props for this film?' And so she said, 'Yes, I think I can get them for you, but I have a young brother who has just come out of the air force, and he draws rather well, and do you think he... you have a way for him to get into films?' And he said, 'Yes, why doesn't he see the art director at Riverside Studios?' And I saw the art director at Riverside Studios, and that's how I got into films.

The first film was, I think, This Was a Woman, but I only stayed for three… Riverside... there were three studios: Riverside, Southall, and Teddington. They all belonged to the same group, and I was for a week at Riverside on a film called This Was a Woman, and then they sent me to Teddington to work on another film which was called The Brass Monkey – they were great films! And, you know, I worked as a draughtsman, but what happened was really quite incredible: the art director of that film, The Brass Monkey, was somebody called Wally Scott, a nice man, but he couldn't get on with the American director and the Russian producer, so he came into the art department, there were six of us or something, and he said, 'I can't get on with these people. Why, if you want to design the set and so on, do it'.
And I designed the set, not knowing what the heck I was doing, really. It was supposed to be a radio theatre, you know, but I already was playing around with imagination sets and so on, and they accepted my design, so of course they didn't know that I... you know, I was Wally's designer. But the construction manager was a big Irish navvy called Peter Dukelow – he knew that I had done all that, and I think he really helped me more in my career in those days than anybody else in films, because... it was amazing that it should happen on the first film I'm working on that they are, in fact, using one or two of my designs.

The important thing for me was to find out everything I could find out about art direction, what it entailed, and so on, and remember that I had also had an architectural background, and so I felt I had to learn first of all how to design a reasonable film in budget, you know. And I did about three or four films where I felt I learned my, you know, thing.

In '49, I think... I got my first big break, which was... because I was working for Warner Brothers already, and they decided that I was the right person to go to the South of France to find... because they thought on the Tunisian shores, somewhere on the African shore, we needed a ship of the 18th century, a 1700s frigate, a 36-guns frigate, for a film they were going to make called Captain Hornblower. So that was fantastic for me, you know. I went to the South of France for Warner Brothers, and going from Nice to Marseilles and everywhere, and I got invited onto ships and… but I found a young shipbuilder at Villefranche-sur-Mer, Bernard Voisin, who was very much like me, also sort of 'press-on-regardless', and he knew more about period ships than I did, even though I had spent about two months, or maybe less, months at the Maritime Museum in Greenwich to find out what these frigates were like.
And so I had the job to really design the actual ship as opposed to the set, which we did at Denham, in the South of France at this Mr Voisin's shipyard. And we found an old hull at a place called Sète near the Spanish border which still had the sides, which the French called frégaté. You know, when you do a modern ship in section, it does this and that, but those warships of the 17th and 18th centuries, the sides came out, and then, you know…
And this ship, which they had used for cod fishing on the banks of Newfoundland, still had those sides coming out, and so I bought it for, I think, £5000 for Warner Brothers, and... it had some very old diesels in it which just about worked. And Bernard had the ship taken down... it was at Sète near the Spanish border, to Villefranche. Then we started to... making the drawings and everything, but Bernard knew a great deal about rigging and so on. But also what we did, we ballasted the hull down with about 200 tons of... I can't remember what we used, whether it was iron or something ... and started building up, so that gave us an absolute... thing. And so I spent nearly nine months in Villefranche designing the frigate for Captain Hornblower, which was a fantastic time for me, as you can imagine.

The only problem I seem to remember was I got jaundice, yellow jaundice. I must have eaten some bad mussels in Marseilles, and I was… I didn't know, because I was all… I became yellow like a canary, and I was staying at the Hotel Rühl in Nice. And they sent a doctor, Dr Rosanoff - I'll never forget his name – from Russia, and he said, 'You've got jaundice, and you've got to stay in bed'. I said, 'But the Hollywood director's coming over tomorrow'. He said, 'Forget the Hollywood director'. Well, I didn't forget the Hollywood director, and… but I was so yellow, you know. And in any case, at the hotel, I heard the owner ring up – you know, it was one of the small hotels in Villefranche – was it safe to have somebody who was as yellow as a canary staying in his hotel?
And so I got a car, I went to Nice airport, and I collected the director, who was a man called Raoul Walsh, who was a sort of blood-and-guts director. And I felt terrible, you know. I don't know if you've ever had yellow jaundice, but I mean really terrible yellow, and I tried to pretend – I had dark glasses on, you see – pretend that I was okay, and I said to him, 'Really, I'm not too well, and, you know, I've got a bit of a yellow skin'. He said, 'No, no, you're that sort of exotic type, you know!'
 
Well, I wasn't going to give in, so… but I couldn't go with him on the locations which I had found before, so I had all the meetings with them in the hotel, lying in bed, you know, with the Russian doctor saying he's not going to accept any more responsibility. He said, 'If you don't stop this and take the medication' – in those days they gave me artichokes, you know – you'll be dead'. So, you know, it's nothing to laugh about.
 Well, I got away with it, and established a great relationship, a) with the shipbuilder, who became a lifelong friend who unfortunately died last year, and the whole family. And they have this fantastic house in Villefranche, and we used to stay there, and he lent me his old pre-war Mercedes to drive around. And I tried to, you know, I said, how many times am I going to be in a place like this? Jack Warner had a villa at Juan les-Pins, a Villa Aujourd'hui, and all those things. Garbo was staying at Haut de Cagnes, you know. It was fantastic, but I didn't feel very well, and if you see some of my photographs of back then.

The first thing that went wrong, I was trying to have a good time at Juan-les Pins, places like that, and came back at 4 o'clock in the morning, but fell asleep and went straight into the deckchairs of the Promenade des Anglais in Nice. Fortunately, there was nobody at 4 o'clock in those deckchairs. But I didn't have a driving licence, I didn't have the papers of the car, and of course the police arrested me. And I tried to explain to them... because my French was pretty good – remember, I had been to a French lycée in Germany – and... I said the Mercedes belonged to a friend of mine who is a shipbuilder, Bernard Voisin.
 So what happened, they had a jeep in front of me with a machine-gun and a jeep behind me with a machine-gun –remember, this was during the Algerian problem – and they escorted me with two jeeps to Villefranche to the villa of Bernard Voisin. And he opened up a bottle of brandy at about 5 o'clock in the morning, and I got away with it, you know?
 And then two days later... and then I stopped... Two days later, I had the car parked right near the dry dock, right, which wasn't dry because of the boats and ships there was water in it. But it was a very old Mercedes, and you had to start the engine on the crank, you see. What I had forgotten, that I had left the – because it didn't have very good brakes – I had left the engine in gear, and I started the engine, and for once that fucking engine started! I jumped, because I didn't ... you know, the drop was here... onto the engine cowling of the old Mercedes, and myself and the Mercedes went... dropped straight into the water, and that was about a 23-foot drop, and then the water, you see? And Bernard... he never forgot it.
 And when I came out of the water, you know – it took some time – the first thing I said, 'Put my' – I had a Longines – 'put that watch into fresh water, otherwise it will rust!' And then Bernard, who was a very experienced diver, got the big crane from Nice, and it took them two or three days, nobody could get in or out of the dock, and they managed to pull the car out, and nobody lost his life – luckily I've got pictures of all this. And the only thing was that Jack Warner wrote a telex or whatever it was at the time to Voisin and the shipyard saying he didn't accept any responsibility for my madness. So that was one of the early experiences I had in films.
[Q] And Bernard was still your friend after you'd dropped his Mercedes in the dry dock?
 Yes, yes, he was... he was quite a crazy guy himself.

And it was very funny, because he came from a very famous Brittany family. His father was Gabriel Voisin, who had designed and built all these cars, the Voisin cars, between the two wars, you know, and Bernard married into a very wealthy South of France family. He brought his brother along too – it was a very… I mean, that's… you write a book... I can write a book on that family, in that fantastic villa which is still there in the South of France. So he was an adventurer in many ways, you know, and he was a very good diver, so he dived down into the dock and attached all the things, you see.
He also disappeared, you know – his wife was going crazy. He disappeared to Brittany with a truck to get some of the rigging which we needed down in Villefranche for the ship, you see, and he disappeared in Brittany. Nobody knew where he was, no phone, and about a week later he came down with an American sort of six-ton truck full of rigging and masts and spars, and so on.

The director was also a tough guy, Raoul Walsh, you know, a famous stunt director and so on. And the first day of shooting... and you know it wasn't easy, because the ship didn't have the right engine, so I had to have tugs standing by, and they were trying to get the ship as near as possible to the Cap Ferrat, you see. And just as I'm, with a naval guy trying… the engine couldn't go astern or something, the American Sixth Fleet came sailing into the bay at Villefranche, and Raoul Walsh sent his second, first assistant director to the Commander of the American Fleet, and said, 'Will you please get out of our shot?' And they did, you know! I don't think they would do it today, but it was unbelievable, you know.

[Q] You know, something that occurs to me, telling us about this first big job doing... and telling us what you had to do... I mean, this seems to me like a huge responsibility you had.
Yes, it was a huge responsibility.
[Q] I mean, a lot of money to spend on it, obviously, and your decisions, and so on, but a huge responsibility. Can you say a bit about what it felt like to have that sort of responsibility at that early age? Weren't you scared, or what?
No, I wasn't scared, no. And remember there was one person above me who was the production designer, art director, Tom Morahan, but he didn't spend much time in Villefranche because he had to build the set at Denham, you know. But he was my biggest problem, because Tom used to drink a lot, and then became very... nasty. And I'll never forget one thing, you know. You know the masts are in three bits: you've got the mainmast, and then the topmast, and then the topgallant mast, and you have a platform where, you know, the people... go out and, you know… well, I... that didn't appeal to me because funnily enough, even though I was a pilot, I didn't like to be attached to the ground on... at any height, you know – I didn't like that.
And Tom Morahan came down, and he was a bit of a sadist, and he said, 'Have you checked the platform' – I can't remember the name, what it is now – 'of the mainmast?' I said, 'Yes'. He said, 'Well, would you mind going up and checking it for me?' I said, 'Tom, you're not going to get me to go up! I checked the thing before it was pulled up'. And so he said, 'You're afraid?' I said, 'Yes, I am afraid'. He said, 'Okay, I'll go up'. And he was drunk, you see, and... he was Irish, you know. And everybody in the shipyard hoped he would fall off, you see. But Jack Warner heard about it, and because Morahan was a fabulous designer, really, but he was, you know, drank too much, and so on. And Warner said, you know, we heard the thing happen - if it happens again, you're off the picture.
So, all that was really left to me. But also Morahan was left to me, because I used to take him to Marseilles, because we had to get material from there, and so on. And he got involved with someone – in those days there were a lot of gangsters and so on... and I always... got into fights, and I always had to get him out of it and so on, you know – unbelievable times!

To talk about Hornblower, I could probably entertain you for another two or three hours, because it was an incredible period.
It was a period shortly after the war, you know, and you had a lot of smuggling going on, and a lot of English ex-naval officers who bought these Fairmiles or Air Sea Rescue launches for very little money, and then went across to Algiers or somewhere that they thought… and used to buy cigarettes and take cigarettes, and so on. So Villefranche was... unbelievable. And I remember when the Royal Navy came in, and one of their senior officers had a brother who was having one of those boats; he couldn't... wouldn't go on the boat because his brother was a smuggler, you know. But in those days everything that was… American woman… and now that's come to me... Madame Ourillion, her name was, and she had one of those smuggling boats, and when somebody didn't want to do what she ordered him to do, she threw him overboard. At least, that was what they said, you know.
It was an unbelievable time in Villefranche, but I learnt a lot, I had a fabulous friend, who was Bernard, and family of… present at their children and grandchildren, and all that – actually, he was the best friend I... I think I've ever had – and also they took to Letitzia. They… first of all they said, 'Why do you have to get married to a Spaghetti when we have enough pretty girls in the South of France?' I said, 'Yes, I know', but then they all fell in love with her. And it was an incredible time, you know – there were people… Garbo was staying in Haut de Cagnes, and a lot of film people from the past…
And my supervisor was a man called Edmond Gréville, who was quite a well-known French director, but he didn't know the first thing about boats, or something. But he still had a job, he was paid by Jack Warner, and we used to go out a lot together and have fun.

[Q] So had you found very definitely what you wanted to do? By the time you finished…?
Yes. Well, when you say very definitely, I would be lying, because I adored the life I was leading, and I always adored ships, and so I was doing the first one with Gregory Peck, it was Hornblower. When I married Letitzia, which was the following year, or something... no, when I got... it was in Ischia, I sailed, Warner insisted on my sailing these two ships down to Ischia, which is a six-day trip or something, and we nearly were shipwrecked, but that's another story, in Corsica; and so I was on ships, you know, and I was a ship expert. And then after The Master of Ballantrae, we did a film with Errol Flynn… No, I'm sorry, the... the first film was The Crimson Pirate, with Burt Lancaster, in Ischia. Then the next film was The Master of Ballantrae, where again I did the ships, which we did in Sicily, with Errol Flynn, and by this time I was sort of known as the... the 'ship man', really, and in terms of life and activity, I loved it. But that... something said to me in the back... you don't want to stick with ships for the rest of your professional life.
Then I... then I did Helen of Troy – again, you know, the ship... you know, the face that sank a thousand ships, or whatever it did. I built that in Fiumicino in Rome, and you know, with the... the galleys, you know. And not enough, then I did another one… oh yes, John Paul Jones, it was an American film about an American warship which was in the... in the Wars of Independence. So I got those ships in Sicily, and then rebuilt them in Fiumicino near Rome.
Then they ran out of money, I came back to England, and was lucky enough to work on a John Ford picture through Columbia – I had put the ships and all the... the art department equipment into legal hands, in the lawyers' hands, in Rome – and true enough, while I'm on the John Ford picture, the producer and director came over and said, 'We'd like to see your ships and your drawings'. And I said to John Ford, 'What am I going to do?' He said, 'Well, you've got to go with them, I'll give you two days off, but you've got to make sure that they pay everybody in Rome, and the lawyers and the ships, otherwise our, you know, all the Americans are going to get a bad reputation'. So I went, and they paid everybody and got the ships.

I was very happy in the South of France, and the art director, production designer on The Crimson Pirate was also a Russian, called Paul Sheriff – Paul Shuvalov; he was a count, and he drew quite nicely, but... and he... but he always worked with Carmen Dillon, who I mean, I don't know if you know all these names of the film industry – in any case, he... I was his art director, and he said to me, I said, 'I don't want to go to Ischia, I've got…' He said, 'Ken, I've been there – there's an unbelievably beautiful blonde there: they call her The Colonel's Daughter'. And so, you know, rest at ease, you wouldn't find anybody like that in here.
So I was looking forward, you know, to getting to Ischia. And Letitzia's story is... is that – you know, I had a bandana, and I was black, burned in the six-hour... six-day trip, and I saw this blonde with her blonde hair down to there… at the jetty when we arrived. And that was it!
[Q]You fell in love?
Yeah, I fell in love, yes. It took me some time, you know, but remember, we were on Ischia for nearly six months, the whole unit, and there was nothing – I mean, it was a beautiful island, and you had a lot of artists there, and William Walton was there, and all – you know, and Larry Olivier, and... And the director was Robert Siodmak – who came from Germany and then went to Hollywood and came back, and he had a famous wife, Bertha Siodmak, and they all fell in love with Letitizia, and so… and the only one who behaved badly, but I shouldn't say that, was Burt Lancaster at the time, but he was trying to make a joke. But in any case, it's unimportant.
So I met Letitzia, and to tell you about our experiences and her family would take another two days, because I never put it in book form, actually. And the following year when, after the Errol Flynn picture, I got married to her in Ischia… and... I had an inferiority complex ever since, because the whole of Ischia said, 'You're robbing us of our sunshine, you know!' And I felt guilty ever since, you know. But she took like a fish to water in... in London, you know.

The Crimson Pirate was in... '51, I think. And I did another picture after that in Sicily for Warner Brothers called The Master of Ballantrae, with Errol Flynn – so I still had boats – and it was on that picture that I married Letitzia. And in fact I got her a job as a costume assistant with... she was with 160 male extras on one of the big ships and they're all-day out at sea. It suited her.
And then I returned to England for... on some small pictures and did also some work on Ben-Hur, because the American producer thought I was best suitable to see that not too much money was being spent and... you know, to oversee the building of the… what do you call it? …of the Circus Maximus and so on.
And, eventually – I still... being in... in Italy – got offered Helen of Troy, which Bob Wise was directing, and had had a Production Designer called Eddie Carrere from Hollywood. But... excuse me... in those days there were no film [draftsmen] working in Italy, so I finally ended up with about 12 qualified young architects, and I trained them into sort of film draftsmen, and we had a lot of fun, and it was quite a design picture.
We built the city gates of Troy at Cinecittà, and part of some of the palaces and so on, and it became so big that they took a second director, Raoul Walsh, who I'd worked with on Hornblower, he was sort of blood and guts director. And we had, at times, 3,000 extras with the first unit, and 3,000 extras with the second unit, one at Anzio, and one at the studio, you know, at Cinecittà. So it was a gigantic task to feed them all with props, and arms and so on. And... it really was fun picture.

Raoul Walsh was a sort of ‘press-on-regardless’ director, really tough guy, and I had to supervise, or I was his Art Director to... for the attack on the walls of Troy, we had to build enormous towers, which were set alight. And we had, sort of, built scaling ladders, which had something like a 9-inch tree trunk on either side, but to be sure that they fell in the same place we used to sink concrete blocks into the ground, and hinged these enormous [ladders]… so that they all would fall in the same direction. But they didn't.
And... well, it was a disaster in many ways because the heat given off by these blazing towers, attacking tower, the camera crews just went off, you see, and there was general panic, and the ladders came down and some of them, most of them, fortunately, where they were supposed to, but some didn't, and some poor Italian extras were very badly hurt, so we had a continuous ambulance service.
And there were also political things, they didn't like an American director. There were immediately sort of demonstrations and so on, and it wasn't very pleasant, but having said that we... I learnt a lot. I loved working with all these architects in... at Cinecittà. And... so I had really a... a very good time.
But it didn't end that well because we had six fire engines from the Rome Fire Department standing by when we were doing all those flames, shooting, and to be there when we were having lunch, you know, and we had lunch at the Commissariat at Cinecittà, and in the middle of lunch somebody came racing in, and said, 'The set is on fire'.
So... the fire engines had also their lunch, and so had to rush out, you see, and try and extinguish... it was... and, the heat given off, I mean you could see it in Rome, was unbelievable, and the whole bloody set was burned down! Fortunately we... we had finished most of the sort of first unit shooting and I had to build some sort of cutting piece, as I didn't have to rebuild the whole set, but it was a very good experience.

The horse was quite beautiful. We had a local sculptor, really, design it, and then we built it out of wood, and probably it... it was the best looking Trojan horse that's ever been done. It was really fantastic! And we had the Greeks coming out at night time, out of a sort of flap in... in the belly.
And it was one of the best scenes in the... in the film, you see, by that time the film was over really, because you had... we had the chariot fight between Hector and Achilles. Achilles was played by Stanley Baker and Hector was an English actor whose name now escapes me, but a very well-known actor, and of course stuntmen to Stanley, and... and it was really exciting.
And Bob Wise was a very good director, you know, he did a lot of those sequences, and this film, if you get a chance to see it, it's a film worthwhile seeing, yes. It was very well done.

I think it was about the last time I had to... I had to build a boat, too, because I had to build the galley of the Greeks – you know, attacking Troy – and I got an old coal-barge and I found a family of shipbuilders in a place called Torre del Greco in Italy, who up to great-grandfathers had all been in ship building, and I brought them over to Fiumicino.
And they cladded the coal-barge with planks, you know, which they etched, they used these etches, they didn't use… And it really looked sensational, but since I needed a 1000, you know, we used a little bit of trick-work to... to get the whole fleet, you see. I only built one and we had nothing but problems. I mean, the shipbuilder, who was the head of the family, on the trial trip, I said, 'Well, you better come out with us'. And I also I had some rowers from the famous rowing-club in Rome, you know, they were all gigantic.
And, of course, when we went out it was very calm, and we were about six, seven miles offshore, and there was a rising sea. And I had a sort of naval expert with me, and he said 'I don't like it'. I said, 'Nor do I!' All our... a great many of our oarsmen were seasick, you know. I had, of course, engines too, Chrysler engines on the thing, so we got all the oars, you know, we placed them all along inside, and we were in a real gale.
And also, we didn't... we had communications, but the communications were on a barge, which – because in those days they hadn't... we had to use the army for radio contact, and so on – so I tried to get... I was on the... on the main... get the boat back to Fiumicino. But they'd put up there – whatever it was, yellow, or black balls – The Port... The Port was closed, you see, because of the gale, so we had to go all the way to Anzio.
By this time Jack Warner had heard about this, and he said, 'You've got to get... you've got your stars onboard, you got to get the ship back, you know, we can't lose all our crew!' And we got the... the galley back to Anzio, but the pontoon, on which the costume, makeup, and army radio-operators were, was miles away in this gale, and when we finally got an ocean going tug to tow it to Anzio, it looked as though everybody was dead on that… they were all so seasick, you know.
Well, I had quite enough, I must say, after that one, and... but it was quite a successful film, but it was really the last time I sort of did major... built major boats. And I said, 'I've had enough of that now' and get into more set-design and since I'd already done some of it on Helen of Troy, which was very exciting, because working with somebody like Eddie Carrere was quite brilliant. There were two brothers, they were, I think, of Mexican origin, but they were living in Hollywood. And they were extraordinarily talented designers, so I learnt a lot.

We had two boats and everybody was waiting in Ischia, and as usual, which happened so often, in the Straits of Corsica we hit a gale, and I was on the smaller of the boats. The big boat had a crew of 24 drunken Bretons from Brittany, and Captain Olivier were, you know, was one of the old skippers who had been cod fishing on the banks of Newfoundland, but I was on the... the Marie-Annique with my naval advisor.
And, I... I woke – when my watch had finished, and I went to sleep down below – I woke up with the water swishing. They were built in double skins you see and they were leaking, so the water was... the double skin... and it wasn't very safe you see. And Vernon Sewell, who was my naval advisor, who actually owned one of the biggest steam yachts in... in England, and had led the Dunkirk evacuation, all he had was one Lewis gun, which didn't really fire, but they…
They were these British, fantastic, I mean they had… and a great film director, you know! And, what he did, he used to invite a lot of actors, and say, I take you to Le Touquet, or somewhere for... to the casino over the weekend. And while they were sailing over the weekend in that big steam yacht, he filmed... made a film of them, you know... because he knew how to run the sound and the camera and the…
So, in any case, he was my naval expert and he was very proud because he'd installed the engine in the Marie-Annique, where the first thing that happened – we weren't properly ballasted... and then, I said, ‘Well, we should be able to contact the big one in front to turn back and take us into tow’.
Well, I found out that the Aldis lamp, which we had for that purpose, the battery had run out. And we finally used mirrors, you know, because there was a bit of sun every time the… and, Captain Olivier, on the big ship, eventually, reluctantly, turned round to help us.
And, I was having kittens, not because I was afraid of losing my life, or anything, but the big ship – which the whole stern castle I had built, I mean all the decoration, all that, out of plaster – and it was cantilevered away from the boat, and I said to myself, you know... because we had to... they had to tow through one of the windows. So I was steering the Marie-Annique to make sure that we kept in line with the boat in front, because otherwise the whole stern castle would have been ripped off, and there's Jack... Burt Lancaster, and all these people, Robert Siodmarck waiting in Ischia for their main props to arrive, and we were battling it out with the elements.
So, in any case, to cut a long story short I left the Marie-Annique in Bastia, in Corsica with Vernon, and I said, 'You get another engine’, the reduction gear had stripped, and so on. And maybe it's not that important that we have the smaller one but I must get the big one to Ischia'. And then we sailed for six days and sometimes with full sail, you know – which more than, I don't know how many square metres – but doing nine knots at times.
And thank God we had all those drunken Bretons onboard, who climbed up there, you know and that's how... how we arrived at Ischia eventually. I learned a lot I may say on Hornblower and The Crimson Pirate, and afterwards, you know, I didn't take that many risks any longer.
But there's all sorts of… because, Vernon, thought it was going to be, we're going to have a great trip, and he ordered on Warner's account lobster and caviar, and so on. Well, I couldn't touch anything. This movement was terrible! And then, as I said, a few years later I did Helen of Troy, and then I thought enough is enough, of boats.

[Q] And were you by now, what would you be called at that time?
I was an Associate Art Director. And in Ischia I really did… I mean my boss was Paul Sheriff, who was a Russian Count Shuvalov, who used to make beautiful oil paintings, which were sent to Hollywood, but they're really quite impractical. I always used to call – I had the office next to him – he used to call me, 'What do you think of this?' So, I said, 'Paul, it's beautiful, but what is it?'
And, he said, 'You see, that's what I want, because when Jack Warner and the other guys are standing around, they're such snobs, and nobody is going to ask what is it', you know. Yeah, he had a terrible sense of humour, mind, but he also was very lucky that he had very, very, very good assistants. And he became very close in more than one way with a famous English production designer called Carmen Dillon, I don't know if you remember her, and Carmen did a lot of Paul's work.
But, he had a... a great sense of humour, and his instructions to me in Ischia were, 'I leave that to you, and please don't try and contact me, or wake me up between the hours of two and five o'clock in the afternoon'. He was so Russian at that... you know, and I could never take him seriously.
And I was very sad when he died because he left, you know, his wife and other people without sufficient means, and we had to get money together, and so on, but he was a fantastic character and very artistic. These were all people brought over by the Kordas from Europe, you know.

Francis Ford Coppola. We became very friendly, he wanted me to design a film for him, but he was so impressed with the Powell and Pressburger setup in England that he wanted to base his studio on their studio.
And so he invited Powell over and we had several meetings together and Powell sort of became Coppola's technical advisor. And the film I was supposed to do for Coppola was never made, unfortunately.
 

Kordas brought people over from Europe and they formed London Films and they have some brilliant people there. I mean I can name a few. There was Andrejew, who was a Russian opera designer, Ferdie Bellan, who was a great scenic artist, I mean the greatest of scenic artists, and, of course, within the industry people heard about that, and also saw some of those Korda films were beautiful looking.
And so, Coppola, wanted to have his studio based on London Films, really, and... but it never came... came off, but you could see how he was thinking when he did Apocalypse Now, you know, which in many ways was quite brilliant. I personally didn't like the bit when they arrived in Brando-land, because it became too much like a... like an opera, or something.

I had one very big break, which was to design Around the World in 80 Days for Michael Todd. All that came about through Paramount here – I'd done some work for them, also in... not to do with films, you know, their offices, and so on. And you must remember in those days all the major American studios had their companies here, you know, MGM has a studio, and... and so I was very much involved.
And it was Mike Frankovich who introduced me to... to Mike Todd on Around the World in 80 Days, and the associate producer was probably the most famous art director in the world, a man called William Cameron Menzies, who had designed Gone with the Wind.
And if you think, that there were about three or four different directors, but Menzies stayed on the picture, and he had sketched out every frame of that film. And that's when Selznick decided to give Menzies the credit of production designed by William Cameron Menzies.
And he was my boss, or he was sort of associate producer on Around the World, and I learnt a lot from him. Unfortunately, by this time he was an alcoholic, which is not surprising, working for Mike Todd. And... but, you know, I was just a... a young designer with Letitzia in a flat in Bond Street, you know, and every time Bill Cameron Menzies appeared, a bottle of J&B Scotch disappeared, you know.
It became quite expensive... situation.

William Cameron Menzies, who was probably the greatest production designer – certainly in the United States – and it was the first time to... to be granted that title of production design, and he was associate producer on Around the World in 80 Days.
So I spent a lot of time with him, we both got on like a house on fire. And, unfortunately, he was a nervous wreck, because Todd was a monster really, you know. And that was a strange thing, that I seemed to be attracted to these monsters, because the first time I met Todd, he was at the Messel Suite at the Dorchester Hotel, he was half nude, because he'd just taken a shower. And he had somebody doing a manicure, he had a Japanese secretary, and he was sitting there like Napoleon, and Vincent Korda, who was a brilliant… brother of Alexander Korda was there to advise him where could he buy jewels for Liz Taylor, you know. And I saw this going on and he wouldn't let me, or Menzies, go away at nine, or ten; he ordered caviar, whatever we wanted, and we had to stay all night, you know, with this madman.
But it was... it was... exciting and at the time, it was before... before he married Liz, and he was living with Evelyn Keyes, the actress, and they didn't get on so well, and so I was involved in all that... thing going on, but he had a strange fascination. And when we shot Around the World in 80 Days he asked our production manager, who had some in... to Her Majesty, if he could shoot a sequence of the guards changing, and the courtyard of Buckingham Palace. And we got a very nice letter back from HM saying she would love to grant this to us, but if she granted it to us everybody else wants to do it, but she would give us the guards at Wellington Barracks. So… and, you know, these Todd-AO cameras were gigantic and they had this enormous frame. And I arrived there and... three cameras all setup on the outside to see the guards changing and then march out over to Buckingham Palace. And as they are marching out, Todd got the cameraman and operator to put one of those enormous Todd-AO cameras right in the centre of the gate, at Wellington Barracks. And, of course, they had to do a different manoeuvre to get that out... around the camera, you know. It was a terrible thing to do, but four bottles of Scotch sent to the officer commanding the guards dealt with it eventually. But with Todd you always had these sort of problems.

It was the first time I really was able to let myself go. And, you know, we're making it at MGM studios here and they had a very famous art director, probably the most famous one, also German, Alfred Junge – who got to know me, and sort of took me under his wing. He had also – with Hein Heckroth – designed The Red Shoes. I don't know if you ever saw that one. So they were really the top and much to my surprise I got my first Oscar nomination... you know.

Todd, came back... came back to Europe, by this time he was, I think, married to Liz, and I had one of these phone calls, ‘Get your ass over to…’ and, I really didn't, I said, 'I'm not going, I'm not going, I'm not going to be treated that way'. And, half-an-hour later I was at the Messel Suite at the Dorchester, you know. Mind you to... to see Liz Taylor was… was... she was so beautiful in those days.
And so he wanted me to design the party for the opening of the film – and that's a little anecdote, but I think it might be… and so, I designed the party – he was, I think, in the South of France, or Hollywood, or somewhere – for 3000 people, and The Telegraph was sponsoring it. And I showed my concept to whoever ran The Telegraph and they thought it was beautiful.
And then I had to fly over to Paris to meet with Todd and Liz to show him the sketches. And the publicity man of United Artists met me, and I said, 'What hotel am I staying?' He... he said, 'Well, you're staying in... in Todd's suite'. I said, 'That must be a mistake, you know, I don't want to be there', and I know Todd wouldn't like that, so... and he was just married to Taylor, you know. So this man said, 'No, no those were definite instructions'.
And I just flew over, you know, to show him the sketches, so I was going round... I didn't have pyjama, nothing. So I saw the film at night. I stayed in Todd's bed, he comes... arrives at 07:30 from the South of France on Le Train Bleu, or something like that, with Liz, goes into his bedroom, and finds me in bed. And I couldn't get out because I didn't have any pyjamas on, you see, so it was a very awkward situation, and he went straight into the – Liz had her own room somewhere – and he went straight into the... the bathroom to start shaving, and showering, and so on, because he had meetings afterwards. And then... I also had certain criticisms of one or two things on Around the World and he didn't like that. So, he said, 'Ken Adams doesn't like Around the World'. I said, 'I didn't say that, Mike, now don't… '. So, to cut a long story short, 'Show me your fucking sketches', he said, you know. So, by this time I had my underpants on, you see, and I'm showing him the sketches, and he said 'They stink', and walked out of the room, because he had a press conference downstairs.
And Liz sneaked in from her room and she said, 'Oh, they're absolutely divine', and about 50 minutes later I got a call from Mike, he wants to talk to me downstairs at The Meurice. And, he said, 'I've reconsidered my opinion, they're subtle'.

I was dressing a set at MGM, he comes on, says, 'Stop dressing, we're flying over to Paris, because the balloon you have to supervise'... or something. And, you know, there wasn't a London airport, you had to fly from Croydon, and he had his own plane, you know, which wasn't all that safe. In fact he was killed in a flying accident, you know, in America, in... in one of his planes.
And so I had to leave everything behind, fly with him to Paris, and then he said, 'You... you might just as well stay here, because…' We went to the studios at Belliancourt, because we did the whole... the balloon sequence – which was a balloon, probably, eight-foot diameter, or something, a model-balloon. And the Rue du Rivoli... I had to change all the shop fronts and everything else to make them look like 1880, or whatever it was.
And, so I was there for two weeks nearly, and then I said... rang up Todd, and said, 'Mike, you know, it's the second payday here, and nobody has been paid yet'. So, he said, 'Oh, you schmuck, why don't you go and see somebody, or something'! I said, 'Mike, I'm the production designer on this film, I'm not supposed to find the money'. So, in any case, he flew over the next day with a suitcase full of money – that was the sort of character he was – to settle, because otherwise the French unions, they're very tough, they would have been on strike.

He also had an assistant, it was Kevin McClory, I don't know if you know him, and we were shooting the big scenes in the Rue de Rivoli, and... outside the Ritz, and... outside the...  Tuileries, and all that, and I changed shop fronts, and so on, and it looked pretty good.
But there were about seven or eight cars parked, and we couldn't get rid of them. So Kevin MClory called in the police, and said, 'You better get rid of these cars, because we have, you know, a world production', so the Chief of Police got rid of all the cars. What he didn't realise, they said they're all diplomatic cars. That's a true story. And he got fired and no film company was allowed for two years to shoot in Paris after that, you know. But that was Todd, you know, he was completely ruthless, you know. So it added quite a lot to... to my education... in big films. And, so you know, I got my first Oscar nomination, but I didn't win the Oscar.
And... I mean he was bigger than life, and Todd-AO was bigger than life, and he knew that, and the film was an... an enormous success. And then shortly afterwards he was killed in a... in a flying accident.

I decided it was better to do some smaller pictures, you know, and I don't know what came exactly after Around the World in Eighty Days, I think it was probably Bob Aldrich, who was a wonderful American director, who was also a member of the Aldrich family, which is one of the big families.
But he was also always a rebel, but very generous with money, you know – and a very good director. So I did a film in Berlin for him, which... I can't remember the title, but I can look it up for you in a moment, yeah – and which dealt with bomb disposal. And it was in – before the Wall was up – so it must have been in… I can't remember the date now.
[Q] Was it called Ten seconds... or something…?
Ten Seconds to Hell, yes. And we shot it at the... not the Ufa Studios in Babelsberg, the Ufa Studios at Tempelhof, because there was no Wall yet in Berlin, and our labour came both from the East, and from the West, there was... and he had an all-American cast but the German bomb disposal people were our experts, you know.
And it was a good picture, and terribly dangerous, you know, as... because there were too many real bombs around, you know. And, in fact, two years later when I was doing another film in Germany, or three years later, there wasn't any one of the actual bomb disposal experts alive, they'd all been killed.

Making the film we had a lot of fun and Berlin was, you know, they knew they were this small island in the Eastern Zone, and nobody knew how long this would last, and so on. So everybody had a good time, and we all did... have a good time – and some of the American crews, including Bob, got divorced from their wives and married some of these German model girls, you know.
But it was quite… Martine Carol played the French lead and Jeff Chandler was the American lead. And I learnt an enormous amount from Bob Aldrich. You know, sometimes I tried to bluff, and you couldn't bluff him, you know, it was no good. He saw through it immediately and I never tried again. But I respected him enormously, and I think he respected me, because I did two or three pictures with him.
I did, with Bob Mitchum, a film in Greece, and I did Sodom and Gomorrah in Italy – which we thought we would do in six weeks, and it took a year and a half, you know, in Morocco and Italy. So I basically had a very good time with Bob and he brought... he sent me over to Hollywood too, and I learnt the American way of filmmaking in the big studios, and that became very useful, of course.

One of the earlier, and rather important picture, was Night of the Demon, which French-American Director, Jacques Tourneur directed, with Dana Andrews. And it was really a sort of horror story with a monster.
And, I got on very well with Jacques Tourneur and... and we didn't want to show the monster, we just wanted to show the footprints of the monster, but Hal E Chester, who was the American Producer, said he needed to see the monster, so I had to come up with a design for this Medieval monster.
And much to my surprise and everybody else's surprise, when... several years after the picture had come out, everybody talked about this picture, it also had a different title. And when I had my exhibition, my first exhibition at the Serpentine Galleries in... 2000, the picture was shown as a cult picture I had made, and so I also had to design the monster, which I did, you know, like a, I don't know, like a... like a period, you know, monster.

I was called one morning and... by John Ford. Now, John Ford was one of the greatest American directors, Stage Coach and all these films. And, so he asked me to come and see him. And, the first thing he said, 'I heard a lot about you, Ken, but don't think I'm the sort of arty-farty director who has the camera down, and up the nostrils, or between the legs of the actors. I shoot the script the way I see it and the best way'. So, quite frightening, but, again, he was one who had just arrived, and he was in a towel around his loin, you couldn't really take him very seriously.

This was a film about the old Scotland Yard, really – and Jack Hawkins played the Inspector – and there wasn't very much for me to do really, except design the Old Scotland Yard office, and so on, and then I came up with an idea, because I wanted the office of the Chief Inspector to face Westminster Bridge.
But, because we were making it at MGM studios in Borehamwood, or something, and I had a good special effects department, and I said, 'We can build the bridge, and the cars, and buses – the red buses – on a never-ending belt, you see. And when we tried it, it looked pretty good, I must say. And I must say even this very serious American director was fascinated by my bridge, Westminster Bridge, and the traffic going on it.
And so he decided to put Jack Hawkins right into the window, so he got the model bridge, and we started shooting. And then much to my horror, I could see the buses sort of jerking over the bridge and finally coming to a standstill. John said, 'Cut', and without any... 'Ken how long will it take you to fix it?' I said, 'Jack, I don't know, I've got to get the special effects people over and see'. He said, 'If you get it fixed by tomorrow morning there's no problem, because I can shoot around Jack Hawkins, but it's got to work tomorrow morning'.
So I got all the special effects department around and what had happened, which they shouldn't have done, they used a canvas belt, and they... they'd sewn all the cars, and buses to the canvas belt. With the heat of the lighting, the belt stretched and that caused the jerking, and stopping. So they then got a leather belt, and much to our relief, it worked.
And that was really the only sort of encounter which was... I had was with this very frightening American director, but after that we became great friends, and I don't think it was a very good picture, but at least Westminster Bridge worked.

I was making... I was employed on an American film in Europe called John Paul Jones and there was a production designer, and I was the art director.
And there was... the producer was a man called Bronston, who started, eventually, all those big films in Spain, you know, and it involved boats, full-sized boats, and I set up the art department in Rome. I had the famous sailing expert Arthur Villiers fly with me to Sicily to see if we could find some big schooners, which I think... would convert into square-rigged frigates of the period, and we found all that.
And, so I set up the art department in Rome, and we bought these two old schooners, and had them sailed to Fiumicino outside Rome, and I started the conversion into a 24-gun frigate if I remember rightly, two 24-gun frigates. And they were very keen on this picture because apparently it was the first time in this... in the American Wars of Independence that an American frigate sank a British frigate, and so they had the whole navy behind them.
The only sad part was that I suddenly got a letter from my bank manager here saying that, to inform me that, I don't know what the word was, that the cheques had bounced, you know. And I'm sitting there in Rome with an art department of about 20 people and I had a very superstitious Bulgarian, draft those enormous... and he found a lucertola... it's one of these creatures on the wall. And he said, 'We'll all be in trouble now because that brings bad luck', and true enough, about two weeks later all their cheques started bouncing.
And I was all the time ringing New York and LA, saying, 'What the devil is happening?' Also, Bronston had asked me and Letitzia to entertain the Chief of the Navy, I can't remember the name, in the most expensive restaurant in Rome, at Passetto’s, you know, and... because they were very important people. And we did all that until I ran out of money, you see.
And, they always said, 'Don't worry', you know, 'We are just switching bank accounts from one bank to another', and so on. Well, to cut a long story short – I was never paid, nor were the people paid, and I'd forgotten about it – and I'm working on the John Ford picture here, and I get a phone call in the morning from Barney Glassman and Sam Bronston, they're having breakfast at the Dorchester, would I like to join them for breakfast?
So... and all my work and my assistant's work had been put in the hands of a lawyer. Also, the ships, I mean they were big props, in Rome. So they said they... 'Now we're going to go ahead', and... but they wanted all my drawings released, and so on. So, I said, 'Well, let me think about it, because I'm working for John Ford at the moment, and I don't know if I can get away from the picture'.
So I talked to John and he said, 'This is going to give all of us a bad reputation. Ken, you better go with them to Italy, but you better make sure that they pay off everybody, and there's not any bad debt left behind'. And so I flew with them to Rome and I must say they did pay off everybody. This was nearly two years later, you know. And they made the picture too, but not with me, or Boris Leven, the production designer, because, a) I was busy on other pictures.
And I never saw the picture, so I can't tell you if it was good picture, but we had also a sense of humour about it, because we couldn't take it seriously. Except when all the cheques started bouncing, you know, it became pretty serious.

I did a number of films after the Ford picture, and then was contacted by Cubby Broccoli to do... two films with Tony Newley, and then a very important film, which turned out to be a very important film for me and for them, the Trials of Oscar Wilde, with Peter Finch. And it was one of those idiotic things that another company made the same film, with... Robert Morley, but not in colour. In black and white, and so there was, like a war on between the two studios on who would come out first. I did it at ABC in Boreham Wood in Elstree, and... we had some pretty exciting sets. You know, the Café Royal, St James’s Theatre... and as usual I was running out of money, because a) to keep it in colour, and the Café Royal was a big set, and St James’s Theatre was a big set. And we came to the end of the picture and I still had a big set, which was the Marquess of Queensberry’s castle in Scotland, after the funeral of his son, and I didn’t have enough money. So I took all the, sort of, classical elements from the St James’s Theatre, and like, over doors and double doors, put them on both sides to make a room. I had a big fireplace at one end and on the other end I designed a French window, and I treated the whole set in two colours only. The main colour was terracotta, and all the doors and the fireplace and desks and windows were black, and the floor was like Italian Sienna marble. So I could do it for very little money because most of it was paint, and I also insisted that the actors were all dressed more or less alike in black funeral sort of dresses, and it became a very effective scene. I mean, apart from quite a number of other scenes.

Ken Hughes directed it, but he didn’t get on with Irving Allen, who was a partner of Cubby, and every time Irving came on the set he stopped shooting.  He became very neurotic, but what Irving was very good at, he had been an editor, a cutter, before, and knowing that there were these two pictures in competition, he set up four cutting rooms at the time we were shooting, with four editors.  And our picture, which was in colour, came out before the other picture, in colour, and caused quite a sensation, because it looked good and Peter was unbelievably good also.  James Mason was very good, and it was a really well made film.

Irving Allen, one didn’t like very much.  He was very vulgar... or could be very vulgar, and I’ll never forget when Maurice Binder, who did all the credit titles for the Bonds, and I... went to Irving, because we thought he liked those and we had an idea of a film, and we went into his office and said, ‘Irving, we would like to make this film’.  And he threw me and Maurice Binder out, and said, ‘I’ve got enough geniuses around me and I don’t need you two!’  And then Cubby Broccoli picked up the wreckage, across the road, you know.

It was the first time that the British press... that I got... you know, articles in the British press about the design of the film, and then I got... from Luchino Visconti, who was the President of the Russian Film Festival, I think it was in 1971 or... yes, I think, ’71 and... he gave me the first prize for the art direction of that film, and it was really the first time... that I got good reviews, personal reviews, in the English press, and so on.  And it was really a very nice picture, and, you know, when you think back, I had forgotten that I had done this for Cubby Broccoli, but that was one of the reasons, when he did the Bonds, he and Harry Saltzman, they came up with me to design the Bonds.

I wasn’t staying in this house which I’d given to my brother who had moved, I was staying at the Carlton Tower Hotel, and I got the first 100 pages of Dr No, and... I thought they were pretty awful, frankly.  And then I gave them to Letitzia to read and she said, ‘You can’t make this picture. You can’t prostitute yourself’. But I knew that Terence Young was going to direct it, and even though we had never worked together, but we were great friends and I know he very much respected my work and I respected his work and... so I decided, finally, to make the picture. What I should have done, at that time, which I think they would have agreed to: get a percentage of the film, but I thought it was safer to be paid, because I didn’t know what the picture was going to be like.
And so... then somehow things fell into place.  Locations were going to be in Jamaica, and Harry Saltzman, I knew from Italy, where he was making television pictures, and he knew me and I knew him.  And I think it was Harry who had brought, actually, the Bonds to Cubby.  And... I went to Jamaica for the locations, and there wasn’t really very much for me to do out there, except come up with an idea for the dragon, you know, a strange dragon. But I also... my assistant was Syd Cain, who was pretty good, so I left that dragon to Syd Cain, and came back to Pinewood, because I knew I had to fill three large stages at Pinewood with sets, because it was such a quick picture. And I had a short meeting with Terence, in which he explained, you know... he said, ‘I’ll leave it entirely to you, provided you give me entrances and exits for the actors. A concept I’ll leave to you’. 
And it was really an incredible thing for me to arrive at Pinewood, and I wasn’t all that keen, in those days at Pinewood. I would have preferred Shepperton.

When I came back to England I got all the construction personnel together and said, I don’t want them to use any of the normal film construction materials, because I felt we had to reflect the... age of computers and technology that we were living in, and they said… they were fantastic to me, they said, ‘Anything you come up with we can do’.  So I really let myself go.  I didn’t feel... and I didn’t have anybody looking over my shoulder and saying, well, you can’t do this or you can’t do that. So I spent... it must have been several weeks... the only set where I had some help was the nuclear water reactor, because I didn’t know what a nuclear water reactor was, and I got two young scientists from Harwell who advised me, and they said, when I showed them the sketch, it was perfectly all right.  I always found, and later, obviously, that wherever I went, and said, ‘Can you do this?’ they said, of course we can do that, you know. 
So that was the only set I had some help on, the nuclear reactor, but then I built this sort of... gigantic hall with the nuclear reactor in one corner.  And on all the other sets, like Dr No’s underwater apartment... in order to get the effect I wanted I used some of our antique furniture for a dressing, but also sort of, had dead trees inside it and a big glass panel, because it was supposed to be underwater.  And we didn’t have any money, remember, so I got some stock footage for the fish swimming behind the glass, and when we projected it the first time we all were horrified, because you had goldfish-sized fish enlarged to small sharks or something like that, so they had to put in some line of dialogue – if you see the film again – in which, I think, Dr No says or... Sean says…  Well, no, Dr No says it, but you see, I had this magnifying glass, you know, to adjust that, because we didn’t have time or money to get different footage in, and so on.

When, six weeks later, the unit and everybody came, I had three large stages at Pinewood filled with sets, which nobody else had seen, not even a sketch, and I thought, either I’m going to get fired or maybe I’m going to be a hero.  And... Terence was the first to arrive and he adored what he saw, and then Cubby and Harry came in, and when they heard that Terence loved it they also, reluctantly, said, ‘Well, it looks pretty good’, but they all thought, he’s going to ask for more money next time, you see! But…  so I had won, and then everybody came up with ideas, you know, I had for this underground apartment, which was nearly completed, but ... somebody said, well, we should have some famous stolen item.  And so, Joanna Woodward, or somebody, a writer, came up with the Goya, you know, of the Duke of Wellington.  And remember, we had to shoot after the weekend, so I rang up the National Gallery and they gave me, thank God, a slide of the Duke of Wellington portrait, which I projected and then painted, and... it wasn’t perfect, but you got away with it. 

Nothing was taken very seriously, but everybody got into the spirit of these strange and certainly original sets with copper doors and gun metal sides and so on, and... it worked.  But I only had a budget for ₤12,000, and I said to Cubby and Harry I couldn’t do it for that, I needed another ₤6,000 or ₤7,000, so they said, we’ve got another ₤7,000 for you, and the whole film was made for less than $1 million.

There was a near disaster with the last set, which I’d forgotten about. This is where... the English scientist, whatever his name is, who is in Dr No’s pay, goes over to No’s island to warn him about what’s happening and Terence said, ‘You know, we need a set for that’, and I said, ‘Yeah,  my God, I’ve forgotten about it!’  So I came up with this false perspective, I mean starting off with the floor going up and the sides coming down, to give… and that big circular opening in the ceiling, with a black grill in it, and it was sort of a minimum set. I had one chair, I had a copper door and I had a table in the foreground with the cage and the tarantula – the real tarantula – in the cage. And strangely enough, I think it was probably one of the most effective sets of that film, and several critics remarked on it and said that this set set the style for future Bond films, and so on. And we built it literally in 24 hours. And Terence was great, because I, you know, he should have had the set but he forgot about it too.  And he said, ‘Ken, but you do realise I will never be able to see that whole circle, because... I can’t frame it... you have to give me more ceiling piece, so then I can cut on something and then establish the whole circle’. So, during lunchtime I had all my carpenters working on it to extend the ceiling piece, and fortunately they came up, and fortunately it... it looked fabulous.

Pinewood were fantastic – all the new materials, and everything – and it opened up everything.  It opened me up to go bigger and better with the next picture.  Pinewood were entirely on my side... anybody came up with a new idea.  We hadn’t got any gadgets yet, but that happened really with Goldfinger... but... it was a very effective film,  and because Kubrick ran the film when he came over here from New York, he was so impressed with what I’d done that he rang me and asked me to meet him at the hotel whatever it was, because he was wondering if I would be interested to design his next film, which was a sort of a strange... black comedy called Dr Strangelove, and that’s when I met Stanley and that’s when our relationship started.

We met at some hotel... I can’t remember... off Bond Street, and I was really bowled over by his enthusiasm, and almost... naivety with the questions he asked. And then I started scribbling while he was explaining some of his ideas, and he looked at my scribbles and said, ‘That’s exactly it, that’s the ballroom and the way it should look, like that’. And I’d come up with a two-level ballroom, and... rather like a sort of amphitheatre... and he said, that’s fine, you know. And so I thought to myself, this is easy, this man has such a difficult reputation, and he loves everything I’m doing, this should be a piece of cake, really. Little did I know! 
 

He was younger than me, but we were both young, and he insisted on my driving him to and from Shepperton Studios every day in my E Type Jaguar, but not in excess of 30mph, which was quite difficult. And I don’t think there are many people who spend probably five months on a film, every day an hour-and-a-half to and from the studio, with a director.  So what was very useful for me, and also for him, that I knew any changes of mine and the way his brain was functioning and so on, and as a result, I probably had the closest relationship I’ve ever had with a director.

That apparent naivety... was not something artificial, it was… I found it also the first time I met Barbra Streisand.  You know... they were from a Jewish family living in the Bronx or somewhere, and... very bright, obviously, and highly intelligent, but they both... I mean I brought in Streisand because I did a picture with her... independently, sort of asked questions, questions , questions, why did you do this and so on, and I told Barbra, ‘You remind me of Stanley’.  I thought Stanley reminded me of Barbra, you know.

The script was being written still and so on, and I was going ahead with my designs at Shepperton Studios, and after three weeks, in the car he said, ‘You know, Ken, I’ve been thinking about it and I don’t know what to do with the second level of your set, because, you know, there will be 100 extras, and so on, and they look like they have a lot of cheese on their face, and I don’t know what to do with them.  I said, ‘Well, Stanley, you’re the director you saw the design’.  ‘Yes, well, I don’t know what to do.  We have to come up with something else’.  So he really threw me, because also I wasn’t that experienced in those days.  And I walked around in Shepperton – there are these beautiful grounds, you know, gardens – to try and calm myself down, took a couple of Valium, I think, and then started scribbling again on my... in a little cubby-hole under the window, and he was standing behind me.  And I was going through various shapes, and I came up with this sort of, rather expressionistic triangular shape, and he said, ‘Wait, that’s like a triangle’.  And I said, ‘Yes, it is’, and he said, ‘But a triangle is the strongest geometric form’.  I said, ‘Yes’.  I had no idea, but I said, yes, and he said, ‘So wait a moment, what are you going to do with the wall treatment?’ and I said, ‘That’s reinforced concrete’.  ‘Oh, so it could be like a gigantic bomb shelter?’  And I said, ‘Yes’.  So that sold it, and I found out how... that you really had to justify every line I drew or anybody else drew, which is sometimes heartbreaking, because I was, or am, more or less, an instinctive designer, something like doodling, and something comes out which is interesting, but then to justify it intellectually is... not always easy. 
So in any case, it certainly sold the set to Stanley, and, you know, he saw that circular table in the centre and the light ring above it, and he said, ‘Well, the table I want covered in green felt’.  I said, ‘Stanley, I’ll gladly cover it in green felt, but it’s a black and white picture’  He said, ‘I don’t care! Because I want the whole scene to be as though they are playing a poker game for the fate of the world’.  So it made a lot of sense, and then he said, ‘How do you see this light ring?’ and I said, ‘Well, I thought it was nice for the composition and to light the actors sitting round the table’.  So he said, ‘I’ll light the whole set that way’.  And then he came here, or we had a flat somewhere in London at that time, and we were going… we were experimenting, with me sitting here, let’s say, and he was standing there at night time with photofloods, working out the right angle, and so on, so it was really very useful from that point of view. 

He also had all these... fixated ideas that Peter Sellers was the greatest actor in the world, but Peter had been a friend of mine when we were both very poor, you know, after the war and I knew that Peter had this enormous talent of… I don’t know, making a... caricature of somebody he knew, you know, but... and that was his greatest talent, you know. Unbelievable clown, really, in many senses.

He had Peter cast as the President of the USA, the commander of the nuclear bomber, the B-52, and... and the RAF Group Captain, aid to George C Scott, who played General… I can’t remember the name, but whatever it was.
Ripper?
Yes, General Ripper. And... though we were in tears half the time, because Peter just... invented dialogue. I mean, also as the RAF officer he was talking suddenly during the attack, about the string in his leg, you know from the war still, and it was not in the script even though we had Terry Southern who was a very brilliant and funny scriptwriter. But our big problem, and the people around him, their problem and the other actors’ problem was to keep a straight face when Peter was improvising.

The important change that came about was after two days of shooting with Peter as the bomber commander, Peter, fortunately, whether he broke his ankle or sprained his ankle, I don’t know, and Stanley said, ‘I had a fantastic idea, Ken. While I was in... in Hollywood, on Spartacus, or something, I met this cowboy, Slim Pickens, and I rang him up last night and he’s willing to come over and play the part of the bomber commander. And it was a brilliant idea. I think it was probably the best idea Stanley had on the picture, and so the whole scene and tone of the scene changed.

 I was in trouble, because I’d designed the bomb bay and suspended it at Shepperton from the rafters of the stage, and it wasn’t supposed to be practical. I mean... we never had Peter Sellers going to the bomb, but with Slim Pickens – and I did a lot of continuity sketches – Stanley came up with this idea of him riding the bomb like a cowboy into the Russian missile complex, and he said, ‘How long will it take you to make the bomb door practical?’ I said, ‘When do you want it by?’ He said, ‘The latest the day after tomorrow’. I said, ‘I can’t do it. That’s impossible’, I said, ‘even if I work shifts, day and night, day and night, I can’t do it’. ‘Well’, he said, ‘I don’t know what to do. Try and see what you can do’. And I had brought with me on the picture a brilliant special effects man called Wally Veevers. He was then already in his late 60s. I think he’d had one or two heart attacks, and so on. But Wally always got me out of trouble. On Sodom and Gomorrah, whatever it was, I went to Wally and I said, ‘Wally, I don’t know how to deal with that’, and he said, ‘Just give me 24 hours and tomorrow morning I’ll come up with a solution’.
And that’s exactly what he did, and we took a black and white still of the interior of the bomb bay, cut out the bomb door so that it gave us... it had blue backing behind, and did that sequence without any alteration to the set, and then cut to Peter... not Peter, Slim Pickens sitting on the bomb, and the Russian missile complex... I had a very good assistant who was a scenic artist, and we were debating whether we should use a model or a painting and he felt that you could do better with a painting, and he painted the Russian missile complex, possibly 8ft by 6ft, or something like that. And we strung up the full size missile on the large stage at Shepperton, with Slim Pickens sitting on it, and then tracked back and finally did the last bit optically of him. So he had saved my situation, and that became a fantastic shot.

I knew that I always had to be prepared with Stanley, and also with Peter, because I was looking at London Airport at the time, and I used it eventually as the American B-52 base. I came back from one of my scouts and taking a lot of pictures, and I get on the stage and they’re all sitting round the table, and the whole stage is in tears with laughter. And I saw what had happened because Peter wasn’t happy with playing the president straight, so he asked the prop man to bring him an... inhaler, you know, one of those things, and he played around with this inhaler... while talking to the President of Russia, you know, and we were all in tears. But then Stanley and myself on the way back to the car, he said, ‘Didn’t you think that was hilariously funny?’ And I said, ‘Yes, I mean I ended up crying about it’.
Then he said, the next morning, I think, he said, ‘But maybe that’s not the right way, because the president should really be the only straight character in the film’. But, you see, everybody loved that scene so much that it took some time... so he changed it, and Peter then came... came up with the solution, not, possibly, the best solution but... because his RAF officer was fantastic, and as Dr Strangelove he was unbelievable, and the problem was – and it was a very serious problem – that the actors, whether it was George C Scott or… who played the Russian Ambassador? I can’t think of his name right now. Peter… Well, you can find out. Peter Bull. Peter Bull, right, and if you watch the picture and pay attention, whilst Peter’s going through all this, you know, this thing, Peter Bull couldn’t keep a straight face. It was so difficult for them to, you know, really be involved in the scene, and this is also when Stanley started improvising. In other words, he started re-shooting, take after take after take, or perhaps he eventually did, but sometimes 15 to 20 times, and then picked the little best bits, you see.

We all got so involved in it. It... it was really fantastic, I think, for all the people who were involved in the picture. And... we tried to do it with very simple means. I mean I took him to meet Charlie Staffell, who was working at Pinewood. He was a great special effects there, back projection king, you know – they had built those tunnels through the stages, and so on – and asked him how he would project all these symbols on to these gigantic screens. And Charlie had suggested something like 30... 60mm projectors, back projectors, and Stanley said to me, ‘If one breaks down we can lose half a day of shooting. You’ve got to come up with something’.
[Q] Is this for the wall maps?
For the wall maps, yes, these enormous sloping wall maps, and the way I had made them in the art department, on a double, elephant-sized drawing board, we drew up these wall maps and then had them enlarged or blown up by companies who did photographic backings and so on, to the size we required. And then to get all the symbols, rather than projecting them on, I had the wall maps glued on to plywood screens or... cut out where the symbols were, and put... hung a 100 Watt bulb inside. It was like a little box that was perspex, and that went over. But what happened to my... was a disaster, that the heat given off by these, I don’t know how many hundreds of 60 Watt was so much that the paper used to lift... lift off of the Perspex. You know, so we came up then with installing two or three air-conditioning units behind the screens to keep it cool, and then it worked.
But, you know, there was always a first time... problem, like the floor, which, I wanted a smooth, black, shiny floor. Well, the first time we did it, it looked like a seascape, you know. It really did, so then the construction department came up with putting a block wood floor down first and then another floor on top of it, with a much heavier gauge of plywood, and with the black lacquer on it. And then it worked, more or less. Not perfect, but more or less, you see, and it was, of course, fantastic, because it reflected these inclined surfaces in the floor, and you thought you were walking on air. And it was so important for the actors.

After Stanley had died, the Motion Picture Association in... in Hollywood decided to pay tribute to him, and I was invited also to make a small speech, and so on. And after the speech, Spielberg came up to me and said, ‘Ken, I want you to know that as far as I’m concerned, the war room is the best set that you have ever designed, and not only that, I think it’s the best set that ever has been designed’. So, you know, I was very flattered, obviously, about it.

But it worked in every possible sense, and the actors were part of it.
Stanley shot it brilliantly, against my advice, because I was used… but you... well, you are probably too young, but in the old days the production designer, art director, used to give the director the main set-up for the set, and people like Alfred Junger, these famous people, long before me, used to nail it down or to force the director to shoot it that way. Well, I knew I couldn’t force Stanley to do anything, but I said, ‘Stanley, come on, I’ve done these great sketches for you, you know, and you’re not using that angle at all’. He said, ‘Ken, don’t worry, I will reveal the set as we go along. I don’t want everybody immediately to know what the whole set looks like, and I’m sure you’re not going to be disappointed’. And he was, of course, absolutely right, because it’s been brilliantly shot.

The interesting aspect of it was that we had this war room, which was a complete fabrication, even though when Reagan was President of the United States, when he became the president he asked his chief of staff if he could look at the war room, you know. And that’s true, you know. So that worked, complete... fabrication, whereas the interior of the B-52 bomber, meaning the cockpit which was on two levels, was complete copy, to such an extent – also the instrumentation – that I got a memo from... after some American Air Force personnel came to... were invited to the set, next day, I got a memo from Stanley, saying, he hopes I can justify where I got all my material from otherwise we may be investigated by the CIA, or something like that. It was considered, you know, at that time, slightly... a slightly anti-American picture.
So war room, complete fabrication. Inside of the B-52 complete copy, of course, it didn’t fly, but Stanley used God knows how many Polaroid stills to balance the interior with the exterior, which was shot over the Arctic Circle, from an... old bomber, and so on. And then we had that completely realistic attack on Ripper’s office, which Stanley shot himself with a hand held Arriflex, and these three elements worked and made a fantastic film. So it’s interesting, you see, the complete fabrication, a studio set and the attack, which Stanley, with an Arriflex, shot himself. The three elements worked together and made, in my opinion, a brilliant film.

When you drive a director for nearly five months to and from Shepperton Studios every day you get to know each other pretty well, and Stanley was fascinated by my wartime stories. I mean he was like a little boy. Also, he had tried to become a pilot, but on his first solo flight… I don’t know if I should be saying this, you know, in these Tiger Moth and Stearman, in New York or something, we had two magnetos, and before you took off you switched one magneto off to see how many revs you lost, and then the other one. It was a way of checking that the engine was okay. Well, Stanley did that, but he forgot to switch on the thing – the magneto – and he staggered into the air, and just managed to get back and make a forced landing, and since then has never flown in any other aircraft. Imagine.
So that was one story that I got out of him. But I told him a lot of my stories and he was fascinated by that, and he was going to make a film, you know, but he wanted to make it from the First World War because you could hold all those aerial fights and battles in your frame. You didn’t have to go with, you know… and then in the end, I had no more stories so I had to invent stories to tell, but it was a great... we had a great relationship, except that I said to myself, it’s one... I can only go through it once in my life. Little did I know.

He did a quite brilliant scene at the end of the picture, of a pie fight. Did you hear about that? No... well, a custard pie fight. I ordered about 4000 custard pies and we shot it for over a week, with everybody in the war room, you know, going crazy. George C Scott was dangling from that big light ring, and throwing pies, and Peter as the president was... Peter Bull as the Russian Ambassador were sitting like two kids, on the floor, making... building sandcastles out of this mess of pies everywhere, and it was quite, quite brilliant. I think the best pie fight ever shot.
And... unfortunately it was the same time that John F Kennedy was assassinated, and there was some dialogue, ‘How can you stand by when our president…’ something, and Stanley said, ‘No, no’. And we were all... you know, his family, myself, and everybody said, ‘No, this pie fight has to stay’, and he said: ‘No’. And nobody saw the pie fight until I saw it about four or five years ago at the BFI, because somebody came over who wanted to write about it, and then I became aware of why he really didn’t want to use it. It was quite brilliant, but it was not in keeping with the way he shot the rest of the film. He had, sort of, pies in slow motion sometimes, you know, it became… as a pie fight, in itself, it was probably the most brilliant pie fight ever shot, but as part of that crazy picture somehow it didn’t work.

After Strangelove I was offered a film, which I think I’m right, Basil Dearden directed, called Woman of Straw, with [Gina] Lollobrigida, and Sean [Connery], and we shot it – or shot a lot of it – in... in Spain, in Majorca, and it was Sir Ralph Richardson who... I built a very big set at Shepperton, it was... at Pinewood, for the sort of… I always did want to build a sort of baronial hall type of set for Ralph Richardson who had this big country seat, and that was fun, and also to see how Pinewood reacted to a set which almost filled the whole stage. And it wasn't that expensive. I mean, obviously costs started to go up. And it was again right for this rather spooky atmosphere in the country house of Sir Ralph Richardson, and the locations were nice, in Majorca.

Sean... apparently... he had to slap the face of Gina, in a row or something, and he slapped her too hard and we couldn't shoot with her for about two or three days, because her face swelled up, you know. So these things do happen in films as well, but otherwise I can't really remember anything. Yes, there were things too, because we had a yacht in it, and we thought, great, you know, we'll take the whole unit out on the yacht and... and shoot the scenes actual. Well, the first one who was seasick was Sean. Oh, I'm sure he wouldn't like to hear about it, but… you know, because he had been in the navy before, or something like that. And half the unit was seasick, too, so that... that didn't work out so well, but otherwise I can't, at this moment, remember.

[Q] What happened in the evenings, when you worked on these films?
Well, it was... the evenings normally were fun, because we were all living in a small place called Cala Ratjada, or somewhere, and we used to drink together or eat together, and it was a lot of fun. In fact, Guy Hamilton, after the picture, rented a house in Majorca and then eventually, I think, bought it, and he's still living there now. So he left England, and really, left the film industry and settled in... in Majorca. So it was a great way, I mean, you know, of film-making. It was a lot of hard work and a lot of conceptual work, and so on, but it... you also get a chance of seeing the world, which otherwise, probably you wouldn't have seen, you know.

I did a film with Jane Fonda but... it was, I think her second film, and John Houseman was the producer of it, the famous John Houseman. And it was Jane's second film, and we had a lot of problems on the film because the director was very inexperienced, an American director who'd only done some TV films, and was highly sensitive.
And, Jane, in those days, couldn't sometimes see the difference between playing a film part and... and real life, and fortunately we had Peter Finch playing her... her lover, I think, and... but we had a lot of incredible situations. I built part of Central Park, the bridge, or something, at the studios here, and Jane was supposed to play a scene with... with Peter. And her boyfriend, who was a... a strange guy, was standing next to me and he said, 'Jane is not relaxed at all, go and tell her that she's got to scream'. I said, 'I'm not the director of the picture. It's not up to me. If you want to talk to the director', I mean... 'No, no, no, no', he said, and he was a strange guy. So I ran on to the set and told Jane. She believed in him... this man. He was her guru, you know... that she had to scream to get rid of anxieties. Well, suddenly there was a scream on the... on the stage of MGM, and the soundman came from behind the flats, you know, to see what happened. And it was that sort of picture, and I remember these sorts of things.
And one more anecdote that I remember also is that I'm sitting with Jane, having lunch in the commissariat at MGM, and John Houseman, who was the producer, came to our table with Peggy Cummins, who played Jane's mother, to introduce Peggy to Jane, because they had to play together, and Jane behaved atrociously. And, you know, I was embarrassed and John was very embarrassed. Peggy Cummins [sic] was too clever an actress to be embarrassed. They left, and I said, 'Jane, what... what's happened to you?' And she said, 'You have no idea what went on with me and my mother'. I said, 'But you're an actress, she's playing your mother'. And she was like that. I mean, I did a film with her much later in Canada, and she was a completely changed person, but this, remember, was one of her very, very early films, and she had this affair with this guru, Voutsinas, or... a Greek, or something, who was… you know, and the director was himself a... very shaky, and so it had its interesting sides, but it wasn't a particularly good picture.

I really started sort of expanding. It was also, since it played in Fort Knox, in Kentucky, in Goldfinger's stud farm, and Cubby [Albert 'Cubby' Broccoli] and Harry [Saltzman], myself and, I think, Guy Hamilton, went on a location scout there. And Fort Knox, the exterior was a dull, art deco, 1920 building – and all of Fort Knox is underground, in any case – but this place was in a sort of wood, surrounded by razor wire and machine guns, and on the roof machine guns too, and so on, and I wanted to… I said, 'I'm going to reproduce it exactly', and I needed to see it from the top and I flew in a helicopter over it, and you saw all those people with their anti-aircraft on top of the roof. That's true. And then loudspeakers all around me, 'You are approaching too close', or something – really quite a frightening thing. And so I decided to design the exterior completely as it was, and reproduce that on the lot at Pinewood.
And the interior, I thought I'd do something quite different, because I had looked at the bank vaults of the Bank of England and I thought they were… you know, because gold is so heavy you don't, you know, stack it higher than 2ft or 3ft, or something like that – and I had the idea... wait a moment, this... biggest gold depository in the world, that's true. You want to see gold, everybody wants to see gold, you know, and so I built like a cathedral of gold, between 40ft and 50ft high, taking up the whole of the... the big stage at Pinewood and with the gold stacked up right to the top. And I made, obviously, a sketch, because I had to sell the idea to Cubby and Harry and Guy, and Cubby and Harry were not convinced about it, and said, 'It looks like a fucking prison'. I said, 'That's exactly what I want', you know, and Guy said, 'Well, you know, it... it looks interesting', and so on. And so they went along with it, and I don't think they ever regretted it afterwards because it made an incredible scene, you know, between Sean and... the fight between Sean and… what was the name of the Korean, or whatever he was? Oddjob in Goldfinger...

I had to build some other big sets, which were the stud... stud farm, and there was a Kentucky stud farm, exterior and interior – the interior being what the Americans call a rumpus room, where all the tackle of the horses are. But my problem was that that rumpus room had to become a gas chamber, in which Goldfinger gets rid of all his gangster friends. So all the walls – I built it, designed it such a way that the... the open walls folded down, and in, and even a big stainless steel fireplace came down, so there was no source of air from outside, and... and a model of Fort Knox came out of the floor. And Goldfinger was still briefing people and then suddenly all this came down, and... he got rid of all his gangster friends that way. So it was an interesting set, but it also... I never felt quite happy with it, but purely because I knew what the Germans had done in the Second World War, in the concentration camps, and so on.

On the amusing side, by this time, we had very little problems to get cars from the Americans, and we needed a brand new Lincoln Continental, to be with one of the chief crooks in it and he's driven by Oddjob into this breaker's yard, and that brand new Lincoln Continental is put into one of these squasher things, and first becomes like a sausage, and then, you know, like a square, and I suddenly remembered in... while we were shooting it… already the whole unit felt terrible, because it was like something happening to you, you know – a brand new Lincoln Continental, a beautiful car – and I remembered that, my God, that cube is going to be too heavy for the truck I had laid on...
And I whispered over to Guy that, 'Can we cut', and he said, 'Why?' And I told him that, so he said, 'Okay, we'll cut'. And then the car, by this time, was like a big sausage, you know. But you know, it took us the best part of an hour and a half to cut a lump off it, because it would have been too heavy. And if you watch the film again, because the next moment it gets squashed like that, you see, is when the cube drops into the back of the little truck, the truck sinks down like that on its springs. But fortunately it worked, but we all felt pretty awful about that, but we got over that eventually, because every Bond film had cars and car chases, and the... so on. And although it was interesting, because on the same film I had designed all the weaponry on the DB4 Aston Martin, and DB5, for Q – who was a new character in the film – and I had quite a lot of difficulties getting a car, or two cars from Aston Martin, one to be the real run-around car, and the other one with all my gadgets on it. And we did finally get them. I don't... I don't know if EON, in fact, owned them or if they were loaned out by Aston Martin, but in any event, after that film came out, Aston had, I think it was a nearly 49% rise in their… and we had no more problems in getting cars from anybody. It was strange, you know.

At the end of the picture, or after the picture came out, United Artists were bombarded with letters from irate American film fans who said, 'How was it possible that a British unit and a British director were able to shoot inside Fort Knox, when the president – our president – is not allowed in it?'

[Q] Can you just say something about the laser?
Oh, yes.
[Q] It was... in the book it was a circular saw.
Oh, was it? Yeah. Well, yes, I don't know whether I came up with this or whether the script called for a laser, and we called it the laser room, as part of Goldfinger's factory, really, and he used it to cut the gold, or various things. But I really didn't know much about lasers at the time, and as on Dr No, I had made the acquaintance of two young scientists, who worked at Harwell, I think, and I came up with a design, you know, a futuristic design, but also a visual thing, and brought in these Harwell boys, and they said, 'Yeah, why not?', you know. And I always found that later, when I came up with something and, you know, you went to the real guys, they said, 'Yes’, or, ‘Maybe we have to lower the engine, or something, but that will work', you know. And that was that famous laser, you know, which is a terrifying scene with… Goldfinger was brilliantly played at that time, and the laser sort of entering the private parts of Sean Connery.

[Q] Are you the person who's responsible for the Bond gadgetry, really? I mean you say about the DB5, and that was the first...
Yes, well, when... when you say responsible, yes, I come up with most of the ideas, but we had the most brilliant special effects engineer, really, Johnny Stears, who worked on those films, and then unfortunately died, and later on we had Derek Meddings on the later Bond films, who was also brilliant, and also, unfortunately, died. But it would have been impossible for me to work without them, and without the team around me, you know, and whereas, from my past, having been a fighter pilot, and trying to race cars, and so on, all this appealed to me, and I could think up of, you know, things: cutting the tyres, or the wheels on the car or machine guns – which was the obvious thing – or the flamethrowers, or... but we had Johnny who made them all practical. He was a brilliant engineer. I mean he didn't make a practical machine gun, thank God, but as near as damn it, and we also had a functioning ejector seat.
Martin-Baker I think it was who did the ejector seat, which, when the car chase… and we... we filmed part of the car chase at the Pinewood studios, exterior – night shooting – and the driver of the Aston Martin was a stuntman called Bob Simmons, who was a great friend of mine and a great stuntman, and I had built a phoney wall outside, but it was just about 10ft in front of a concrete, a real concrete wall, at the back of it. So I said to Johnny, 'Listen, Johnny, you've got to start braking really early because the phoney wall has no resistance at all, but 10ft behind it, or 15ft, but... there is a real wall'. So he said, 'Don't worry'. And, of course, he didn't brake early enough and went straight into the other wall. And the damage... and we had the whole crew working through the night and the next day to get the car back into shape again. So these things happened too.

Thunderball was a... a new experience for all of us, because we had to work underwater, and so the whole art department was learning to swim with bottles, and so on. But we also used the Ivan Tors' people, who were working in Miami, doing a... a Flipper series, which was very popular, and they were underwater experts, but we had several near disasters. The... the first one was that I had, from the air, found this incredible villa with two pools, a seawater pool and a freshwater pool. And I rang up the sea aquarium in Miami and said if we could get some actual sharks to drop into the seawater pool, and in one night they fished about 15 sharks, and they were, you know, some 10ft, and big bloody sharks, you know dropped into the pool. Then I remembered that the owners of the villa, and I shalln't mention their name, were fond of having maybe too many drinks at night time, so I had to provide a guard overnight in case somebody would drop into the shark pool, which was pretty awful because the smell already was... was terrible. But, you know, those Ivan Tors' people used to swim them around the pool to keep them alive, and we had to put... feed oxygen, and so on.

The biggest faux pas I made was that Sean has to be in the pool, with the sharks, right. So I decided I'm going to build like a plexiglass corridor through the seawater pool, and the shark would swim behind it and Sean would be on the other side. Well, that was all very well but I couldn't get enough plexiglass, and I, you know, I even sent someone to Miami to try and get it but they couldn't get it, so I was missing a 4ft by 8ft sheet of plexiglass, and I thought the best thing was to put a... one of the Ivan Tors' underwater experts down there. And Sean is in the water and, of course, a shark is fed into that plexiglass corridor, and the first thing he does when he comes out of that gap... what happened to our Ivan Tors', man, up to this day I don't know, but we saw the shark coming in and we started screaming, 'Sean, get out, get out', and I've never seen Sean get out of the water that quickly. He was running on water, and, of course, by this time, the sharks, in any case, were too tired to do much damage, but it could have happened, you know.

When you are dealing with new things, like underwater battles, of course accidents happen, and the man who directed the underwater sequence had one of these arrows shot right through the thigh.
And also we had... I had to design this Vulcan bomber, which makes a false landing in the Bahamas, in... in the water, with the two nuclear weapons on either side. And so we built part of the Vulcan bomber, full size, and then we had a model, which must have been 14ft, probably, or something like that, wingspan, if not bigger, of the Vulcan crashing or landing in... in the water of... of Nassau. And we had this stuntman from Ivan Tors’, who was the dead pilot in the full sized Vulcan, and in the film you see him, you know, surrounded by the... and the nuclear bombs have gone, and we gave him an alarm system that if he felt anything was wrong or wanted to come, because we sank that Vulcan in about 50ft of water, we would get him out as quickly as possible. Well, something did go wrong, but he didn't... being a professional stuntman, he didn't want to spoil the scene so he didn't send the alarm or press the alarm until sometime later, and by the time we got him out he was in a bad way. Fortunately, he didn't lose his life, you know, but I'm just saying that, because in the Bond pictures there were really people taking some serious risks, and also lost their lives, unfortunately.

This was a... a great experience for me and my department, and I... also there weren't any yachts fast enough, doing about 60 knots, which were to... to take the nuclear device and let it off in Miami, or somewhere, so I came up… Oh, I... Harry Saltzman and I, we... we found advertised a hydrofoil, in... in one of the islands – I can't remember which one – for $10,000, so we flew there. And the hydrofoil was one of the Rodriguez hydrofoils that they used in Italy, and it had been lying on dry ground and was not very shipworthy, but we brought it down to the shipyard at Miami and then found out that the Mercedes engines were useless. And so that's when the money builds up, and... and what I did, I built like a cocoon round the hydrofoil, so what it did, it increased the size of the hydrofoil, making it look like a good sized ocean-going yacht, and at the same time, it gave me the opportunity of the hydrofoil and the catamaran really dividing. And the experts in Miami said, 'You've got to be very careful because you can't have them solid, because of the independent movement', and so we had two one inch slip boards on either side.
So the two halves were separated, separately in the waves, and so on, and then the slip bolts came out and the hydrofoil just came out like... like a flash, you know. And it was a very exciting sequence. But, you see, everybody learnt, you know. I had, obviously, great shipbuilders in Miami who built... they repaired the hydrofoil, then built the catamaran, and... and all the underwater buoys and the sharks.

Apart from one of... someone underwater was being injured by these bloody weapons, and things, and... we really had very little problem with the sharks themselves. Even though the underwater cameraman, was a man called Lamar Boren, who had spent, I think, 5,000 hours underwater shooting sharks and... on the Great Barrier Reef in Australia, and he said to me, 'Ken, it's like any other wild animal, eight times out of 10 they're not doing anything to you, and then suddenly they attack'. And they were working in cages, and... they tried even to get into the cages, and so on, so it was a new experience for all of us.

The Ipcress File is... was very interesting, because it was not a Bond, at all. It was one of the first pictures from... from Michael Caine, and you know, we had a lot of problems with Cubby too... with Harry Saltzman, because he thought he wasn't going to make him... a sort of a poor man's Bond. And we all ganged up on him, and the director was Sid Furie, who's very talented, and said, 'You know, this is not a Bond, because Michael Caine is not a Bond type of character'. And we treated it completely differently. Did you ever see the picture? And we shot it all on location, except the one sequence with the brainwashing, and it was really a very good-looking film.
And if I remember rightly, and as a slight anecdote of it, I hope I'm right with this – I was nominated for two BAFTAs, one was for Goldfinger and the other one was for The Ipcress File. And, Cubby and Harry had taken a big table, you know, wherever it was I can't remember, and to everybody's surprise I won it for The Ipcress File, and Cubby wouldn't talk to me for... for several weeks afterwards, you know. But it was, it had a look to it, and considering that it was all shot on location… We had a wonderful old cameraman, Otto Heller, and a great operator and a very good director, who was Sid Furie... and Michael. You know, it was his second picture, or something like that, and he was brilliant in it. It worked, and we all had a lot of fun making it.

We shot it all in the real locations, and I found this... was really Victorian interior in Grosvenor Place, or somewhere, not far from here, and there was a lovely room with three tall windows, which was supposed to be the office of the MI5 head. And, Harry came to me and he said, 'Ken, whatever you want, computers, I will get it for you'. I said, 'Thank you, Harry, let me think about it'. And I didn't sleep all night and... because I had this design of that room in front of me all the time, and the next morning I came up... you know I had the universe... and I talked to Sid Furie and I said 'I had an idea. Sid, what... what do you think if instead of the Head of MI5 having all sorts of gadgets or gimmicks, he sits behind a trestle table, he has a camp bed on one side, and he doesn't even have a chair for somebody who comes in, and maybe he's got a bust of Caesar or the Duke of Wellington, and that's it?' And Sid said, 'Let me think about it for five minutes and I'll let you know'.
Well, after five minutes he came back and he said, 'It's a brilliant idea. We'll shoot it that way, get rid of all the other stuff'. And about an hour later, Harry comes on the set and he sees this bare set, and he went ape. He started screaming at me and, you know, I... when people like Harry or... screams around, I always had to laugh, I couldn't take it seriously. And he said, 'You're trying to get between me and the director', and so on, and I said, 'Well, I discussed it with the director'. And, of course, for the unit it was great fun because they always enjoyed a big fight going on, they all disappeared all over the place. And then Harry came back about two hours later, as though nothing has happened, and he was, you know, approving of it. But those were continuous things that happened on these pictures.

[Q] Okay, now having said that you weren't going to... you thought you wouldn't... weren't going to work with Stanley Kubrick again, that turned out not to be right.
No, it... it turned out not to be right, and also I've got some letters of Stanley, in which he said – because I managed to, you know, get out of the other films – and he said, 'You're behaving like a star but a star can go...' It's quoted in one of these books here. And, but if Stanley wanted you he always found you, and I was working on a picture in the South of France and suddenly there's a phone call from Stanley. That he's doing this picture, Barry Lyndon, 'Very economically', he said, you know. 'I'm shooting it all on location and I think it would be just right for you, because you've done too many studio pictures', and so on. But, he said, 'I can't pay you your money'. And I wasn't making a lot of money, at the time. So I said, 'Stanley, be my guest', you know, and he said, 'Well, I'm... I'm afraid I'll have to take the next best production designer', you know, and I said, 'Okay'.
I went back to where we were staying in the South of France and said to Letitzia, 'My God, thank God I got out of this', you know, because I was really frightened. And then four weeks or five weeks passed, another phone call from Stanley, and now it's a quite different Stanley. He could... could be like a little boy, on the phone, you see, and he said, 'Ken, for some reason or another, the second best production designer didn't seem to know what I want and you really have to do this picture, and your fee is no problem', and all this and all this and all this, and all that. And then in the end, he talked me into it, you know.

I never felt comfortable, and there were several reasons. A) I did not believe that doing a period picture all on location was the sort of settings we needed – big country houses and all that – would be more economical than building parts in the studio and then using… if you have a great interior location, use it, by all means.
And the other reason was that I felt very concerned about Stanley's idea of shooting it all on location, because he had just done the Clockwork Orange and he had received the most horrifying hate mail that I've ever seen. And he wouldn't even talk... discuss it with his family, but he had discussed it with me, and I mean it was unbelievable, you know. If I know somebody who had a gun licence or something... and then he said, 'But you know, I've thought about it, but if somebody wants to kill me they have the advantage, so forget the gun licence'. But, so I thought, how am I going to get him out on location, in any case, and I didn't. We had a young... about six young photographers, including a... a niece of mine, who had a Leica, or something, and we had made the garage at Borehamwood, where he was living, into a miniature war room, with ordinance survey maps all over, little flags, you know, and radius, starting with a five-mile radius around the house, ending up with a 40-mile radius. And he used, I think, every excuse not to go out on location, because these kids, they only got one page of script, or something, so they didn't even know what they were shooting.
And, Stanley's argument to me was, 'You never know what's round the corner', you know, and I said, 'Come on, Stanley', but the major locations they are all, you know, written about, know about. I know Hatfield is there, and this is there, and so on. So I think we spent four or five months just working out of his house, at the miniature war room, and with our kid photographers, and each night we had a screening. And I felt like a sort of unwanted teacher, because I did know 18th century, and every time Stanley saw something Victorian he said, 'That I like', and I said, 'That you can't choose, because it's Victorian'. He said, 'What's Victorian?' I said, 'The wallpaper is Victorian'. 'Prove it to me'! I mean, this sort of discouragement... and in the meantime, he collected every book, and material on the period, and eventually became a great expert on the Georgian period. So secretly, he was always drawn to the Victorian, you know. Because it's so different, it's not as severe.

He decided to go to Ireland, and within 24 hours I was in Ireland, and he treated the whole unit like it was Rommel in the desert. We all had to have our VWs, you know, my drawing board was fitted across the back of the VW, and looking for locations. Well, we had Irish locations and that made sense, but it didn't stay there. Then he wanted me to find the German locations in... in Ireland, the French locations, and I was going, and I was driving this bloody Volkswagen all over, with my cameras, and so on, and being chased by what I thought were cows, they were bulls, you know. But I'm not a country man. And then, Stanley was... I mean he was... he enjoyed it, in a way, but we really didn't know what we were shooting every next day, and he was also writing, rewriting pages, because he thought he could shoot Thackeray like it was written, and I told him, you know, I think... and he couldn't shoot Thackeray as it was written, so he was rewriting script pages and he never gave more than a couple of pages to everybody... he was looking around.
And... and also we did... you know, he was so... he remembered some of my photographs on a mountain track, the Comeragh Mountains, and he said, 'Ken, that was fantastic looking. We're going there tomorrow with the unit'. I said, 'Stanley, you know, it's a track, and when you get 40 vehicles or 30 vehicles going up that mountain track, if anything comes the other way we're in trouble'. He said, 'Who gives a shit. Let's do it'. And that was his attitude, you know, and in fact, what happened, we went up that mountain track and on the way back, you know, to... to turn around was a big problem. On the way back, suddenly the sky opened up, with a sort of Goya skyscape, or something. We got the German actor, whose name now escapes me… Harry. Harry Krüger. Yeah, Harry Krüger, out of his car, on to a horse, and we shot the scene there, and it... it is a fantastic looking scene, so you know, how could you argue?

But the sad part of it – I don't want to go into too many details – I was losing more and more of his assistance. And because I had an incredibly close relationship with Stanley I started taking all his mistakes – or which I thought were, you know, reckless decisions – on my shoulders, and sometimes going to the actors and apologising, you know, which had nothing to do with me, it was Stanley. And also what happened, I was trying to find these locations – wasn't only English locations, it was also Irish locations and French locations, and German locations, all in... in a little bit of Ireland, you know.
And I found that he liked the location, but when the scene didn't work I had to find a different location, so I was really getting completely exhausted. And, you know, what he did, of course, he said to me one day in... in the car, 'What would happen if I closed down the production for six weeks, what would Warner's do, and we get our act together more, and so on?' I said, 'Well, you would probably be the only director that I know who could get away with it'. And that's what he did, he closed down, fired everybody except me, to get the act more together, but by this time I was… Letitzia came to... to visit me on... and she was seriously concerned. And, you know, we were very close to the Kubricks, in any case, and they spent so many evenings here, and Letitzia said, 'You know, Ken is not well', and he said, 'Well, I think you are right, but whatever you do, get him treated by… get him the right sort of medical attention'.

I went back to London, and of course... and I cracked up, and had some psychiatric treatment in a hospital for some time, and I was getting better, but Stanley tried to ring me every day, and letting me know that he did the locations I had chosen, that he was going to do this and that, and so on. And he was obviously was very concerned about me, and the only funny situation that... I finally… and the psychiatrist said to me, 'Ken, you will never get better unless I can cut this umbilical cord between you and Stanley'. And finally I get home, I... someone, Letitzia had got a chauffeur to collect me in the Rolls, you know, and I arrived. And the doctor you were talking about was my doctor, my... he was very bright and a very good doctor, you know. And there's a phone call, and it's Stanley on the phone and he says, 'Ken, I'm so pleased that you are well again and, you know, all the things you wanted me to do, that you wanted me to send a second unit to Potsdam, near Berlin, to get some atmosphere?' I said, 'Yes, I remember all that', and he said, 'I've decided you are going to direct it'. Well, that gave me such a shock that the next day I was back in the clinic. I mean, now I can laugh about it, but he didn't see it that way at all, you know.

It was not the sort of thing I... I wanted ever to go through and, you know. You have a complete breakdown, you think you can't do anything anymore and you really have to start your life again, and what was wonderful that as the next director I had was an Italian called Tinto Brass, who made this film, Salon Kitty, or Madame Kitty, which was almost porn, because Tinto always liked to have a porn element. But he was an unbelievably talented director, and I worked with him in Rome, and in Berlin too for several months, and I got my… but normally I do big... big sketches like that, but I only did small sketches, you know, and he kept all my sketches too, because they were very pretty, but it wasn't the way I normally try to express myself. But I was very lucky that I met Tinto.
And then after that did another picture called The Seven-Per-Cent Solution, which was Sherlock Holmes, which was then back to the big picture-making. And then by that time I was more in Hollywood, in any case, and so I'd lost contact with Stanley, except he used to ring me when he wanted to know something, and we kept a very friendly atmosphere, and also when I came back, and so on. And he always said to me, 'Your Bond sets are fantastic, but I only wish I could photograph them', you know.

When I was doing the Bond film, what was it, The Spy Who Loved Me, and the cameraman was a French cameraman. What was his name? A brilliant cameraman, but, like all cameramen, including Freddie, I mean, they were worried about these gigantic sets and nothing to compare them with, and I knew I had to give Claude, he was the grandson of… Renoir. Renoir, Claude Renoir, as much help as I could with source lighting, and then I rang up Stanley, and Stanley – remember, said all those things about sets and cameramen – 'Would you mind helping me with the source lighting on the tanker set at Pinewood?' so he said, 'Ken, you must be out of your mind', you know. 'I would like to help you, but, you know, if Claude finds out… anybody finds out, Stanley Kubrick, you know, my... my name will stink'. I said, 'Stanley, I will guarantee you, you will come in my car to Pinewood on a Sunday, there will be nobody there. I will have the key to the 007 stage. You don't have to worry about the security because they all know me and I'm, you know... and nobody will know that you are there… had been there', and he said, 'Well, let me think about it', and then he came back and he said 'Okay', provided I can guarantee that nobody is going to know about it, and we spent four hours together crawling through the super tanker, setting out, you know, source lighting and... and so on.
 
And of course I never talked about it while he was alive, and that was the story, because, you know, he was always… or very often made up as this monster of a person and so on, but that fascinated him, like I took him behind. When I did an opera at Covent Garden, I took him behind to see the stage sets, you see, and he was like a little boy because it's a completely different technique to what we use in film studios, but it showed that, you know, there was still a lot of feeling there. And it was of great help to me, but I wouldn't have worked with him again and I don't think he would have worked with me again, you know.
So it was… became too unhealthy a relationship I would say, and a very, very difficult man, and you know, I wasn't the only one who cracked up, of course. There were other people who cracked up – actors and so on – particularly when he started this repeating and repeating and repeating of a performance until he felt the performance was right. You have to be pretty tough to go through that, you know, it you are a creative person and so on.

I didn't… I didn't like the last film he did. I... I thought… I can't remember what it was called, but it was based on a German novel, I think.
[Q] Eyes Wide Shut?
Yeah, Eyes Wide Shut, and I think even Christiane, his wife, tried to talk him out of doing the picture, but he had made up his mind. I don't think it was one of his better pictures and… but you know, my relationship with him was unique, and I never had such a relationship with a director. That's when things go wrong with a sensitive, creative person it really does go wrong, you know. If you don't give a shit about somebody you wouldn't be affected that way.

[Q] But you won an Oscar for it.
And I won an Oscar for it, yes. That was… yeah... and he was very pleased about the Oscar, and of course I was pleased, you know, even though I felt my God, you know, I nearly lost my life and… and the strange part is that the two Oscars I won were both for 18th century period pictures.
You know, the second one, The Madness of King George, I did more the way I think that Barry Lyndon could have been handled. I think the whole paycheque was $7 million, and we shot it in seven weeks, and it was partly at this… the Royal Apartments at Windsor, were built at Shepperton Studios.
I used a castle which belonged to… belongs to a friend of mine, Arundel, for Windsor  because we couldn't shoot at Windsor, and in location I used Wilton too, for the Double Cube Room, is the famous thing, and the Painted Hall at Greenwich, which is quite beautiful, which I knew from my early research days into ships, and the rest were… the... the whole apartment at Windsor was at Shepperton Studios.

To give you an idea what I think production design should be about in a way, the scene starts that the mad king goes into the children's bedroom, grabs hold of the children, and his wife is with him, and he runs through the Royal Apartments set at Shepperton, right.
You then pick him up going up the most fantastic staircase, which is this famous staircase at St Paul's Cathedral, and he ends up on the roof of Arundel Castle – owned by my friend – which I loved because it had these enormous chimneys, so I put six more… I built six more chimneys to make it look almost like a Greek tragedy or a Greek temple. So he goes up this circular stairway at St Paul's, ends up on the roof at Arundel, and there's a fabulous scene between him and... what's her name who played his wife, a famous English actress... and when he says ‘Do you think I'm mad?’ or something like that – it's a touching scene amongst all those chimneys which… and it worked, you see. That to me is a good example of what production design should be like.

Even with a first time director like Nick, a very good cameraman, myself who was with him all the time, wonderful actors, cast, which he had directed at the National, you know, in the play, it worked, and it worked extremely well, and a very great… good costume designer too, and you know, one tried to protect him obviously because Hollywood was trying at one time to dictate what they wanted to see and what they didn't want to, I said, ‘Nick, if they say a certain shot didn't work and you agree with that, do it again, but if they want to dictate to you you're too talented to be influenced by that’, you know, and I think that helped him too because he's an... he's an enormously talented guy, not necessarily a film maker... but on that film he was because it somehow worked, I mean, the script by… I keep forgetting the names now… by… I've got his book there. It's terrible, isn't it? Alan Bennett. Alan Bennett, yes, of course, yeah. By Alan Bennett, yeah... was fabulous, and everybody got affected by that, by...by the scenes and by the way, and then how certain things came up, by the performance of the actors and so on. Yeah, Helen Mirren played the queen, but he was wonderful too.

[Q] Did you want to be a director ever?
No, I never wanted to be a director. I enjoyed too much what I was doing and I felt I could… my... my best contribution in... in my way to a film. I felt as a director, to be an average director or something like that, was not my ambition, you know. And it's great when you work with a good team of people, and it can be a lot of fun, but physically you have to be in shape too, you know.

One of the most memorable Bond films, from my point of view, was You Only Live Twice which we made, I think, in '66, and Fleming had covered it quite well, locations in Japan and so on, so we rented two helicopters when we got to Tokyo and covered, I think, two-thirds of Japan for... during four weeks.
I was flying with Lewis Gilbert, the director, and the other one there was Freddie Young, the cameraman with Cubby Broccoli, and we didn't find any of the Fleming locations because… I'm not sure whether he was there or whether he had invented these locations, but they didn't exist, like certain castles and gardens, poisonous gardens and so on, so we were getting really quite desperate about them, and during our last week we were on the island of Kyushu in Southern Japan, and by chance we flew over an area of volcanoes who… I mean, the... the image was fantastic, like a moonscape or something, and after we landed locally I think it was Lewis who said ‘Wouldn't it be fun if our villain has his headquarters in one of these extinct volcanoes’, and the idea appealed to me enormously, and I immediately did a little scribble which I showed to Lewis and Cubby, and they liked it. And Cubby said, ‘Well, how much is it going to cost?’ And I said, ‘Cubby, I haven't the faintest idea’, and he said ‘If I give you $1 million, can you do it?’ I said ‘Yes’, not knowing of course, but $1 million in... in '66 was a lot of money, and of course my worries started once I had said yes, to see how to cope with that... set, because in fact it was the biggest set ever built in… certainly in the UK.

It was enormous. It was 120ft high and it had a crater lake which had to match the lake on location, which was, what, 70ft diameter on a slant, because it had to open, you see, to let the... the baddies and the goodies in, you see, and also a helicopter had to fly in, and I mean, I was living on valium at the time, I mean, and so were my staff, because I had a wonderful construction coordinator and assistants, and by this time, you know, this was I think the fourth Bond film we did, and we were all a team, but I found that it wasn't normal film construction, and so we had to call in a firm of structural engineers as well to do the various calculations, but they said, ‘Ken, if you had given us to the... the calculations for the Empire State Building in New York it... it would have been easy, but this, with that sliding lake on a slant, you know...’ and I mean, the set, the biggest span of the set was, I think 120ft or more. No, no it was more. The lake was 70ft, I remember.
And, you know, to do all that out of plaster, which we did… took from coal mines because the structure of a coal mine is very is… it looks like real rock if you cast it and... and you know, paint it and so on, and… well, you know, and what I... what is interesting that the bigger the set and the more complicated it is, the more you concentrate on every bit of detail, and normally nothing goes wrong, whereas with a small set or a small… where you don't pay that amount of attention, you suddenly find that somebody shoots a close-up of Sean or Honor Blackman in front of a door which is barely finished or something like that.

Even though we had some near serious accidents, but fortunately everything worked, because I had a sliding helicopter port, and nobody had ever flown a helicopter on the inside of a building, you see, and so we didn't know what was going to happen, you know, were there were any counter currents or so on. And that same helicopter we had used in Japan and we were watching it fly into the crater of the set of… of the volcano that I eventually copied, and he disappeared, and we were standing and you think… and Cubby said, ‘Oh my God, have we lost this one?’
And he came out… he came up – it was a Brantly helicopter, a... not very powerful one – and he was caught in a down draft and had a hell of a job trying to get out of it, and it took him, I think, over six, seven minutes to get to the top of the volcano again, so… I'm only saying that because I was worried what would happen when he goes into my set, and what sort of currents is he going to encounter, but nothing happened. I mean, he came in beautifully and landed on this heliport which was on rails, so it could move, and all that worked... extremely well.
And also when you have, I don't know, 200 stuntmen abseiling from the top of the inside of the crater, you know, it was very dramatic, because people ask me ‘But couldn't you have done the whole thing with models?’ I said, ‘Well, I suppose I could have done it with a model, but you couldn't have had…’ – you know, I'm talking about the '60s – ‘... you couldn't have had 200, you know, people abseiling at the same time and all those sorts of things’, so it was really a worthwhile expenditure.

Not only the biggest set I have ever done [You Only Live Twice], but it was also very, very successful. It worked extremely well for the film.
The only disadvantage was after we finished shooting, the locals near Pinewood – because the outside structure was just steel and so on to hold the thing up – and they hated it, so I had to pull it all down, and we had over 600 tons of structural steel in that set, so I said I'm not going to make that mistake again, and in fact, when… on… which was it, the film I did before Moonraker... The Spy Who Loved Me. I had to design the interior of a supertanker which swallowed up three nuclear submarines. Even though I had reduced the submarines somewhat, I built a stage around it which... which is the 007 stage now, so they couldn't complain about that. And even though that stage burned down, I think, once or twice, it has been used again and again and again on other productions as well.

[Q] Could you say a bit more about the supertanker set?
Yes, it... it was an... an enormous set because it had to house three Hunter/Killer Submarines and these submarines I think were about 400ft long, and even though I reduced them to… I can't remember, five-eighths, or something like that, full size so that the people didn't look out of scale, you see, a) I had to dig out a tank in which they could float, but they didn't float. I built the hulls out of marine ply and then covered it with a type of plaster to give it texture and so on, and they were running on rails, so they didn't in fact float, so they appeared to float, and that all worked very well, but I remember at the end of the film we had to do some shots on a real submarine, and the Americans had promised that we could use one of theirs and then they got cold feet and I didn't get that submarine, and then the Royal Navy said they could also supply us with one, but since the Americans had turned us down they turned us down as well, so we didn't have a submarine.
And what I did… what we did, we cut one of the submarines into three or four pieces and put them on low loaders and took them somewhere down on the south coast, assembled the pieces and floated them on big drums, like a raft really, and if you look at the film you wouldn't tell the difference because Roger [Moore] and Barbara Bach are lowered down from a helicopter into the conning tower of the submarine, and you would really believe it's a... it's a real submarine floating at sea. So you know, you sometimes also have to come up with ideas if... if your donors don't come up with the goods.

I was incredibly fortunate to have probably the best team of people working with me and… but they got worried too, obviously, you know. And I don't know if I told you that story, but on You Only Live Twice this... this crater lake opened on rails, you know, and the first time we tried it – the whole construction crew, myself, various other people, stood down below, I mean, this was 120ft up – and suddenly there was an explosion, or it sounded like an explosion, and we thought the whole set was going to implode or collapse, and my construction manager who never, never was worried, I mean, you know, Ronnie Udell, he immediately sent somebody up there to see what had happened.
First of all we were all waiting if there was another explosion, you see, and what we found is that one of the riggers had left a pulley in the steel rails in which the... this artificial lake was sliding, and the wheels of the... lake structure went over that pulley about that size, and it sounded like a... a terrifying explosion, but fortunately nothing happened, so you do need valium, you know. And you know, it was very funny because Cubby [Albert 'Cubby' Broccoli] said… I remember Cubby saying that, ‘Every time Ken puts pencil to paper, I have a heart attack’, you know. But those Bond sets really worked very well, you know, and I had probably the best team of collaborators I ever had in my life.

The theory of... of Cubby [Albert 'Cubby' Broccoli] and Harry [Saltzman] and... and the directors too, was that we were… we're going out of our way not to cheat the audience. You know, sometimes obviously we had to use trick, but as a rule we did everything for real. And I'll never forget we had a sort of American colonel who was – ex colonel – who was a friend of Cubby who found out that there was a jet pack being used in the American army. So he got it over and Sean is supposed to – I don't know if you remember the film, it was on Thunderball – and Sean takes off his jet pack and it flies for about two minutes or something, but… and then it runs out of fuel, and you know, and if you are 800ft up you'd better get down, you know, quickly, before it runs out of fuel. And of course Sean could… would not do it, and we would have never allowed him to do it, and we had an American stuntman who knew this thing, but you know, there was no gauge you could look at or something. I think you had to go by your timing, and that, you know, two minutes or two and a half minutes, and then that's it, you know, so that was danger as well.

The Owl and the Pussycat was made in New York with Barbra Streisand and... and George Segus or Segal, whatever – and Herb [Herbert] Ross directed it – and it was amazing because Barbra was, by this time, the biggest star in the world, and she never felt safe in Los Angeles because she was mobbed the moment she was seen anywhere, but New York was her hometown, and she felt much more relaxed, and so we didn't have any problems with her and her performance until one day the actor – because she plays a hooker too, you know, a prostitute, who is supposed to pick her up in the car – didn't turn up or was ill, and she had insisted that I play this part, and this was transmitted to me by Ray Stark who was a producer, and I said, ‘Ray, come on, you know I'm not an actor’.
He said ‘But you'll only… it's a minute. You'll be sitting in the car picking her up’. I said ‘Yes...’ and the camera is here, quite close up, and like ‘No way’, but at that time he wasn't willing to pay my union initiation fee in New York, so I thought it's a little business I can do with him and I said ‘Okay, I will only do it if you pay the fee at a local...’, and... and his hands were tied.
 
Then I talked to Herb Ross, who was the director, and I said ‘Herb, now, come on, you know, I'm not an actor’ and the scene is that I'm undressing her while she's in bed, you know, and all that, so the first thing I said, ‘I've... I've got to talk to Letitzia about it’. It was an understandable term, and I rang Letitzia and I said, ‘You know, I may have to go with… to bed with Barbra Streisand’, and she said ‘What underwear are you wearing?’ was her first question, and so we had to send a car to change my underwear and my socks, all sorts of things, and then of course, fortunately, I never went to bed with her, but she did, you know, while I'm there, she… and she was so nervous and she actually has a… has a great figure, but the stage was cleared. They couldn't clear me, but… and she was so… I mean, somebody who is so talented, that she was so insecure was incredible.
And then that scene I don't think is in the film any longer, but the scene when I pick her up, and we... you talk about snow here, in New York, I mean, it was… and... and we had fire engines to create the rain, but I mean, the moment the water left the hoses it started freezing, you see.
So… but we had a lot of fun and it was… I mean, it was a nice experience and so on, and I think she enjoyed it even though we shot for three nights or something like that, so that was my only major acting experience, and it was a fun film, you know, and I liked working in New York and... and later on did several other films in New York.

Sleuth was offered to me by Joe Mankiewicz, who was one of the most fascinating directors and intellectuals I ever was lucky enough to work with, and Joe said to me, ‘Ken, I want you and Letitzia to come and stay in Bedford, New York, at my house for about six to 10 days, and I will explain to you exactly how I see the film, and you can argue with me, you can talk to me, but once that has been settled I'll leave you completely in peace and you will never hear any more from me’, and I think he... he was very sarcastic.
At one time he said ‘And you know, when the film is good I, as a director, get the credit, and... and when the set doesn't work, you get the blame’, he said. But there were only two actors, as you'll remember if you ever saw the film, Michael Caine and Lord Olivier, and they were quite a team.
And I had designed a sort of baronial hall type of country house. I had actually toured, with the help of the National Trust, about a third of England to try and find a place which could be the exterior, and I... though I found some of the most sensational stately homes I finally settled on a place called Athelhampton because it had the right sort of oriel window because Michael Caine has to climb through that, so I settled on that, and then designed the interiors for Pinewood, for one of the big stages at Pinewood, and the idea was that Joe and Ossy [Oswald] Morris, who was the cameraman, could move all the time without my having to strike part of the set and so on, so I built it in sections out of fibreglass and on pulleys so that all the flats would move very easily, and so that worked extremely well.
And Ossy Morris was one of… a brilliant cameraman and I'd worked with him before, and we had a great relationship, and when Joe came over here he... he said, ‘What I want you to… you and Ossy to do; to leave me alone for two... two days, sitting on the set. I may want a prop man, but that's all, and I want to think by myself how I'm going to shoot this and all that, and after two days I'm ready to shoot and we can go on shooting then’, and that's exactly what happened.

We only had Michael Caine and Lord Olivier, and the third star of the picture; I had found a woman in Scarborough who had these mechanical dolls, what do you call them, automatons or something like that, which was so lucky, and she let us have them, and they became really the third star of the film. Because Joe was incredibly clever, how he used them, how they started... talking or moving or something like that, and I only built I think the laughing sailor. If you've seen the film, there was a laughing sailor who, at the most inopportune moments, started sort of cackling and so on, but it was brilliantly handled by Mankiewicz and we all got into that spirit.
Ossy, you know, with his lighting was as quick as I've never seen him before, and of course the set worked beautifully because all the flats were on wheels, were counterbalanced, and they came out quite easily, and you could even create different venues somewhere.

It was very interesting to see the relationship between Larry and Michael, because Michael was very nervous at the time, but funnily enough Larry was too because he was young upcoming star, and I sometimes… Larry sometimes invited me to lunch in his dressing room, and it was fascinating for me to... when he talked to me and told me some of his stories and so on, and he knew that Michael was good, and he knew that he had to pull out all the stops as an actor to... to deal with Michael's performance, and so it was a very exciting new experience for really all of us.

When the film... came out nobody believed that we hadn't shot it on real location, so that was a compliment to me. I even had at Athelhampton – because I used Athelhampton for entries and exits – but I had to build a maze there. I don't know if you saw the film, but the film starts in a maze so we built the maze at Athelhampton, and the maze was at least, if I remember rightly, 7ft high, and of course it created enormous problems how to shoot it, and I think we used the first sort of cam on a... on a crane, you know, controlled by somebody on the ground. So Mankiewicz could… we could have tracking shots and all that, because otherwise you wouldn't have seen anybody, you know, unless you had been up on a crane or something, and that worked extremely well too – and it turned out to be a very successful film.

After the last Bond, which was Moonraker, I got a call from John Frankenheimer who wanted me to do a film in... in Hollywood, and so we went over there and it was… I can't even remember the title, but it was a film dealing with the Cuban exiles and Miami and... and so on, and I had to do a lot of location finding. We flew to Cuba and nearly got into trouble because it was still very much a communist regime, and then I found a great location in Mexico and so on, and then the whole film suddenly was cancelled.
I never knew the exact reason, but I think John Frankenheimer was a bit of a naughty boy with one of the producer's or distributor's wife or something like that, and overnight the film was cancelled and… which was really rather sad because it could have been a good film, and all the films I was working on then didn't materialise, except a film called Pennies from Heaven. And you must remember that Herb Ross was a choreographer and he was married to... to Nora Kaye who was one of the most important ballet… New York ballet stars in the… during the '50s and so on, and we were very close, and I always wanted to do a musical, and to do a musical at the old MGM studios in Los Angeles was the height of my achievements I've had, because it was still the old MGM studios, you see.
I mean, they had sold the lot unfortunately, though. That didn't exist any longer, but there were five or six films shot at the same time. Billy Wilder was doing a film, and I knew Billy and so I quite often had lunch with him, and you know, he had that dry sense of humour, and while we were still shooting at seven o'clock in the evening he finished by three o'clock in the afternoon, and he said to me ‘Ken, I don't know what you're doing’.

You know, I heard... had heard a lot about the MGM studios and so on, so it was incredible for me to be in a studio in which Billy Wilder was shooting a film. At the same time Bob Aldrich was... was shooting another film, and two or three other directors. Cary Grant came to... to watch us filming, and it was a fantastic experience, quite apart from the fact that I had a house in Malibu, and driving along the PCH – the Pacific Coast Highway – to MGM and back with the ocean view was something I will never forget, and it wasn't supposed to be quite that way.

There was a TV film of Pennies from Heaven made in England. It was a script by Dennis Potter, and Dennis wrote the script also for Hollywood, but it was much more difficult because in the English Pennies from Heaven the actor, whose name now escapes me, was a typical Cockney actor, and the moment you… the audience saw him they knew he was a Cockney and where he was coming from.
[Q] Bob Hoskins?
Yeah, Bob Hoskins, absolutely, and this didn't... doesn't exist in America, so we had a lot of discussions who could play that part, and finally Herb [Ross] came up with Steve Martin, who had played comedy roles and was a big star in comedy, but who didn't really know how to dance, so he had to have an enormous amount of dancing lessons.
 

The film was supposed to be shot all, or most of it, on location in Chicago, so I spent about two or three weeks in Chicago mapping out the locations.
It was a cold winter, freezing, I'll never forget, the moment I put my camera outside it started freezing up. Letitzia had to warm it up in... in her fur coat or whatever it was, and I thought, you know, Herb [Ross] is not going to go and like Chicago for this picture, and he came and he was not in the best of mood, and then he came again and I said to him, ‘Two more months and I bet you something is going to happen, we are not going to shoot in Chicago’, and then he had come to an agreement with MGM that the whole film was… they... you know, the head of MGM said ‘You've got a designer like Ken Adam, use MGM, we'll give you the biggest stages at MGM, and let him do it’. So I was quite pleased even after I'd wasted weeks and weeks in the freezing cold in Chicago, you know, but even the big stage at MGM was not enough, so I had to use Goldwyn's studios and another studio, because we had to build everything.

It was the first and last major musical I had ever designed and I loved every moment of it because also to see these, you know, 200 dancers, beautiful girls dancing down my staircase off the bank or something like that, and of course we couldn't really afford… You know, what we did, because we couldn't afford to rehearse 200 dancing girls for two weeks or so on, so Nora [Kaye] just had two dancers... dancers with her and she rehearsed all the dance numbers with the two dancers, and then we called the whole lot in I think a day before shooting, because we could never have afforded to pay for that, and Herb [Ross] kept changing his mind so I had to be, you know, very elastic, changing certain designs, coming up with other designs, but I didn't mind that because it was a magical atmosphere at the studio.

We had problems when the picture came out because MGM tried to sell it as their biggest, you know, musicals and... Gene Kelly or Fred Astaire or something, which of course it wasn't and, you know, when the writer, who was sort of… you knew him, a depressed person, and the story was during the depression of the '30s, and so it wasn't exactly a cheerful musical, though some of the numbers were cheerful, and when the film came out, you see, the audience they... expected like a Gene Kelly or Fred Astaire, which it wasn't, and it didn't do that well.
Then they redid it, I mean reprinted it, and it then became very successful the second time it was released.

We even used [Fred] Astaire's and Ginger Rogers' sequence and… There will be troubles ahead, I can't... can't remember now of the name – oh, Follow the Fleet was the name – and black and white, and they're dancing it in a sort of lighthouse, and we had Steve [Martin] and the girl dancing with them, in other words you see the big screen of Astaire and Ginger waltzing or tap dancing the scene and... and Steve is sitting in the audience with his girlfriend, and they're both miserable because he's accused of a murder which he didn't do, and we then transferred Steve and the girlfriend onto the stage to dance together with Astaire and Ginger.
Well, you have the big screen back projection, and you have Steve full size with Bernadette Peters dancing the same number in front. Well, it wasn't easy, and you have to remember that Steve only did learn to dance really eight weeks before, so Herb [Ross] and Nora [Kaye], and we had a brilliant tap dance choreographer too, they were all sweating... how can we get away with it, but we did get away with it.

I had a problem because it looked like a fairly simple set, but I always was wondering how – in these American dance numbers of the '30s and '40s – the floors were so shiny and... and not a scratch on them and so on, and I... I had learnt my lesson from Kubrick's [Dr.] Strangelove when I tried to do a black shiny floor and it looked like a seascape, you know, until we found out that we had to have its under-floor and a much heavier section of wood.
So now I'm in Hollywood where they have done this thing for films and films, and the construction manager, who was reasonably young, said to me, ‘Ken, you don't have to worry, you want a shiny floor, I will give you a shiny floor, you know, we've done it before’. I said, ‘Well, you know, be my guest, I'll be happy’, you know, and of course Herb [Ross] and I, we arrived about two days before shooting to look at the floor, and the floor's no good, whereas Fred Astaire's floor done 20 years before or something like that, you don't see a scratch or anything. You look at some of these old musicals of Astaire's or Gene Kelly and those men.
So now this reasonably young construction manager spends sleepless nights, I mean, nearly suicidal, rings up everybody he knows in Hollywood and eventually came up with a terrazzo floor, which was cast and, you know, it's like concrete. I mean it's... it's liquid, and then hardens like marble, terrazzo, and then you polish it and it is… it becomes perfect. I mean, there are no unevenness, it's... it's the perfect floor.
The problem which nobody thought about, it's damn tough on the dancers because it's... it gets so hard, there's no spring in it at all, that they all had pretty painful legs after, but... but at least it worked, you see, and it is… I mean, it is a big treat to see Steve and Bernadette Peters dancing together with Astaire and Ginger Rodgers, but I think it worked.

We had several numbers, you know, which were unbelievable. I can't unfortunately remember, there was a Cuban choreographer who was very tall and he was… played the accordion man in the film, and there's a dance number when he sits with Steve [Martin] in the diner and I open the diner up and this Cuban goes into... to the music of Pennies from Heaven, walks onto the stage floor, and I had designed a... a 60ft backing, all with a collage of Walker Evans photographs of the depression. And so the Cuban looks very small in front of that 60ft backing with the pennies coming down and the music of Pennies from Heaven, and it is one of the great numbers of all times, if... if you saw it, I don't know, but it's worthwhile looking at it just for that number because he does like a soft shoe shuffle or whatever is it, and we were all amazed.

I also designed of course the... the L-street in Chicago. Unfortunately we didn't make too much use of it, but I used the… some of the… who was a famous painter of the period? Potter or… no…
[Q] American painter?
Mm?
[Q] American painter?
American painter.
[Q] Hopper?
Yeah. Hopper, yeah, and I designed the café at the corner, which is a very famous painting. I completely did it like the painting because as… you know, the problem I had, you design a street on the biggest stage in Hollywood, what are you going to put in that street? I mean, it was a L street, so I couldn't build the structure of the L. I didn't need to see the train. I mean, you could see a shadow effect or something, but you've got a street 300' long or something and then I curved it and so on.
So I used a lot of… well, not a lot; some of the artists of the depression like Hopper, and one who had painted models, mannequins modelling their clothes on the second floor, so almost each store or shop had some history to it, and it... it became a very successful street set, so successful that MGM kept it for I think two or three years to do other films on it. And even though I think I was a year and a half on the film it was… it was the only really major musical I had done. It was a fantastic experience for me.

The most amazing thing was that when it came to my being production designer the Hollywood Union said I can't do it. I said, ‘Why can't I do it, I'm a member of the New York Union? You have a... a deal with the union. I've done two or three pictures here. You never said I can't’. Well, we had a fight with the New York Union and ‘I'm sorry Ken, you cannot do it’. They got the head of MGM, they got Herb Ross to talk to them and they wouldn't, and finally they agreed that I would design the picture.
The head of the union said, ‘Why can't you be producer?’ I said, ‘I don't want to be the producer of it’, so he said, ‘All right, we'll give you Associate Producer credit in the front credit, and in the end credits we say Visual Consultant’, and I was so keen to do the picture, I said okay, and then when it came to the Academy Awards they said, ‘The film doesn't qualify for the Academy Awards because it was designed by Ken Adam’ and he had… and two art directors would get the Oscar, and so it wasn't… because it was… I... I don't know if it would have had the Oscar, but I think it stood a damn good chance of getting an Oscar. So then, about 20 years later, the same union gave me a... a Lifetime Achievement Award for the work I had done, the irony of it all, but that I would say was my happiest experience in terms of film in Los Angeles.

I got another Oscar nomination for a film I did which I also enjoyed enormously, which was The Addams Family Values, and I loved his cartoons in The New Yorker, you know, and so I tried to do the settings very much like the cartoons, and you know, he was a brilliant cartoonist, but my sets were all, you know, like expressionistic things, and I had to have very, very good assistants who – while I was... sketching a youngster, he was only 18 years old – used to build little cardboard models as I was sketching to see that, you know, that the floorboards going up that way, the ceiling was coming down the other way, and it was very, very successful.
We used three Hollywood studios to... to do the film, and I had, you know, three different construction crews working, but it was a very successful picture and it worked.

Some of the pictures I worked on, which happens so often in Hollywood, that they were never made, you know. You design them, we even start building and then, because they can't get the star or something, the film is cancelled.
One of them was... was Harrison Ford, and it would have been a very interesting picture. But it was very expensive because it dealt with the Pullman Strike during the '30s, you know, when the Pullman personnel who were working on trains and something went on strike, and it was a very good story but terribly expensive, because I had, you know, whereas I could design all the train carriages and so on, but the locomotives had to be shipped, and it would have been very expensive but… and then they decided to use Harrison Ford for another picture, then it was cancelled, you know, so these sort of things happened quite often.

We had another scene in Pennies From Heaven, it took place in a sort of very shady café off the L and I designed this very shady café. And, Bernadette Peters, who by now works as a prostitute, or no, she... she hasn't yet become a prostitute, she goes into this speakeasy or bar and she meets a villain there who is Christopher Walken. And in... while he explains to her, you know, if she wants to become a prostitute... the whole set changes and Chris Walken does an unbelievable dance number, first with two women of ill repute and then he does a striptease along the bar and... And, it is one of the great dance numbers of all times. I mean, it's maybe not Gene Kelly and Singing in the Rain or Fred Astaire, but it is quite brilliant. And, of course, most of us never knew that he was such an incredible dancer.
 

Special Project came about because Herb Ross – who you know, we were very friendly with Herb and Nora [Kaye] – and he was very friendly with a producer, quite a successful producer, Danny Melnick. And Dan was working at 20th Century Fox and they'd come up with an idea that I should come up with a design like the cinemas of the ’20s, which were like movie palaces. And, they didn't only have one film, they had, very often, two films, or they had a Wurlitzer organ coming up or other entertainment, whereas now – when I say now this was in '82 – there were no longer these incredible film palaces who gave, you know, so much entertainment.

I started work on that at Fox, and I came up with a sort of second environment, I mean first of all I used IMAX for, you know, the screen and so on. And, I also talked to NASA about... and they showed me their space cameras, which believe it or not were not bigger than this, and cylindrical almost, and, you know, from a few million miles away they could come up with a 10 by eight still every 40 minutes, I mean... And I said, ‘Children, you know, we have these gigantic...’ ‘Well, we would like to work with the film industry, it would help our budget’, and so on. They advised me on one or two things.

In my designs I created like a space... like a space station environment, where the audience goes first before they go into the IMAX theatre. And since they wanted to build 14 at the same time, hopefully near a big car park, all over the States, I decided maybe the cheapest and best way to do it would be... to be that... and make the whole thing like an inflatable. You see, I'd seen those tennis courts which were, they were in... in the States, and I said, ‘Why can't we build a... a cinema, 14 cinemas like that?’ And, I had, you know... I found people who were experts and they were, of course, very excited.

[Q] Dennis Potter.
Dennis, yeah. Dennis was so excited about it he wrote a screenplay for the first, you know, use of the cinemas. And, then we had a big presentation in the main theatre at Fox with Marvin Davis, who was the Head of Fox, and all his minions around him and Danny Melnick, and they just flipped when they saw all the sketches and all that and... And I, with my crew, thought we were going to all be under contract for at least two or three years, you know, get his thing... And then, the whole thing collapsed and it was a strange reason.

Melnick was a strange man, he had a... he had a complex that his office had to be changed every two months and the carpet renewed and the furniture renewed; this is all on the Fox lot, right? And, I remember he had an English secretary, who was lovely, and she always warned me, she said, ‘If you go into the office be careful you don't touch the desk or do anything’. And, I mean, if you tried to touch the desk or anything he said, ‘Don't sit on that chair’, and so on. And one day I come in and... and Elizabeth, who says, ‘Don't... you can't go in your... into your offices’, I said, ‘What's happened?’ ‘He said he's re-carpeting it.’ I said, ‘But the carpet was as... brand new’. ‘Yeah, but he wanted the shade of grey to be a little darker.’ Well, you know. And, every time I went into a meeting with him he said don't do this and don't do that and don't touch this, and anyway.
So, I knew, you know... I didn't know this would eventually blow up, but it did. And Marvin Davis and... who was the Head of Fox, had a terrible row with Danny Melnick and this great scheme was... Special Project never was born, unfortunately. I'd worked on it for over a year and I had the order to roll out there too. And Danny Melnick was such a snob, he said – because normally you can't drive your cars into the studio lot – he said, ‘You're allowed to take the Roller and park it in front of my bungalow, it gives us some class, you know’. But it was very sad because I had some very good assistants with me and, you know, old Hollywood producers who were too old for running a film studio and so on, but they were working with me. And it just wasn't made, and all this because Danny Melnick – poor Danny is dead now – but he had this mania about renewing his bungalow every two weeks and Marvin, I can't blame Marvin Davis, you know, for saying, you know, finish that, you know.

I had a... a fantastic life, you know, and it... it suited me so well, you know. And the interesting thing was, though I really had made my career in England with the Bonds and so on, but my training came mainly from great American directors, so I knew about the Holly was... Hollywood way of working and the making of films. I mean Bob Aldrich was great, John Ford, another one, Joe Mankiewicz, you know, I worked for mainly these fantastic... And I knew the way the studios worked. And so, when I went to Hollywood it was... it was very exciting, even though I didn't like Los Angeles, but Malibu, where we were living on the beach with the greatest ocean in the world and which was always alive, you saw either whales or something, you know, swimming by, and driving along that PCH to the studios was very exciting.

I really had fulfilled all my ambitions in a way, except, until about four years ago. I was asked by Electronic Arts to design some of their, one of their... it was a Bondian thing and so I did that, you know, which was a complete departure really because I did it here and used to send them faxes with my sketches.
[Q] This is a computer game?
Yeah, a computer... a video game, yeah. And, I went out there too, and it was, you know, a new technology and so on, but it wasn't really film making, you know.

While I was in Hollywood I also had... I did other things. I was on the jury in Cannes in 1980, which I enjoyed, and... then became... was on several film festival juries and so on. And, I still enjoy, of course, seeing the films, here and now, seeing all the videos and, you know, on a big screen, a fairly big screen, for the Oscars – always a... you know, I enjoy... I enjoy doing it and it keeps me in touch with what is happening.

I never thought I would see, there... I never thought I would see the end of the war because, you know, we were always playing poker and at time I thought... you know, how... how lucky can you be? You know, we had that, tremendous losses in... in '44, you know, in the Beachhead invasion. And, so I felt I'm living on borrowed... borrowed time, so every time and... and you know, since they couldn't get any replacements for us because they had a lot of volunteers at Lasham wanting to fly Typhoons or fighters, but nobody volunteered any longer for the rocket Typhoons because we had big losses. So, the Air Ministry decided that... to give us 48 hours off every four weeks, fly our plane to Gatwick or Northolt and have a 48-hour leave. And, very often, on the day we were supposed to fly, you know, back to England we had to do an operation and one became very superstitious because quite a number of us were shot down, or something, crashed, just on the day they were supposed to fly to London, to England. And, so for me it was just a question of time, you know.
[Q] But, now we know the answer to how lucky you can get, very lucky by the sound of it.
Very lucky, yeah, yeah.
