kg.subramanyan

KG Subramanyan (1924-2016) was an Indian artist.  A graduate of the renowned art college of Kala Bhavana in Santiniketan, Subramanyan was both a theoretician and an art historian whose writings formed the basis for the study of contemporary Indian art.  His own work, which broke down the barrier between artist and artisan, was executed in a wide range of media and drew upon myth and tradition for its inspiration.

I lived quite a sizeable part of my early life in British India not in independent India. And I was born in Kerala, but I am in a sense, I have a double India. I am a Tamilian who grew up in Kerala. My father came from a place called Palghat, which is nowadays fairly famous for a whole line of musicians and scientists who have come from there. And my mother came from Travancore and her background they were a family of landowners. Though I know very little about their other background and I was a late child. So I think very soon after I was born, hardly 5 years, my father had retired from service. He was in the Revenue Department and he used to travel around the place and probably survey land and make maps and things of that kind. So early in life I was quite sickly. So when I was school-worthy I didn’t go to school. So we had a tutor come to our house and teach me the basics of language, the alphabet to start with. And then I seemed to have picked that up fairly easily and he was a very fine man. In fact I still remember that my grandmother used to tell, ‘You’re no good as a teacher unless you break a cane or two on his backside. How will he learn anything at all?’ Well I didn’t give him any need to do that and he also did quite well. And I heard that when I got the Kalidas Samman calendar, somewhere he had read it in the papers and he was very happy that he once taught me the alphabet.
Was that Malayalam?
Malayalam,Tamil and English.
From the beginning, all three?
All three, yes. We had a primary school round the corner of our house but then I could never go and sit there. I had some trouble or the other. In fact I went to school only after I was 10 or 11 and went straight into what was called in those days I think the Fourth Standard or something. Those days the school system had, I think, six standards and four forms, so made 10. And finally you took the matriculation examination.

By the time I was 6, my father had retired and we moved to where my eldest brother was. And my eldest brother was about 30 years older than me. So I was the eighth child and he was the first son naturally. And he had got into the educational service of French India at that time, which is how we went to Mahé. Mahé was a very small town, in fact in those days Mahé town itself, I don’t know, it should be the same now. But one square mile of area, it had some areas but not quite adjoining a little further away, which was about 6 square miles. But Mahé itself, the town itself is a very small place. And in those days there weren’t too many people, but it was a great centre for the political underground of British India and it was also a centre for smuggling. Because it was a free port and they generally traded in silks, silver and liquor. So they used to get what they call Fiji silk, like almost a sari length thing, for almost a rupee or two. And while in British India they used to cost a lot, so they used to smuggle a lot of them in. Similarly silver and then foreign liquor. And in that 1 square mile of area, if I remember right, there were about 30 to 40 liquor shops. So people used to come from British India to drink and go back because it was cheaper there. And that small place had... they started sort of an English school. That’s how my brother came there, to teach. He was what they called the first assistant, the next to the headmaster. Then there were other schools. There was a convent and there was a French school that took you up to what they call brevet, that is I think the primary certificate. And there was also another small school that sort of would train people that is I think there were a large number of Moslems there. So they used to sort of make some special arrangements for them, this is as I remember. But it’s a sort of a comic town: it has a police force. Most of the police didn’t know what to do, there was no traffic to be regulated. And it had a municipality and it had a hospital to which very few people went because they were sure that if they get treated, especially in the surgery ward, they would all die of tetanus. So they never... in fact I remember at one time my brother had a problem, a fistula. And he was operated at home by two doctors without anaesthesia. Just because he didn’t want to go to the hospital and then come back dead.

By that time in British India the school system was changing into what they call secondary school certificate, SSLC what they call. While here the earlier system of the matriculation was still current. And it was after 10 years of study. And they probably found that many of the people have to find employment outside this small town. So they had to be qualified in degrees that will entitle them to such employment. That’s how the whole thing started. But then it’s true, those people who studied in this school, they wanted to continue their studies let’s say in Paris, it used to be free. I mean they will sort of support the whole thing and then there were quite a few people who did go to Paris for study and some of them have also made a mark on the field of literature. But then it didn’t happen in my case anyway. So after I, we moved to Mahé then I should have been at that time about 10 years old, a little probably earlier. Then when I was 10, I joined this school in what they called the First Standard. In those days that was possible, nowadays it is not. And all my background was what I had learnt through tutors at home. But then since my brother was the kind of the coordinator of the library and things of that kind, so there were lots of books in the house. So I knew a lot of things more than the students of that level could know, so it was easy for me to get through. And then the next I think 6 years I went through in this school. And this school was small, it had only about I think 125 students or something of that kind. But then it had a good reputation because in the matriculation examination, at least in the 2 years previous to my graduation all the people were toppers in that matric. The difference between the SSLC and the matriculation examination in those days was the matriculation examination followed the old British system of essay type questions: you wrote essays. While in the SSLC, they were trying to make it simpler, small questions, small answers, this kind of thing. So at that time we did fairly well.

It was a small town so many people used to come and go. And then there were small sort of pockets of radical thought or discussion going on. It is no more there but at that time it was there. Because then people who thought about uprising went to Pondicherry or came to Mahé. Mahé was on this side, Pondicherry on the other. And there were little clubs and some of the early Marxist leaders of Kerala used to pass through Mahé. So even as a small boy in this school I used to go attend these things and all. And started with some amount of sort of initiation into Marxist thinking at that time. That was before I sort of came into the final year of this school. But then sometime in the final year of this school then I became more actively associated with another organisation, which was influenced by Gandhian thought. And there was because by that time, by the 1930s, Gandhi was already trying to have a sort of a social programme. What he called a 13-point programme or something of that kind. And there was little units called Charkha clubs in the various villages where you could sit with people and probably learn to spin and talk issues with them and things like that. I got involved in one of them at that time. And I used to go and attend some of the political meetings there. In one or two cases I also got caught by the police and sort of a sideline, because of my brother’s sort of influence, no harm was done, I didn’t land in jail at that time.

I was sent to study in Mangalore, it is in Karnataka. In a Jesuit College that is called St Aloysius College. It is a very nice college, very well situated. It’s one of the old colleges and they had a church that had a mural.  Anyway through these years, when I was studying at home or studying at the college, I had got some amount of interest in drawing and making things, and things of that kind. It was easy to do at that time. And at the time we were in Mahé, we were in the beginning not staying in French Mahé but in the land opposite. There was a temple very close and it had some what I still think some fabulous wood sculptures, painted sculptures. And then of course they had some other things happening there.
Can I ask, wood sculptures of the 19th century or earlier?
I can’t tell, it could be 19th century or even earlier.
Can you say a little more about that?
Because these wood sculptures are seen in many temples in the area and of course only recently have they been published now. But then this particular temple had, it was what they call a Bhagawati temple, means a temple of the mother goddess. And so there is the mother goddess is generally only a sort of piece of stone with two eyes encrusted on it. And people used to come and worship there but at the entrance and on the sides, it was a temple built like the other Kerala temples. Now they have dismantled it and it’s not the same as I saw it because when I saw it about 2 years ago. But then these sculptures are still there. They have been covered up by some brass work but luckily they haven’t dismantled it; they are still there. And there were two guardian sculptures near the shrine, they are still there exactly as they were. And there were friezes at the entrance that are also there. In those days I didn’t know even what art was, I was just there, but then I was terribly impressed by them and then it was always at the back of my mind. Another thing that I was impressed with was the Kathakali theatre. We used to have Kathakali and Theyyam and these things there in the compound. The drama and the spectacle [inaudible] but at that time, well I used to do these things on the wall. I was noticed that I had some talent in that direction.

When I went to this school in Mahé then we had a youth club in the library in [unclear]. So when I was in the sort of Fourth or Fifth Form, at the time we were not yet taken to final exam. I used to be a frequent visitor to that library. And that is where I discovered the art of the rest of the world. Because it was financed by the French government and they sent in various kinds of magazines there, which are art reproductions. And for that time, in a sort of small place, it was not easy to come across this. I particularly remember a kind of a polyglot magazine called L’Illustration, which had a sort of an art section every time. And then it was there that I found that there are all kinds of art. There were reproductions of African art, Japanese prints and things of that kind. At the same time, this reading room subscribed to certain of the magazines that were quite influential at the time. Like the Modern Review from Calcutta. And through that I came to know a little about the world scene, because it used to always have reviews of the cultural happenings all over. And also the political sort of atmosphere in both Europe and India. And Ramananda Chatterjee took part there, I was one of those people who tried to inform people about what it is to be a nation and things like that. And then a big part of their exposure was of what Rabindranath did and his institution. In fact, I came to know about Nandalal Bose through little drawings that used to be here. Well at that time, too, I didn’t have any notion that I’ll at one time sort of end up there.  After I finished what they called the intermediate examination at the end of the year, I sort of applied for higher studies, an honours degree and ended up in the Presidency College, Madras.

You got an honours degree if you studied for 3 years straight away for 3 years. And then if you got an honours degree and waited a year and paid some money, you could get an MA degree at the end. It was the old system. Well, I started all right but I had all the time, at that it was the time of the nation was brewing for the Quit India movement. Then, when I was in the second year, the Quit India movement started.
Could you just say what you were reading, what subject you were studying?
Economics, yes. In fact I wanted to do literature really but then somehow everyone thought that I should do economics, literature you can always do, this sort of thing. So I used to do a lot of reading here, but then here it was economics. But somehow my mind didn’t really settle down into the economic studies of that time. There again, economic study in those days meant the study of the market forces, I mean, not anything else. In fact I remember in the first year when I was asked to do a special seminar project, I had written an essay saying that what should get distressed, the market forces or men, kind of a thing. Anyway the whole question is at the time when there was so much of a difference in economic status of various people, the question of leaving ourselves adrift on market forces doesn’t make much sense. Anyway, all the same, I was supposed to be good in my studies there.
Had you already read quite a lot of Gandhi literature?
Yes, I had.
So wouldn’t that make it difficult for you to read economics?
I know, that is true. In fact there was, I remember his name is... Somebody had written about the economics of Gandhian thought at that time, which I don’t remember exactly his name, he’s a sort of Westerner. And I remember having found his book at that time. And in any case, so after when the Quit India movement started, then I was one of the leaders of the strike at the college. So, well, we I think struck work and then the college closed for quite a while, about 2 weeks at least to start with. Then later things cooled back then people went back to studies; I also went back. Then we were having various other group meetings and things of that kind. And through the next months we had kind of loose contact with other colleges and things like that. And I used to at that time stay in private digs because, well, the hostel dues were too high for my brother to pay. So... and later moved into stay in a mosque in fact. At the time before the time we picketed the Madras Secretariat and got arrested, I was staying in a mosque. And my things were all lying there in the mosque. And that made quite a bit of a change.

Some of my drawings were taken by a young friend of mine to the principal of the Madras Art School. And Devi Prasad, Roy Choudhury and there was a KCS Paniker who was his young assistant. Both of them thought that they were promising, and Devi Prasad was an impulsive man. Almost within 2 days of that he sent a note with a special peon, in those days they had a sort of hand delivery coming. So I was sitting in the Presidency College in one of the classrooms. In those days the classes were very small and then the Presidency College the way of the MA was also very liberal. You could any time walk out of the class and it was a sort of thing nobody would have done anything. And then I think you had only about 12 to 13 lectures a week. Most of the other time you were in the library or doing...  And then my professor said maybe you have a summons from the government that was this man. So then I went down, then it was nothing like summons, it was just a letter but with a stamp of the principal of the Art School. Well, he was being the first Indian principal of that Art School he had a kind of a status, which was different from the others. So he said and it read more or less like this: come and meet me immediately. You seem to have missed your profession, you are in the wrong place. So here if you come, well, we’ll give you all kinds of freedom to start a new career. So I went to meet him after a while, I think 2 or 3 days. He was very nice in fact he had a sort of a reputation of being a very quixotic man, he might treat you well, he might treat you badly. And but then he was terribly nice, he was very affectionate and said the thing this is what I want. We want you to come over. Really speaking at that time probably Devi Prasad  wanted to attract all kinds of people from everywhere. In fact, if I remember, Paritosh Sen also studied in the Madras Art School. And there were people from Gujarat also who went to the Madras Art School and studied. All on invitation. So I went, he was an interesting man, and if you thought in terms of the stories that you had heard about him he didn’t look that at all. Because he was supposed to be a great eater, and he was a great drinker I have heard. That I could imagine because on his, the glass that should hold water on his table, he had Scotch. He used to sip Scotch most of the time. And he was apparently a very good wrestler and a flute player and all kinds of things. I had heard about that. Anyway then I said, ‘Look, I mean this is where I am so I can’t just make the decision now. But it’s very nice of you to have thought of that and maybe it will change my perspectives’.

My father came when he heard that I was getting into trouble with the police, to persuade me not to get into trouble. But my father was old, permissive kind of person, so he came, he said, ‘I’m coming here to Madras after a very long time’. So I took him round Madras, and showed all the sort of sights of that time. Then after a day or two, he said, ‘Now I should go back home’. And he didn’t tell me why he had come. Only when I put him on the train and the train started moving, he said, ‘Look here, I forgot to tell you what I had to tell you. Don’t get into trouble with the police’. It was very touching, but anyway I got into trouble soon after. And that’s how I landed up in prison. Of course really speaking that group of people we were very much exercised that Quit India movement was not sort of a catching scheme. It was losing steam, you see, I mean, it was not there. So we wanted to do something spectacular so that is why we went sort of, went and picketed the Secretariat, batch by batch. And included more or less the top students of the Madras at that time in the different colleges. Some came from the Tamberam Christian College, some came from the Presidency College and some from the Patchhayappa’s College, and all that kind. So it was a kind of group that had not known individually each other but had welded very well when they landed in prison. Some of us were sentenced to 6 months [inaudible] and some others to 3. But then we were all sent to a prison far away; we were in the Madras Penitentiary for the initial 3 days I think. Then we were sent to a place near Bellari, there was a place called Alipuram, it was a camp jail. At one time, those constructions were Hyber Ali’s stables, he used to keep horses there. And the British government had taken it and made it into a camp jail. And it had to make it into camp jail during what is called the Moplah Rebellion. Moplah Rebellion is a kind of an uprising in Kerala where the downtrodden Moplah riots. They rose against the upper castes. And they ran amok, they not only raided their houses, did all kinds of cruel things too, then raped the women, and skinned men, and I mean they did a lot of things. But then the whole question is they were downtrodden and kept in sheer subjection for a long time. In fact I’ve heard that one group even raided our house at one time, but then somehow my mother saved everything. Because my father was very well thought of among the people who came to raid... So those Moplah Rebellion people were all put in goods wagons and sent there to this Allipuram jail. And then it became camp jail. So when we were arrested we were sent to that jail. So we stayed in groups, so within the same of area you could meet each other. But from one hall to another hall it was not permitted to go in there. And we were all what they call simple imprisonment prisoners. We didn’t have to do any hard labour. In fact many people did not want to make us do hard labour because they thought that we’ll probably interfere with their normal labour. So anyway it was good, I mean, it was like all these young people were enthusiastic. But then there were also other people who had, I mean, we were really all out of the colleges with a kind of idealism in our minds. There were also other people who had thought in terms of having a political career. And there were some people who were senior, I mean, who were quite refined and things. So it was sort of a mixed section of people.

By the time I got out of prison, I had seen two sides of the whole area and many of the people I reacted with of my own age group. We thought in terms of ideas of transforming the world, just like that. Then there were some of the people who came from various parts of the country who knew how to take advantage of the situation and who, when they got into. I mean we used to have certain groups doing cooking, serving ourselves, things of that kind. I see that even in prison there are people who try to exploit the situation for their own benefit. And there were some people whom I still remember, who are very refined and educated, and one of them really was called Gopal Reddy. Gopal Reddy was some kind, I mean, in Andhra Pradesh, he was a leader of Congress. Then later he came when the Congress government took over, he became the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh and later ended up, at one time, as the Governor of Bengal. Now Gopal Reddy had studied at Santiniketan. So I knew more about Santiniketan through him. And then he used to have a sort of a small group within the area where he taught Tagore songs, especially the group songs to people. Now when I got out of prison so I was in two minds: one whether I would go into the sort of political scene and be a kind of an activist. And or should I continue my studies. But continuing my studies was not possible because I was the only person there who came from a government college, the Presidency College. So I was thrown out for 3 years. So within 3 years no institution could [inaudible] while the other didn’t have that. In fact some of my friends who came out at that time later continued their studies and came to hold fairly high positions. One of them became the Chief Secretary of the Madras State, another is still alive, he retired as the Additional Secretary of Kerala State. And there was someone who entered the medical services, he’s still there, retired somewhere, he’s a Muslim. Like that they did, but in my case it was a different thing. First of all, even if I wanted I couldn’t go to Devi Prasad’s school because it was a government college. The other thing is that by that time I didn’t want to go there. I wanted to go to a place where I’ll have a sort of freedom. The amount I had known about Santiniketan was very heartening.  So but then I couldn’t tell this to my brother. My brother is not the first brother I talked about who studied in Mahé. It’s the next one, he was a police officer. And he guessed that would be a kind of a thing I’d enjoy doing. So he wrote to Nandalal Bose directly without even telling me. So I suddenly get a telegram from there in I think February 1944 saying come over. He hadn’t seen any work of mine, he hadn’t seen anything. Probably he should have written something that persuaded him to take this decision. So that’s how I went to Santiniketan.

At that time, of course 1944 means there were a lot of military movements going on in India at that time, the trains were very crowded. And I was travelling not for the first time. And I got into the crowded train somehow and was sitting on my bedding I think more or less all the way through. Then from Madras when we came to the Cuttack Station, that is in Orissa at that time. A number of policemen came into the area and then they spotted me out and said that I want to check your baggage. Then they checked my baggage and found nothing incriminating so they said sorry and went away. That of course changed the atmosphere of the air. Suddenly all the people round they thought, they should give me a seat to sit. And then keep me in comfort, and there were a number of even military men who were asking me why did they do this and all. And finally when I got to Calcutta they almost took charge of me and put me on the right train to Santiniketan. Well, the background is this: because at that time in 1944, the Midnapur District in Bengal had declared itself independent. And there were a lot of underground workers going to Midnapur District sort of to talk to the villagers and say [inaudible]. So they thought that I was also one of the persons going to Midnapur that side, and that’s why probably they did that. And really speaking one of my old jail mates had gone to Midnapur, he later ended up as a minister in the government. And he was also a confirmed Gandhian later, and he has written on Gandhian thought. I don’t know whether he is still alive or not.

When I went to Santiniketan I was very happy. Partly because I had found out during the time in prison that I was - probably did not have the kind of talents that will sort of keep me or the kind of energy to keep me a political activist. But at the same time, I was terribly impressed by the kind of a cultural generation programme of Rabindranath and the people of the area. So I thought that that was the right place. And then at that time Santiniketan lived up to my expectations. That’s how the whole thing started and when I first went there, luckily, or luckily for me, most of the teachers and students of Kala Bhavan, most of them had gone to I think had probably gone to Bombay with a Tagore play. So the only people there at that time in Santiniketan were Nandalal Bose, Benode Bihari Mukherjee and Ramkinkar Baij. So when I, the first few days I was in their hands really. So I can to know them more intimately than I would have if the whole group was there. And Nandalal, any new entrant he wanted them to paint and show him the work and then he would discuss it, which he did. And he thought I was doing something that was worth noticing and he even took it round to Benode Bihari and Raminkar and showed them. I don’t even remember what kind of trash I showed him. Well at that time, it did put up my spirits. Later, of course, Nandalal was more stringent and then we didn’t always get along together. But then he was very nice; I mean in spite of all the - because Nandalal was a sort of a, he was a sort of a person who had a kind of a conflict with himself. On one hand, he wanted sort of fresh mind to come, this sort of a thing. And the kind of education that you get in the universities is not the kind of thing that leaves your mind fresh. You are already predisposed to a certain way of thinking. So he suspected people who had a background of education. But then on the other hand he was very liberal, I mean he was always nice. So even in those days when he didn’t think I was going according to the sort of laid out sort of a programme, he was terribly nice to me. Almost parental in his solicitude, very nice. I still remember that. And then I later also I found out whatever you might say, he had laid the foundations of a different kind of art educational system at Santiniketan. And which is, I think, if anybody followed it, it is as liberal as anything anywhere in the world.

You’re 20 and you’ve arrived at Santiniketan. At the age of 20 I wondered whether there was any contact between your Gandhism and the ethos of Santiniketan?
When I went there, I had come from the background I mean in my background there was some kind of an effect of Gandhi’s ideas to me. But I cannot say I was an out and out Gandhian kind of a thing. Similarly in Santiniketan, Tagore himself did not want to get people around him embroiled in the various movements that Gandhi had started. It could be partly of his different kind of outlook or things or it might be also tactical, because he was running an institution which should not be thought of in terms of a subversive institution, that kind of a thing. But in any case, it is true, that during the Quit India movement, when some people wanted to sort of take part in it, he allowed them to forego their registration and then go and then he took them back. So in fact Sankho Chaudhuri was a student of that kind. He was studying at that time in the college, so he went and took part. So like that and amongst his followers Nandalal was one person who was terribly influenced sort of by Gandhian ideals in his own special way. So really there wasn’t that kind of a thing. And the other thing is that if you’re thinking in terms of, let’s say, living in Gandhian simplicity, in the ashram of that kind, well it was there already. The only thing that wasn’t there to the extent that Gandhi wanted was self-help. Gandhi wanted that you should wash your bathrooms yourself, you should wash your clothes yourself, you should do everything yourself and not leave it to others, or another class of people. He had made that very clear when he visited Santiniketan when he moved to India. In the first 2 or 3 days itself he had made it clear that this is what I think is the right thing to do. And they did under pressure from him for a while. After that now, that date is observed even in Santiniketan today, called the Gandhi Puja. So it is ritually they do it at that time, the kitchen is run by people, and the food is cooked by the ordinary people. But then there wasn’t that kind of a conflict at all. And many of the other things were - the only thing is Gandhi was in certain kind of a insistence on celibacy and things of that kind, brahmacharya and all. I think people like us didn’t take it so seriously, I mean, I thought it was not quite a sensible thing to talk about in a generalised sense. If somebody wants to be celibate he is welcome to do so, but otherwise not. And then, so really there was not that kind of a conflict at all. And then later when it came to be the relationship with Gandhi and Tagore, if you only go by the written word or the printed word. Of course there were lots of controversies: Gandhi said one thing and Tagore said another. And there were sort of areas of divergence. But then they respected each other as if they complemented each other. And in fact when Rabindranath was thinking that he wouldn’t last long, that was in 1940, which was Gandhi’s last visit when Rabindranath was alive in Santiniketan. He is supposed to have sort of been very - and he talked to him I have something to tell you. But he didn’t tell him till the last moment. And when Gandhi was supposed to be leaving, then it seems he gave into his hands a kind of a written note. In it he was saying, ‘I don’t think I’ll be there for a long time. And this institution is like a boat that carries the best treasures of my experience, so safeguard it’. And Gandhi read it only after he got into the train, this sort of thing. So he wrote back saying that I’ll try my best. So he trusted Gandhi, I mean, he thought that Gandhi in spite of all, is probably the only person who can safeguard his sort of a heritage.

Gandhi selected Nandalal as more or less the only artist that he could trust. So if you are thinking in terms of, thinking about Gandhi for instance. Gandhi, if you’re thinking in terms of Gandhi’s sort of relationship with art, there’s only one or two instances where he has spoken out on art. It was I think sometime when he was on a fast in [unclear], a young man called G Ramachandran who was studying at that time in Santiniketan and who later become a sort of confirmed Gandhian. He was studying in Santiniketan and he went through the good offices of CF Andrews to go and meet him and interview him on his views on art. That is the longest there is of statement by Gandhi on art. And that statement itself, I mean, he talks about Gandhi’s sort of morals and all, and you can see Gandhi holds on to certain principles. He says moral is very necessary, he talks about Oscar Wilde, while he was not moral enough, this kind of a thing. Now they go round and round like that, I mean, Gandhi apparently was held on to certain notions that were current at that time. That this is what art is, this is what art is not. But then when after that, when you think, he I mean is his, sort of Gandhi’s life story, when he went to the round table conference and was returning. Apparently he wanted an audience with the Pope, but the Pope refused. But then he sort of was in Rome so he went to the Vatican and spent about 2 or 3 hours in the Vatican art collection. Then apparently the press hounded him saying that we have heard that you have no interest in art but you spent so much time here. Then he’s supposed to have said that it is not that I don’t have but I do not have time for art. And then here whatever I have seen, there are certain things I’m terribly impressed with. But I can’t comment on them unless I spend instead of 3 hours, 3 months here. So I wouldn’t say anything about that, and especially refers to I don’t know which one it is, sort of a painting of a crucifixion, which he was very impressed with. Then he said really it is not that I have no interest in art. In fact, if through sheer force of circumstances I didn’t become a political activist I would probably have liked to be a musician. That is what he told the people at that time. But when he came, when in the beginning till he was a political activist, and he used to be always very close to the way, I mean take interest in how the Congress ideology and things like that. After a while he withdrew from it, he resigned from the Congress. And at that time suddenly he was a sort of a, like a sort of a senior statesman controlling what was happening in the Congress, but then he was out of it. But then he took one major step: he tried to instil into the Congress session a cultural input. In fact, from I think it started sometime probably in [unclear] or somewhere in 1934 or so, I don’t exactly remember the date now. He said that at one time when Ramachandran was questioning him, he said how can a man have any idea, a sort of a thought about art, when a place like Orissa and Kalahandi, people are dying out of hunger. I mean they’re all like skeletons there. I cannot think about it. Similarly, when he was going to, I think, Karnataka in those days, to receive the donation of 500 rupees, he was going all the way. Somebody asked him would you go and visit the Belur temples. Then he is supposed to have said, ‘Ah, they should be sort of things that are worth visiting but then when do I have the time? I cannot have the time for it’. But this same Gandhi later he organises in I think 19... in Lucknow, he sort of asks people to organise a whole vista of art and craft practice in India. And there he sort of himself goes and opens it and then talks about it. And he found Nandalal, he commissioned Nandalal to do that. So it was an art exhibition that had a whole array of traditional art. Then the living tradition, the arts of here, and then it covered the whole from Kashmir to here, all the kinds of crafts. And I have read somewhere that Nandalal also had decided it will have a long mural by Jamini Roy which I haven’t been able to locate. But it is there in writing somewhere that he had done. Now during that Gandhi comes and says it is true, I said that the starving millions are there and that is my priority. But then you come and see what beautiful things that in spite of their situation that they’re able to produce. Now this continues after that. And then after that thing he catches on Nandalal and says that I’m going to have a village congress session in Faizpur. And in Faizpur, I want it to be a villagers’ congress and I want you to organise the whole thing.

So Nandalal says, ‘Look, I have no experience in these matters - I’m, just a painter’. So then it seems he sort of writes to him a sort of a small note saying, ‘You see, I do not want a trained violinist, I want a fiddler’. So Nandalal says it sounded so pressing, so he went there, he sat with people and to a certain extent what they did in the Faizpur Congress with just local materials, straw and bamboo and matting and things of that kind, became more or less a sort of a brand idea for all subsequent public designers in India. I mean even when Dashrath Patel did something for the Paris Festival of India, it was more or less based on that old idea. But anyway he did that, but there is no record of that. There is no photographic record of that. And after that, because Gandhi then said, ‘I will take you from sort of place to place and show you what Nandalal has done’. And Nandalal, who was till then known only within the four corners of Bengal, became a national figure. And in fact, Nandalal was extremely, I think being a shy man, extremely embarrassed about such notice. There is a story which I suppose is not apocryphal, because at that time Nandalal’s work group had a very handsome young sort of Punjabi, young man, in the group who had gone to help. I came to know him later in the day when I was becoming a professional here in Delhi. His name was Jaipal Mehta. So he was there in that group. And it seems people used, after hearing Gandhi’s voice, all the visitors to the Congress used to come to see who is this Nandalal, we want to see. So Nandalal, it seems, asked Jaipal, he said, ‘You do me a service. You lie on this cot here, this sort of a thing, and do me this service’. So whenever people used to come and look for Nandalal, Nandalal used to quietly point out to them, ‘That is Nandalal’. So it seems people used to say, ‘Oh, he’s so good looking and his work is also so good’. Now the whole question is this may be just a story, but this is very typical of Nandalal. He always used to be sort of withdrawing. But this is the time when well Nandalal got more involved and when the next Congress came to be in Haripura in Gujarat he was again called. Then by that time Nandalal, I understand, had already heard that there was some grumbling that Gandhi was depending on a Bengali artist too much and there are artists elsewhere. So later I think Gandhi had [unclear] on to in a certain, he’s a sort of secretary, Mahadev Desai had also written about this question in the Bombay Chronicle, I have heard. I had seen that article somewhere but I haven’t been able to locate it. Well, they were trying to say no, everyone will have work but let Nandalal do something that he can do best. And that is how the about a hundred and odd Haripura posters came into being. And Nandalal at that time camped here and then sketched, and there are lots of sketches he has done of the rural life here. But what I am saying is there were differences, there were, and Nandalal had written a later article and he says that he had had a chance to sort of talk with Gandhi at that time. He had heard that probably some of the enthusiastic Gandhites, especially in the [unclear] public, they wanted all the Khajuraho sculptures, which they thought were sort of highly erotic and should be covered up. And also similarly in Konarak, so it seemed Gandhi was asked by Nandalal saying, ‘Is that true, and then will you allow it?’ He said, ‘No, it will never happen’. At the same time he got a little more enthusiastic and said, ‘Bapu’, he used to mention to him as Bapu, ‘haven’t we had enough of temples? Shouldn’t we sort of where people go in for hospitals and all this kind of thing?’ And Gandhi is supposed to have said, and Nandalal himself quotes that, ‘Well if people want to visualise the All Powerful Being and then worship Him, who can stop?’ So this kind of a thing is there. There is, and later when the ashramites of the Gandhian institutions wanted to have a cultural sort of a grounding, they went to Santiniketan. And when the Santiniketan people wanted to have an exposure to the realities of life, they went to Sevagram and this has been going on. In fact Sushila is one of them, my wife, because she was selected by, then Gandhi was still alive, when the Kasturba Memorial Trust came into being, and the first Chairman was Sucheta Kripalani who was very close to Gandhi at one time, that [unclear] and his wife. She had at one time taught Sushila in the College, history. And later she knew that Sushila had spent a year here in Santiniketan at the same time as Satyajit Ray [unclear] and these people. So...

It’s a sort of a special kind of relationship. It’s not that Nandalal believed in everything that he did, nor did we. Many of those people who admired Gandhi for various things he had done, and even if Tagore had different things to say about various issues, they respected each other and they thought they had their own kind of role in the region of India. So, and this has been kind of an influence in the way, in at least drawing up the, let us say, a kind of a blueprint for sort of the building of a new India kind of a thing. Whether that blueprint is being followed is not, it’s another matter, but it is true that their ideas, one side or the other. Now, to tell about Gandhi’s visit, I mean it will be an interesting thing because I saw Gandhi in 1945, or end ’44 or early ’45. He came from Noakhali and he had raised his CF Andrews Memorial Fund and he wanted that an institution in CF Andrews name should be started on one side sort of focussed on social medicine, that the villages around will get sort of proper exposure to medical facilities, and on the other, sort of have a library and a centre for inter-religious topics. He came and it was about how much, about 4 years after the death of Tagore. So in a sense, he was the mentor and the custodian of the Tagore legacy. So, he went around and visited every institution, they showed him around. He was very outspoken in whatever he said about it, what it was or what he thought it should be and things of that kind, and that there was also a fine get together of all the people who asked questions and he sort of answered those questions. So I remembered that year, and there were certain interesting things. He did want to put this cornerstone to ensure that the money will be used for this purpose, and he thought that after doing the ritual they will confirm to him. We were all around to see what Gandhi does and what Gandhi does not, so early in the morning when he was going to the ritual, he was up and about. He used to stay in that mud hut in the Tagore complex called Shyamali. Then he just walked out and was ready at 6 o'clock in the morning. Then he found that Tagore’s son, Rathindranath Tagore was not still there, then people said no, no, he is trying to bring the car for you. Then Gandhi is supposed to have said  that he will walk the whole distance because CF Andrews was somebody so dear to him. I don’t want to go in any sort of vehicle for that. So everyone had to walk with him. It’s not very far, hardly a kilometre, so they went there. Then he sort of did, went through the ceremony, and everything was arranged in a rather tasteful manner. That is when they put the cornerstone, they sort of put the cement and with a kind of mantra, they watered the whole thing. So, when he lifted the jug which was supposed to hold water, there was no water in the jug. So, he is supposed to have smiled and said, ‘No this,’ I was there so I have seen him say that,  so he said, ‘I hope the fate of this institution is not just like this’. And really speaking, the fate of the institution was. They had the cornerstone done. Till today there is no institution of that kind, except a small clinic, one room, and there is also nobody sort of sits regularly or does anything. So this is what happened at that time. Anyway, after that, when he went round the institution, of course he had not very much to say about Kala Bhavan, he was very happy, and his relation. But then at one time, and the last sitting, Nandalal is supposed to have questioned him about, because he says that well, I have done this with this institution, it has a sort of reputation, I have a... but then what will the future hold for me?  So he is supposed to have said more or less to mean this that you hold onto the present, the future will look after itself, so you do not have to worry about that this time. So, and similarly many people said about money, we don’t have money, how do we run the institution, and Gurudev is not there. He had said that if you hold onto Gurudev’s ideas, then the money will come by itself. But don’t try to sell yourself to other ideas for money. Then at the last moment, at that time there was one of those Tagore relatives called Indiradevi Chaudhurani who was Pramatha Chaudhry’s wife who used to be head of the music college. Then she said, ‘I have a question to ask. What do you think of our programme?’ He was in a hurry to catch the train, so he told her that well, I am in a hurry, but I will answer your question by letter. Then he apparently did that the next day, saying that I am impressed by what you do, but I suppose your horizons are not large enough. You seem to think all music starts and ends with Tagore’s music and that’s not quite true. There are all kinds of music in India, both South Indian and North Indian, karnatic music, and then I would think an institution which claims to be a world university, you should invest in music here.  It is written and that is here. So he was critical in a way. He had a kind of soft corner for the institution. He eventually tried to approach the government to take an interest in the institution. Only there, these people didn’t read them rightly, otherwise they could have had change naturally. This, I have been witness to that at that time.

When you arrived at Santiniketan, Tagore had already been several years dead.
No, not several years, 3 years.
Was there a… did you know about his painting?
I knew about his painting much earlier because really speaking, when I started taking an interest in painting, one of the things I was struck with was what they had published called Chitralippi. It was a sort of publication of Tagore’s. This is the only publication at that time which was published by Visva Bharati. This should be in the 19... early ’30s, and at the same time the first exhibition of Tagore’s works was done by Mukul Dey, I think somewhere in 1932 or so. So it was known. I mean, Tagore’s work was not celebrated by the critics, but then that, Tagore’s work was known, and because 1930 means he started doing this by 1926 or so, after his visit to Argentina and Victoria Ocampo, this sort of thing. He wrote his poem, a sort of group of poems called Purobi and did the illustrations and things of that kind.
Erasures.
Hmm, Erasures. So, it was known. I mean, the whole question was here, and then already even Nandalal had talked about this thing, and I still remember one of Nandalal’s lectures trying to explain Tagore’s paintings in his own way, and it was a lantern lecture in which he had selected various kinds of what you call rhythmic or image analogues of Tagore’s paintings. That is figures which are made like sort of sprouting seeds or showing that sprouting seed, and figures made up by sort of like a splintered glass, this sort of thing. So I remember, I mean people were trying to explain to them or to explain to each other what the special qualities of his work was. It was known, but then of course it didn’t come to the kind of prominence it came to later. Anyway, this was the background of the thing, and especially among the younger people like us, I mean it was only, not only the programme that was, but the freedom you had to choose whatever you wanted to, and also, the impressive Tagore’s literature, his thoughts and other things were there everywhere and in that atmosphere, I really enjoyed my time. It is true that Nandalal later didn’t like certain things I did. I didn’t attend certain classes, but he was quite happy that I was working throughout the night and things of that kind, so I didn’t go early in the morning to their prayers. But then the whole question, he never mentioned anything to me about this. On the other hand, I remember an incident which was quite, yes, I was terribly touched by it. I was in the hostel and I had probably been reading late into the night, in those days by lantern light, and sleeping straight into the morning. The sun was beating on my hair, then I found somebody sort of close the window and then walk away. I said who is this person who has closed the window, and I looked and I found it was Nandalal who had sort of, he was getting me up from bed. He rather thought that I needed that kind of comfort. That thing he had, and he was always very nice, but then it is true, he was not very happy when I asked him that I want to stay one year more, because I spent much less time in Kala Bhavan than the others did because I came late and I stayed about 3 and-a-half years, then I had my sort of degree, then the certificate. I said I wouldn’t mind if you sort of allow me to. He said no, you have got everything you need and the world is your school, and I am happy he sent me away because I would have wasted one more year there instead of going out. But then I am very, very grateful to him, whatever sort of thought openings came through my contact with him and his close associates.

Hindus are born into Hindu households, but as far as I am concerned, I am not that staunchly religious at all, though we came from a family where most of the normal Hindu rituals were observed. So I have heard Sanskrit mantras being recited, and things of that kind. I even like the smell of sort of home, I do, but then from the beginning, I was a little put out by the state of the temples and all wherever I went at that time, except the temple we lived close to when I was very young. Later in the time, I became almost irreligious, because wherever you went and people used to say that this is the temple with the sacred family, and when you go there you find a whole line of beggars and lepers sitting there and it used to put me off very much. So really, I never went to temples thereafter. Then later I came to realise that I can probably live without all these rituals. Temples did impress me by their carvings and their sort of physical presence, but the temple as a place of worship didn’t interest me, and later as time went on I found that worshipping, if at all you worship anything or think about anything, it should be in the seclusion of your own mind rather than elsewhere. But I like going to temples and watching the general atmosphere, but I am not religious at all. As I grew up, I did not believe in most of the rituals. I was also given a sacred thread at the right time, but then I took it off almost 2 weeks after the thing was over, and I have never worn it since. I don’t observe any of those old things like after death the anniversary, the anniversary celebration. That’s why when Sushila passed, we didn’t have any religious observance except the one at home, and every year we observe it on the 28th February with a musical performance. Well, otherwise then I am not worried about whether there is a God or not, but I can see that the creation is a wonderful thing, and in fact, even a little insect, if you watch, you can see what all goes on inside, and you can see a scheme, even if it has come arbitrarily from somewhere, it is sort of a very complicated scheme. So, this sense of wonder I do live with, but then I do not attribute it to some person, place or the whole thing. There is no grand architect anywhere, in my mind. The other thing is that many of those things which had a kind of relevance at a certain time in a certain society really don’t mean anything, though some of the verses sung in these things are very wonderful. In fact, when my mother died I had gone to the ceremony. At the end of all the sort of ceremonies there are certain things sung in Sanskrit, the meaning of which ah, the dead die but the life has to go on and there is something in life that you have to live for, that kind of thing. So, there are good and bad points, but I think they are totally relevant in our kind of life.
But artistically is this a liberation or is it an impoverishment?
Well, as far as the playing around mythology if we can do it without reference to a god or a godhead, that you can always do and I have always done that. Only that mythology might have meant various things to me, sort of a thing, which I do. In fact, certain things have sort of stayed with me throughout my life work like probably the bullfight stayed with Picasso. Similarly the kind of fight between God and the buffalo demon, that I sort of re-edited, re-presented this sort of thing in various ways and play around with it, but it means to me something else. It is something like there is an angel and a beast within you, and then the fight goes on and some, that unless the fight goes on, you cannot take charge of yourself, this sort of thing. I don't even say it is a fight of good and evil because I suppose as human beings evil has to be there and the good has to come out of the fight, if at all, this kind of a thing. But well, many may not agree with it, but that’s my personal opinion. So, mythology as such doesn’t need a godhead, and many cases, if you are thinking in terms of the godheads made, I mean there are so many umpteen godheads all over the country, they have their own little mythology which are based on certain observances of even low down life. Most of the Devi figures in India are in Gujarat, Saurashtra. There are probably many versions of Devi figures. There are differences, what kind of animal do they ride on? The story finally is that on the basis of the Devi or powers, the male hero, it is almost like a female spider eats the male spider after mating with it, this sort of a thing. There is some kind of mysterious reinterpretation of that observance into a myth. Later, of course, people sort of worshipped that goddess, powerful goddess. After all, somebody who can eat up a helmet should be powerful indeed.

Is this a good moment to ask about Benode Behari’s Life of the Hindi Saints?
Huh?
The Life of the Hindi Saints? It is a sort of religious picture.
In fact, since I worked with him, I have some kind of an idea of what he... his idea of religion was very much affected by the idea of Brahma religion because the whole question, they thought in terms of its human centre.
Will you explain Brahmo please?
The Brahmo religion really, or of course they say there is only one God, they don’t encourage idol worship. In the beginning, the Brahmo religion came very close to Unitarian Christianity. Then later, of course, it took on various openness and kind of creatures. So it is a kind of a liberal religion which lays off the various distortions that have come into Hindu thought, and in normal orthodox Hindu thought. Otherwise, the late Brahmo religion with the Tagore family, it was like that. I mean they did believe in a god, but as far as we know Benode Behari was concerned, he was more nearer to what the Brahmo religion, a little tempered by the folk religion of Bengal, auls and bauls and all, where they say they can think of God as a man who remains in the mind, moner manus they say. And each man, if he finds out that centre, he almost undergoes a kind of reincarnation of a kind, and his whole, he was, if it was... I do not know if it was originally conceived that way, but he did mark out various ways that the Indian public was trying to sort of search out for this kind of reality. So, he starts with the first focus on the religion of the hills where the rishis meditated, then discussed the various questions of right and wrong.
This is the mural itself?
Yes, the mural. Then it goes into the various teachers who became great pillars of various sects, then into the religion of the common man, the worker, the... and then some of them became great figures just by the simplicity of their vision. Then the literary Jains who had their kind of religion, then finally the militant religions of the Sikhs and the others, and the folk religion. I mean, that is the kind of period. Now I have read about it somewhere, but then it is that his idea of religion was, I mean, if you have to reconstruct what happened, you will have to see it in the life around. So when you think in terms of the various figures you are putting there, historical references only with one or two, maybe he got the phase of Ramananda from Vaishnava Ramayat, which they worshipped. All the other signs he had modelled on the basis of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa whom they saw in pictures or saw in person. Then, when it comes to the craftsmen saints, he sort of drew from the figures of craftsmen saints. In fact, there is no real portrait of Kabir, but a supporter there can always be, so he tried to do that.
And Tulsida? 
Ah ha, Tulsidas, in Tulsidas case, he has written it from a sort of Brahmin view, but then his guru, according to the legend, his guru was Hanuman, that is the monkey god, but he has not made him a sort of monkey god. He has not even given the guru any hair, but he thinks that he is a kind of person who probably had a name of Hanuman, but who is sort of a great thinker.

My relationship with Benode Bihari came in a peculiar way. After a few months in Kala Bhavan I did a few things that didn’t please Nandalal. Otherwise, in the beginning he was very pleased with what all I did. Then I did certain things a little out of the air. I mean, they did not conform to the normal image, and they showed some facets of works of other lands that I had seen. So he one day called me in and said, ‘You dress like an Indian but you think like a foreigner’. Then he suddenly felt that he said that a little too much, then he said, ‘No, no, really speaking, I'll send you to Benode, he will explain things to you’. That’s how it happened. So he more or less handed me over like an orphan to Benode Bihari. Then, Benode Bihari tried to explain to me, he said don’t  misunderstand Nandalal, he means well and these are the things that he probably wanted, and thereafter my relationship with him became thicker and thicker, and also with Ramkinkar. My relationship with Ramkinkar came in slightly another way. Ramkinkar was, came from a Bengali religious family, a family of barbers at one time, but he also worked with Kahendar, an idol maker, and he was very proficient, and then finally came to Kala Bhavan to study. He was already terribly accomplished, and in fact, Nandalal himself says that when he came, I felt that he had nothing else to learn, though Ramkinkar used to say I learnt a lot here. It was not the craft to do, but the whole atmosphere gave me a certain kind of a re-education of some kind. Now, I came to know Ramkinkar in this way. Ramkinkar was very inquisitive, and he was very inquisitive of knowing what the more educated and learned people sort of thought about literature, art, drama. He was especially interested in drama. So the first few friends I had there all used to go to Ramkinkar, and I used to go together with them. So, these two people I met in two different ways, but in those days they were also close friends. So I often met them on the veranda of Ramkinkar’s house taking tea, and I had the pleasure of taking tea with them, and that’s how the thing grew.

A few months after joining Kala Bhavan, one of my friends who had the enthusiasm to exhibit works of these people in UP in one of the exhibitions, thought that he should get them to agree to exhibit in Delhi. They hadn’t had an exhibit in Delhi. So he said that he, and he had an uncle almost his own sort of age, and he planned the whole thing and persuaded them that they would lend their works. Then he talked to me, since you can talk in English a little better than I, why don't you come with me? So I went with him to Delhi with his exhibition, and in planning the whole exhibition, getting together all the works, I came a little closer to them, and I saw their works much more than most other people saw. Of course our experience in Delhi was also very educative. In 1945 there wasn’t much of an art activity in Delhi. In Delhi at that time the Old Delhi and New Delhi, you have to reach by horse carts, tongas, this sort of thing, and it seemed quite far. And then the culture of New Delhi and Old Delhi were also different, very official, very... and then the main art exhibition in those days was the art exhibitions that the different societies had, which was mostly academic work. The other people who had Sudhir Khastagir at that time was Sharada Ukil, who had an Ukil School of Art, and Amrita Shergil. In fact, Amrita Shergil charmed Sarada Ukil’s brother, Baruda Ukil, to go along with her, and they used to have a few exhibitions together. So in her letters, she laughs at the kind of things he had to do to do that. Anyway, she was known and the other artist known at that time was a product of Kala Bhavan but who used to be in the Doon School as an art teacher. That is, Sudhir Khastgir. These are the people who were familiar at that time. So, when Benode Bihari and Ramkinar’s work went there, Benode Bihari had said that time you see, I don’t know many people anywhere but I know Nirad Chaudhuri, and you can go and meet him. So we went and met Nirad Chaudhuri. He was then the script writer in the All India Radio, especially news and other items and things of that kind. We went and met him, we said, ‘Look, we are going to have this exhibition, Benode Bihari apparently knows you, will you be helpful to us?’ He was very forthcoming. He said, ‘I will write a small note for your leaflet’. Then he even took us to dinner, to his house, in Kashmiri Gate, then showed us his library of art books and things of that kind. Well, he had not become the man he became later as a sort of all-knowing sort, but he was very nice.
Is that before he wrote The Autobiography of an Unknown Indian? 
That’s right, that’s much before, yeah. So then he said this kind of work, you can’t just show like that here. No exhibition sort of attracts people unless it is opened by somebody. So we were wondering who would do that. Then he himself suggested Zakir Hussain, who at that time was the vice chancellor of the Jamia Millia Islamia. He is sort of a man with a lot of knowledge about the world, and also interested in art, so why don’t you go and ask him? So we tried to contact Zakir Hussain, and Zakir Hussain said, ‘I ought to see the paintings, I will be very happy, I have heard about artists but I haven’t seen any of their work’. So we had to go in a tanga all the way, so many kilometres to his place to show him, and in the meanwhile, we had to find a place where to show them. The only two sort of not gallery spaces there were was one owned by the All India Fine Arts and Craft Society, and then there was a smaller placed called Freemasons Hall at that time. But in the All India Fine Arts and Craft Society, they didn’t approve of the work. They said that we can’t show that work. So we were quite...
So there was no Lalit Kala?
No, no Lalit Kala, nothing. This was in ’45. Lalit Kala came into being about 7 or 8 years later. So, while walking along, we saw the YMCA which had a big hall, and I went in and then it was the administrator of the whole thing was a man from Kerala. So I talked to him and said that this is the thing, is there any space where we can...? So he said we have a kind of hall, but nobody exhibits works here, but I can give you on a certain date, yes, you can fix the date, but then you cannot put any nails on the wall, and it had too many windows. So I said look, we will have to put some kind of batons and nails at the end and have jute canvas so that it looks like a proper exhibition. He agreed to that. So the dates were fixed. So we went and told Zakir Hussain can he come and open. He saw that paintings and he was quite favourably impressed and he said, ‘I would very much like to do it, but I am not there on that day, I am going to Germany’. So then I said, ‘If you are going away, does he have any suggestions of who?’ He said I don’t know who is interested in art these days and things of that kind, and especially if you can, then he suddenly said, ‘There is a person called, I think Edward Benthall, I think Edward Benthall’, who then was the member secretary of the Railway Board . He said, ‘He may not know anything about art, but he is a perfect gentleman, and he is well thought of by everyone in Delhi, so why don’t you call him’. So we went to Edward Benthall. He was very nice. He was a tall Englishman, very proper, and he said, ‘I will agree, I know nothing about art, but all the same, I am sure that when you have come all the way to show these works, these works should be of some importance’. Then there was the opening and because Edward Benthall opened them, well, a lot of people came to see it, and especially the people from the then Delhi Art School, which was not an art school at that time. It was a Delhi polytechnic where it had an art department. And then The Statesman sent its critic over, that was Charles Fabri was the critic, and it had a kind of a good reception. Now, this is how I came close to them, through these things. Of course those days, I mean we just made money we spent on it by selling two paintings each and that was bought of the art department of the yay [sic], otherwise, there was nothing else.
 The art department of the yay [sic]?
 Huh?
 The art department of the yay [sic], you said.
The art department of the Delhi Polytechnic. In fact, what is now called Delhi College of Art, was at that time the art department of Delhi Polytechnic.

Really we used to meet very often at the tea shop, Benode Bihari and I, and occasionally a friend or two. In fact, many of our interactions has been more in the tea shop than in the classroom, and that is the case with Ramkinkar too, and Ramkinkar I often visited in the evenings and sat with him, sometimes read with him and things of that kind. So I had that amount of good fortune, and then it is also true, they were, Nandalal was probably 40 years older than me at that time, or maybe even more, while the difference between me and them, these two teachers, was not that bad. I mean they were edging on 40 at that time. Anyway, it was a very useful experience because they were very serious artists and all the time thinking about what they have to do and any concepts that they have to sort of give form to, and they were very generous teachers. Through time, I suppose they clarified various things to me while working with them, not that I learnt anything so directly from them because I, during the first 3 years of my studies, I was dissatisfied with whatever I did. So I even didn’t keep anything aside, except a few things. But then I suddenly found that by the time I reached the final year and started working with Benode Bihari on the mural  that I had got some kind of a grasp of what to do, and then that’s how he sort of trusted me to do certain things.
So what did you do on the mural?
Well, the old question, the main thing I did, because I had seen the book that he has written, that only sort of prepared the surface for the mural. But then, when he wanted certain things to be done in a discretionary way, he later allowed me to do one or two figures. In fact, there are two horsemen just below his figure of the gesticulating Sikh guru, which is done entirely by me. In fact, I had to do it twice, because when I did it once, I thought it should look exact, so Benode looked at it and said, ‘Ah, you have done well, but that doesn’t go with the other paintings. It has too much meat in it’. So I had to scrap it all then redo it again with less meat. 
And that’s almost fresco, buono fresco?
Ah, I did fresco-buono, yes.

Did you share Benode Bihari's interest in this Italian painting at the time?
Well yes, I did. In fact, that interest in Italian painting was there even in Nandalal. Nandalal, in fact, when Nandalal was a student of the Calcutta Art School, he sort of talks about it in one of his later articles, that there was in the Calcutta school provision for learning all these things, that is mural processes, and even stained glass and things of that kind, which most of the art students did not take advantage of. And he was probably one of the few persons who went and worked there, and those days when they talk about it, on one side was the Jaipur method of arias fresco, and on the other side, they depend a lot on Cennino Cennini’s book on fresco painting, and most of the technical exercises they did were based on what that book sort of said. Along with that, they sort of tried to see what were the kind of works in Italy of that time, early or later. So they had also the interest, and then especially when they did visit, but then it was a time when Giotto was being discussed all over, and then they discovered all the other group painters, then the Sienese painters, then also Piero della Francesca. So that was part of the whole thing. In fact, Nandalal, when he started sort of making a sort of a disciplined drawing, he had sort of put two kinds of models in front of him, one was the sketch books of Leonardo, which had luckily Kala Bhavan had one of those very bulky books from that time, and the others were the engraving and paintings of Dürer. So many of the students were referred to these as sort of models to learn from, and then it turned out into the work of various others of that tradition, or you should say, if at all, the early renaissance tradition, or something earlier still. All that kind of exposure did help you to find out. I couldn’t do all the exercises that the other people did, but then I slowly tried to discover my own sort of interest in there, so I was more interested in the earlier painting, in the earlier sculptural thing, so down to gothic and Romanesque, and the Romanesque thing is what I tried to be most. That is why when I went to Europe, or through the little travel I did, I centred to find out what is where, sort of thing, related to Romanesque and Gothic.

Satyajit Ray was there at Santiniketan in 19... I think ’39, ’40 or ’40 about. My, I mean Sushila, studied almost in the same year as him, so she knew Satyajit Ray, but I didn’t. By the time I went to Santiniketan, Satyajit Ray already was a well established graphic designer and later he went, the organisation that employed him, sent him to London. Then his interest changed. But it is true that after I had been noted as an artist, Satyajit Ray was aware of what I was doing and he had talked to various people about it, and I knew what he was doing. Of course, all other people knew and that he had made a big impact on me, he had seen. And Satyajit Ray...
In the films?
Huh?
In film. 
In film, also in the graphic design scene. He was the first person in the graphic design scene then who had tried to implement various lessons he had learnt in Santiniketan, the brass drawing of a certain kind, the children’s book of a certain kind and all, which he found Nandalal had done what was called the Sahaj Path and done the illustrations for it.
Wasn’t he closer to Benode Bihari than Nandalal?
Yes, I know, he was, he was. He was closer to Benode Bihari and in a certain way closer to Ramkinkar too. That was, Ramkinkar was greatly interested in hearing Western music and he had recordings of that. So, in that sense he was, and on the other sense Benode Bihari’s reading of various things was much more, so he was very close to him. That’s right. But then Satyajit Ray I met only once in a sort of casual encounter on the station. We were introduced to each other, we said hello to each other, after that we haven’t met. So I had to say that when they asked me to do the Satyajit Ray memorial lecture in Calcutta. So that is, without being very close to each other, we knew what each other was doing, hmm.

Why did you leave Santiniketan?
I finished my studies, then I wanted to stay a year more, which I couldn’t do. Then in any case, I had to sort of make a living, so I came out of Santiniketan to Calcutta in the beginning. There was a friend of mine who had a jewellery concern which sold diamonds and jewellery, so he said, ‘Why don’t you come and stay with me and do something?’ I mean that was just a sort of excuse for saying that I didn’t feel that I was not sort of used when he was giving me hospitality in his house. So why don’t you do some designing for us? So I did that for a while, and later, when there was a friend of mine who got employment with what is called the, in one of the vocational training centres of the new ministry of rehabilitation, the country was divided and people from Pakistan had come out to India. So there were various kinds of institutions coming up, projects. So there was a sort of centre in Punjab there, so I went there, but then of course we were all living in tents, there was no infrastructure. I had a good time staying there and watching what other people do, but I couldn’t make too much of a contribution, except by way of learning what can be done.

Weren’t you working on the Benode Bihari mural just as partition was taking place?
Well, in 19... the partition, in 1947, yes, but then at that time we didn’t know what it was going to be. In fact, when I, even when - when Mahatma Gandhi was shot, I was in Santiniketan. But then the whole question is we didn’t know where it would end, this sort of thing, but then it finally came to be and these institutions came up in their sort of way. So that’s how I got to Delhi, and in Delhi I was with this agency in Delhi and Punjab for about, I think, nearly 2 years, and later drifted to other agencies. So I was a kind of freelance artist for a while, till finally I got a call from here.
From Baroda?
From Baroda, and that was largely because, I mean, I would not have known about it, except for the fact that my friend Sanko Chowdhury was here and he sort of sent me a cutting of the advertisement of here. And that's, although it took me by surprise because here was a faculty, in a traditional university trying to have kind of an interdisciplinary sort of... because at that time when they thought in terms of the faculty of fine arts, that included visual arts, music, all categories of performing arts, and architecture, which was something which at one time the people of Santiniketan were thinking of, that kind of an interrelated thing. So, I was enthusiastic to come here, and then I came for the interview and somehow got taken, yes.
And that was very early in Baroda’s history as a fine arts school?
You see, Baroda, there was a kind of small fine arts school with the college of technology. In those days, the fine arts used to go with the college of technology. But then it didn’t have much of a status. I mean, there weren’t too many people here. So when the Baroda University was founded, and that was in ’49, ’50, they utilised certain funds which the Maharajah, Sayaji Rao Maharajah, kept for certain kind of new areas of education. Part of it was earmarked for the areas if education which involved women. So, Baroda University was one university which seriously made different sort of colleges for social work and home science. Then with the same funds, they made this college of fine arts. So really speaking, college of fine arts, college of social work and college of human science, the Baroda University was a pioneer in giving them full status as sort of component of faculties, while in the other universities they had small sections of faculties, but they didn’t have. That’s how the whole thing... So I, it started in 1950 and I came here in 1951.

When I came here, I found that the situation was very congenial and you were together with a number of people who were very friendly who wanted to work together and then build up a faculty which had a sort of a personality of its own, and then where teaching would not interfere with your own work and then which gave you enough time to do that, and also where you could, from time to time, re-examine what you were doing. So it worked quite well. For the first... and then luckily for us at that time, the relationship between this faculty and the administrators was very congenial. They were very supportive, and they heard whatever you had, they tried to solve whatever problems came up. So the first 15 years the faculty was able to make a kind of impact on the national scene. That’s how it happened.
Was there a more developed critical dimension to Baroda from the beginning than in Santiniketan?
Well, really speaking, from Santiniketan to Baroda, on one side Baroda got various kind of, let’s say, attitudes and inputs from Santiniketan in the sense that there should be a certain amount of informality in teaching. It should not be too highly curriculum-based, and that it should be more related on the talent of each person. So the course or whatever, the programme, should be broad enough, and in the beginning we all tried to do away with tests. So it will be only, it is the first institution that said that the adjustment should be made on the basis of an exhibition and not... and we were all more sort of ambitious at one time thinking that we will keep a kind of day-to-day record of each one’s development and things of that kind. So we had a file on each student. We didn’t, and it continued for a long time of that sort of work, but they tried, we used the grading credit system that was then current in the American universities. So, on one hand, this faculty learnt a few things from Santiniketan and on the other, it learnt a few things from the American university programmes. So, together, in a kind of structured university like that of Baroda, I tried to fashion sort of an educational setup that will be kind to both student and teacher. I mean, that’s how the whole thing happened. So, we were able to make an impact at that time, and I should say, by working in that setup, I myself learnt a lot. In fact, I would not have thought in terms of thinking on certain lines if I had not worked with young people like that and tried to explain to myself the questions they asked, of this kind.

Had you begun to write already?
 
Really speaking, I wrote very little at that time. To a certain extent, whatever I wrote, there was somebody or the other asking me to publish. In the beginning, Sanko Chowdhury in later times, I think the first, the moving focus for instance, I had already written small things by that time, but the main initiative came from Sheikh. Sheikh said, ‘Why don’t we get it all together and publish it?’
That’s 1978?
Huh?
That’s not till 1978. That’s a lot later.
Hmm, later, otherwise these little things started sometime, I think I started writing sometime at the end of 1961 or so.
And by that time you had already been to the Slade. 
I was in the Slade in 1955.
What was that like?
Well, I was very happy to be in the Slade because well, I wanted to see around a lot, and in Slade you could just go in and go out very easily. I mean, it was not tight deeply enough. In fact, at the time, at that time I was in the Slade, I think Slade had probably on their register 300 students and probably 300 visiting teachers, except one or two of the Slade publicists were permanently there. So the general impression Slade gave me at that time, it was largely a drawing school, kind of a thing. I mean, they gave a lot of importance to a certain kind of drawing. So I used to go to the drawing studio early in the morning and do various kinds of things I did, and some of my tutors were quite happy with what I did. But later I thought that probably what I should do is to learn, do some print-making. So I used to spend part of the time in the print-making studio, and there I became fairly friendly with Anthony Gross and with Ceri Richards.
With Ceri Richards?
Ceri Richards, and they were very nice, and they were very open and they understood quite a bit about the... Those two people I enjoyed being with at that time.

Susheela came to Kala Bhavan for a special kind of training under Nandalal Bose. She was picked by her previous teacher, Sucheta Kripalani, who was then the president of the Kasturba Trust Committee. The Kasturba Trust wanted to work towards the betterment of women in remote villages. In fact, it was part of their condition that the villages where they were should be at least 20 miles away from the nearest town. Susheela was enlisted as one of the persons who will look after the cultural sort of education, and probably train them in a few crafts that may be useful to them, and generally sort of give them an idea of how to keep the surroundings, home and everything. So, Nandalal was one person who had given thought to all this in the beginning itself, so Gandhi should have thought at that stage he is the person under whom, that’s how she came here. Otherwise, she had been here when Satyajit was here, and she...
Sorry, she’d been here, Santiniketan, not Baroda?
Not Baroda. Then... this is... I am talking about Santiniketan. So she was in Santiniketan before, but then she left after a year because of certain personal circumstances. Then she came again for this. At that time I was a student there, that’s where we met. She knew Benode Bihari much earlier, because Benode Bihari had, after she studied here, Benode Bihari had once or twice gone to Banaras and stayed with them. So it is at Benode Bihari’s place that we came to know each other a little more closely. Then I found that we had many things in common, though our nature was not necessarily the same, but we had. Then she left to the Kasturba Trust and I came to Delhi, but we kept in touch, and after about 2 years away, so we decided we will get married. So, from ’48 to ’40, we got married in ’50. When I got married, I had thrown up all the jobs and I didn’t have any income. So she had this job and they used to earn a little, so we had kind of a beggar’s honeymoon in Rishikesh with the little money she had and some money I borrowed from friends. Well, it was great fun, except that it wasn’t fun for her because I went down with jaundice during that time. So, instead of enjoying our time, she spent time nursing me. Anyway, I got out of it, then when I came here of course she had given up the job and then come, though she had a great desire to do social work again. So there were Kasturba Trust centres in Gujarat too, and the chairman of those centres was big Sarabhai’s wife, Sarla Sarabhai. So she came to visit us and persuade her, but then she had a little problem here after she came, and that was related to breathing. So, I was not too anxious that she should go to the villages and fall ill there and within our scanty resources we couldn’t sort of afford it. So finally she had to sort of stop doing that. But then she had already done what she was supposed to do in the beginning, train some people, and later there was another reason why she disassociated from the aim because when the various governments in nationalist India had their own kind of budgeting, they started helping these institutions, and while they took help from the government, the government put various restrictions that it became very difficult for them to function according to the ideals that they wanted to. So Susheela thought that this is the time I should leave, otherwise I will be in constant conflict with the people who are providing the funds. So she still kept a kind of loose contact with the organisation. Her elder sister was already the administrator of a larger centre of the Kastoolwa Trust in Allahabad, and through her she used to be in contact with them. So I remember her going to one or two workshops and then spending some time with them. But as time went on, that contact became lesser and lesser.
Did she come with you to London?
No, she didn’t. At that time, that arrangement was not there. I was, I think one... our group that went to London on British Council’s scholarship was probably the second group. At that time, the scholarship didn’t allow anybody to be taken there and they didn’t pay for it, and then we couldn’t afford it either. So I had to go to London.
Was that hard for her?
It was hard for her because we later came to be that she was with child. She in the beginning sort of wrote to me that well, she will probably work somewhere, but then she found that this is the... but luckily her sister came forward and said you come and stay with us, I mean we will be very happy. So Uma was born in Allahabad in my absence.

Did your subject matter change when you were in London, when you were away from India?
Not considerably, but to some extent, I suppose. I don’t really -because after seeing all those mediaeval things and various kinds of artefacts in the museums, I got interested in certain things which I wanted to do. I didn’t immediately start doing them, but then yes, sort of thing. So the experience did make an impact, but all these things I had already been thinking about earlier.
Do you think you had already achieved something as an artist even at that time, or do you feel that most of it is after that?
Well, concept-wise yes, but I knew that at that time that there were various things I wanted to do that I had to still get prepared with, and I was not too sure which direction I had to go. So it took me some time. I had already started working with various materials at that time, but then not to the extent I did later. I had already noticed from the museums that each kind of art object had its own kind of accent or linguistic accent, and artists can use them to their benefit, if they understand what they had to be done, and that is what I have been doing since, this sort of thing.
I hinted earlier that your language, your early language experience could have some effect on that thinking.
That’s right, true. It is quite true, and then this question of the various dialects in a sort of a whole tradition was in my mind even before I decided to be an artist. In fact, I was interested in what was happening in Santiniketan, even when I was studying economics. It was in the present library that I discovered Ananda Coomeraswamy and his Mediaeval Sinhalese Art.  Probably it was a very polemical book and he wrote various things which I might not fully agree with, but the thesis he presented was very attractive to me, that when you are talking about, of course he was drawing Mediaeval Sinhalese Art but the art he was talking about was of the 17th and 18th Centuries. I mean, it is not mediaeval in that sense. So he was thinking of mediaeval as the site of the world which had that kind of spirit of inter-relationship. Then it started me thinking on certain lines. One thing, what is called tradition? Generally we think in terms of tradition in the kind of, let us say, in a sort of an upward line, or a downward line. It comes from one to the other in terms of various successions, but then there is in tradition a horizontal line where various kinds of activities reinforce each other and probably borrow from each other, or influence each other, and give each other a kind of personality composite. And you can see that in traditional India, or maybe in traditional Europe. So that was how art interested me from that time onwards. So when I came here and then I saw the various things in the European museums and came back, then I suddenly had a great desire to know about what is happening among the traditional artists and craftsmen. That is why soon after I came back from England I thought I should take a break, and the chance came quite readily. I mean, wanted me to work for them. I had an offer from the Antique Crafts Board, another from the Handloom Board, so I joined the Handloom Board for 2 years, and then went around and found that it was greatly educative, at least for me. I did an amount of work with the young people that were hired at that time and we became young friends and did something worthwhile, but I also learned in the process that to work within a government setup is very difficult and very frustrating, and whatever you did is almost brushed under the carpet, for the reason that certain kind of other agencies work to each one’s benefit and the government doesn’t sort of. So, after about 2 years of this educational break, I thought I would come back to Baroda, that’s how it came.

When did you meet Pupal Jayakar?
Pupal Jayakar was the person who sort of invited me to join, and Pupal Jayakar didn’t know me before. But I had a friend in Riten Majumdar who was Sucheta Kriplani’s brother who studied in Santiniketan and was very close to Benode Bihari, and he ended up as a designer. So Pupal knew him. So, Riten Majumdar at that time had an offer to go to Yugoslavia on a scholarship. So she probably talked to him saying that we have a design centre here, so could you suggest anybody’s name there. Then he knew, Riten knew that I had some interest in getting into the industry. That’s how I came to know him. After that we have been sort of reasonably friendly and she was in a way a dynamic woman, and she had a kind of a fairly comprehensive idea of what the craft scene should get at that time. She worked at a certain level in the government that she could get things done. So it was a good association and she was quite supportive. So when I was leaving she was very unhappy, Senzatigar [?], but I said at least you can arrange for my showing what I did in the 2 years in two exhibitions so that people can know, and also know why a government organisation is not able to deliver the goods. So we had an exhibition at the Jehangir Art Gallery, a big one, and later in Delhi in the All India Fine Arts and Crafts Society with samples of the various works we had done for the craft scene, starting with the lowest price to the highest price. All these things were not utilised by the Board to sort of get into the market, so we said that this is because that they do not want their traditional contracts to be broken. So I said we will book all this year on this, it’s not because the market is insensitive but the government is insensitive, and then we could prove it to them. Within 1 week that we had booked, the orders were on a lakh of rupees and then even giving them the whole way of getting them executed. But later I came to know that nothing was executed. They didn’t go at all. Anyway, I was happy to have had that experience at that time.
But you don’t feel you really changed anything?
Huh?
Do you feel you did change something?
Well, to a certain extent perhaps by the kind of samples we produced probably found it filtered into the market a certain kind of visual access. But then these changes are very sort of temporary, I mean transitory. I did, while doing this, various kinds of tapestries with the sort of bits of yarn we had thrown away, and one or two of these tapestries got shown outside and went into the New York Trade Fair, and there was a turnabout and probably publicised. Then what happened? Well, here everyone started taking small tapestries to put on the wall and they were very intelligent, to say the least. It became a kind of a, sort of a sales commodity, you know, this kind of a thing. So, how you affect the market is a very difficult thing, unless sort of you are constantly pummelling public taste with high quality goods or highly designed. Well, the trade pulls, they pulled it down, they vulgarised it very soon. This happens. Anyway, that experience has been very good for me, and I also came to know why, how our whole, what you call, the functional art scene is suffering just because the government doesn’t have the right kind of attitude towards functional art, and how their kind of development, philosophy of development doesn’t also think in terms of it. I was a member - I was a member of the Handicrafts Board for many days. I put it down in writing; I talked to them and all. That hasn’t changed. That hasn’t changed. In fact, Pupal Jayakar when she turned 70, they published a volume to felicitate her. I have written a sort of long article there called Do Hands Have a Chance? kind of a thing. Now, to pinpoint how the government’s attitude has been sort of changing in a sort of a ridiculous way, how in what is called globalising society we are sort of losing sight of the essentials and sort of taking greater notice of the non-essentials, this kind of thing.

Do you think through the figure of the, sorry, the... through the figure of the vernacular artist you found something more primal in your own language?
That’s right, yes, and then I also found that there are various things, various ways that do and don’t. Now, each kind of practice probably has a little grammar within it which helps it. Even when one practice goes to help another, then it creates a certain kind of, let us say, a sort of a bridge from one grammar to another, this kind of thing. That has been very interesting for me to do, and in fact when I started doing these terracottas, or when I started also doing some tapestries, though I haven’t done too many tapestries, just I started it off here, but then here terracottas and fibre sculpture, there are various possibilities here, and terracotta using clay as something which has its own kind of language. That I could see that this was there in certain of the objects, the primitive cultures used, or you could see that kind of a language in the Mohenjo-daro terra cottas and things of that kind. They continue till a certain time then they disappear, then the surface finish becomes more important than this kind of manipulation of the essential metrics. So all this has helped me a little to sort of change my perspectives while doing these things, but I know, I mean these are all side things, but then they help you to visualise things a little better and better.

I think the first fair was in the year ’62. That was after I came back to Baroda, I came back in ‘61. Then in ’62 I cannot take the full credit for it, it is between Sanko Chowdhuri and me. We sat together and we thought that our whole teaching probably and the work programme is too stereotyped and doesn’t have a sense of play in it, and then we had to also somehow break out of the ivory tower and get the interest of the general public into what we were doing. That is how the fairs began. And then the first fair did sort of attract people. It was not a great crowd at that time, but then we enjoyed doing all those things, and later the years went on, we had a yearly fair at that time, and during that time our students made things which were, they would not have normally done in their studios. They tried various kinds of materials out, and they sort of made a big impact on the people's interest, and we also started earning a little money.

You see, we had at the back of our mind what people used to do for the fairs in Santiniketan. At that time it was part of the larger fair, and there used to be the participation of the art school, a little, mainly they made special cards and sold them, then they made things for children. Occasionally they made kind of a hand, I mean sort of illustrated little booklets, then clay toys and things of that kind. So we thought that here too we will start with these little things which will attract people of different age groups. So we made, in the first fair I remember, we made a lot of animal masks for children, then we made calendars sort of thing with hand painted calendars, and then we had all sorts of special food shops, then also some stage area we had. One or two of our - I suppose this will disturb you? No, okay - so they had this sort of live puppet show kind of a thing. In fact, still my young colleague at that time who was a teacher for a long while still writes little skits for that, for the live puppet show, though he is not in good health anymore. So, this is how it started, but as time went, then it became a little more elaborate and then we collected more money. Then, we could then donate things for various purposes, in fact, earthquake relief. We did a certain amount of donations when there was an unfortunate communal disturbance in this area. That is at that time when I started doing illustrated books. In fact, the book called God Made all Creatures Alike, kind of thing. That I did at that time. After that, so I think every fair or every other time we produced one or two other books too, and that is even after I went to Santiniketan and I came back here. So, and I thought that it was a very good outlet for student creativity every year outside the normal study exercises they are doing, but somehow there were a lot of young people who thought that it was cutting into their course time, and so they didn’t have it every year. So, now I think they are probably thinking of it after 3 years, but then last year when they had and I was around here, they had a collection of about 50 lakhs of rupees, which was quite sizeable.  Anyway, here is that Santiniketan, the big fair, doesn’t have any more participation of the year, so now Santiniketan, the art department has its own fair because the big fair attracts crowds from all over the nearby towns and it’s almost impossible to breathe, while the small art fair within the Kala Bhavan complex, it has all kinds of various activities all centred around this sort of prints, calendars, these things, masks, trade shows, probably some musical performances and things of that kind. It adds colour to the environment.

Did you not also import into the faculty sometimes craftsmen from traditional…
Yes, we do, we did, yes.  It all started when we sort of persuaded the university to appoint traditional craftsmen as my assistants in the mural section. Thereafter, I thought that what Nandalal did at one time in the beginning of Kala Bhavan we should also do. That is, we wanted to have people from the various areas of craft, handicraft in different parts of India to come and demonstrate their work, and probably we could learn something from them, and probably this interaction will be very useful to the students. At one time of course it was not taken or looked upon very kindly. They thought I was a kind of traditionalist who was trying to go the opposite way, but then, now of course it is no more so. I mean people appreciate that, and it is being sort of continued in various different ways. But my main idea at that time was a little different. I wanted that whenever a man is practicing then all the things of his practice should be documented and then it will become a kind of a source book of craft practice for the artists to draw their resource from. That never happened fully. That never happened. In fact, some of my students have continued things piecemeal, like photographic documentation. I mean my junior colleagues like Kanaria have continued. Some amount of ethnographical classification and then documentation Harku Shah has done, and along with Eberhard Fischer, they have produced a book in which they very laboriously documented the process and things of that kind. But in a place like India we need a whole encyclopaedia of crafts with all these things documented, and my whole idea was only this, that whether it is useful to us it is a kind of cultural treasure we cannot let lapse into oblivion. The other thing is that how do we know? Maybe this knowledge can be an incentive for further knowledge when we can make use of them, and then unfortunately we do not have this going. Even the big organisations like the Handicrafts Board and Handloom Board, they are not doing it. They tried in the beginning. I remember at one time they got an American lady to come and sort of continue this process, but then they didn’t do that. She only produced one book on the, I think bronze casting methods current in the country, but then the idea was to have a sort of whole encyclopaedia done. But then it’s a thing that has to be taken up through a whole generation.

Do you feel the crafts still are alive, fully alive in India?
I do not know whether the crafts are still alive, and crafts are still alive for the wrong reasons. They want to earn dollars and pounds, and the tourist industry makes use of these crafts. But the whole idea is that if you are thinking of terms of the kind of expertise that these craftsmen have, you can recreate a whole sort of system of Indian handicraft as it was at one time. I mean, they have the expertise still. Of course, they are being vulgarised because of the people who merchandise these goods do not have the right taste or the right understanding. In fact, when the craft was somehow, the development of crafts was somehow turned to the question of foreign trade, I had tried many times to persuade the people saying that look, you are doing the wrong thing. In fact, if I think in terms of craft, as a sort of valuable culture, I said it is on the basis of the nexus between the user and the maker, and a close nexus so that both get educated in the process.
 

Many of the things that are exported respond to a market outside which is not very sensitive to the finer quality of the crafts goods made here. It is true of even the internal market, but in the internal market you can educate them a little better if you show them the right things. Now, when I was travelling in the United States, I mean there was a very nice old lady who was host to us in Santa Fe, so she was very sorry that Indian craft was languishing, and then she said that in fact America has a big market, so really you can export various goods here. Then she suddenly said, ‘You see those coffee spoons with an elephant at the end?’ Now, you see the kind of buyer I mean - he has a specification of that kind, and then the whole question is we don’t quite realise that even if we enthusiastically think of creating a big market in the United States, how big will that market be? In fact, Indian craftsmen, if they fully, I mean if the Indian public realises that they can sustain it, the biggest market is within the country, and that is what we need to sort of cultivate. So, this problem remains, and people don’t quite realise that. Sometimes this has, because of the change in the ways of life, this has done harm to the whole craft culture of other countries because when I went to Mexico I found that Mexico had various traditions of handmade objects including sculpture and things of that kind, but what now remains intact is only those categories which cater to the needs of the American tourist or the tourists from the rest of the world. But no country like this, except probably China and Japan can compare with the widespread crafts except that India has. India has still maybe certain things have gone out of work, but still India has a great variety of craft practice which can be sustained and probably made to sort of succeed in making a whole craft culture like at one time. But then we can only try.

In your own personal terms, did you feel you were able to integrate some of the elements of this play and this virtuosic facility?
Yes, true.
Into your own art?
Yes, I have been, I suppose. At least in various things, I have been able to do that, and in fact, even in the way I work, I sit and scribble and overdo things, overlay things, then change then use paper cuts. Sometimes when I do a thing for designing a children’s book, that thing, the playfulness that comes into it, comes and affects the work. So, there is a kind of useful interchange, but of course how it comes and how effective it is, is for other people to say. I don’t really sort of try to find out where it happens or it doesn’t.
If I use a phrase like ‘it released you’, that implies that previously you would have been blocked. 
Well maybe, I don’t know. The whole question is the normal system is that if you are thinking in terms of conforming to a certain kind of a style, you are being blocked, and that is what I try to cut across.

While this process was going on in Santiniketan and Baroda for you, another kind of Indian art world was taking shape in Bombay and Delhi, with which you had relatively little contact.
No, I don’t have much contact, yes. Really speaking that was taking shape, not exactly at that time. It is later, and by that time I had already made my choices, and now I keep a certain amount of distance from the whole thing.
But weren’t the Bombay progressives happening in the late ’50s, early ’60s?
Well, I don’t know. The sort of Bombay progressives and the Calcutta progressives, somehow the art historians make much of it, but I don’t think too highly of them. That is my personal feeling, but then the whole question is that there were some very talented artists among them, and they tried to make a mark in various parts of the world, that I agree. But then those progressives were not terribly progressive, and their manifestos are not so terribly balanced forward-thinking manifestos. So really speaking, I do not give much importance to it, but it’s all right for the art writers to do. I have no quarrel with them.

They had at that time, I think one Professor Gerrard or somebody, and the others who were there were Reg Butler and there was Mc... McWilliams, I think. Each one thought about sculpture in a different way, sort of thing. So, many students, especially those who went from India, were rather confused about whom to follow, and some students were denied their sort of certificate because Gerard didn’t agree with what the other people did. I heard about that, but then I was a drifter, so there was no point. I mean I was not sort of affected by all this, but I have heard from others also in the painting department. Of course, I haven’t seen too much. At that time Coldstream used to have a sort of a general parliament of discussion, I think once or twice in the term, when he commented on various works displayed in the exhibition. He used to think highly of certain people whose names I don’t hear about anymore. There was firstly a youngster whose name I have seen in some catalogue or the other who used to do a kind of painting post-Cezanne. I forget his name. Well, he didn’t make a mark, but there were others who have later been quite well known, I know. So, that only convinced me that it is not easy to make up your mind about anybody, it depends upon how. But the kind of conversation I had with other people, the person who was supposed to be sort of seeing what I did, was Townsend, William Townsend. He was an absolute gentleman. I mean, it was easy to talk to him, and then of course he put you at ease. He even suggested when I was coming here saying why don’t you do another year, I can sort of write, but then I told him look, if I spend another year in Europe I would rather want to travel around rather than stay in a school like this. So if that is possible, will British Council underwrite the expense? I don’t think so, and it didn’t happen, but he was very nice. I think at that time, I remember his brother was the high commissioner in Russia or somewhere.
Really?
Yes.
He had another brother who was editor of Art Monthly, later, Peter Townsend.
Peter Townsend, yes. I remember that.
He came to India actually. 
Yes. I mean these contacts with various people was very amicable and very profitable too. I came to see that we always don’t see eye-to-eye on every matter, so there is a certain kind of a cultural thing, but then there were large things which we agreed upon, things of that kind. In those days I was older than most students there but I didn’t look very old. In fact, they all thought that I was their own age group.

I came to know another scholar from the east in British Columbia. He is still there; occasionally I get a letter from him. He was a sculptor. He started sculpture quite early as an apprentice to Meštrović, and he had come on a British Council scholarship at the same time to be in the Slade. So, we had a large community of interests. We wanted to see the same things and things of that kind. So we got together and travelled to the major sort of cathedral towns. So I remember going to Lincoln, then Ely, then further on to Durham, and then he had a great grandmother in Scotland. So we also went there and spent some time. Seeing all these cathedrals was quite a kind of revelation and also I remember during Christmas we were in Lincoln and attended, and I could see something in them which I could not have known before. Then later when I travelled into Europe also, he was my companion. So we went through most of the Romanesque Cathedrals through France, then we went into Italy. Well, he covered more ground because I had to come back early, but then after we covered from north to south, almost to the middle of France, that is Sens, Auxerre, Avallon, Vézelay, Dijon, then from there, there was a plan to go to Moissac and Arles, which I couldn’t do, he did it later.
Did you go to Autun?
Huh?
Autun?
Autun, yes, of course. In fact, what disappointed me in Autun was that it was so crowded up with other buildings around so you couldn’t see it from a sort of a distance, otherwise the kind of sculpture that was there. All these were an education in themselves. Then in Vézelay we were there at the time of the Corpus Christi festival and people had come with their crosses all over. We couldn’t find any place to stay, so my friend, George, said well, let me see, there is a sort of a Christian hostel they say. So we went there, then he probably talked to them, can two of us get beds here during this time. I am a Christian but my friend is a Hindu. So that man just looked at him and said will you bring your friend to me? Then I went there, he said you are the first Hindu that’s come to this hostel and you are very welcome. The next morning they fed us breakfast and he drove us to Avallon. We were going from Vézelay to Avallon. It was a good experience and I could see how people are very friendly. I had such experiences all over, and even Durham, when I went to Durham that we didn’t used to go to the youth hostels generally, but the youth hostels were full, there was no other place to stay. We wanted to spend a night there and then return the next day. Then, while walking down the road, it was very drizzly and wet, there was a board saying room to let, so we went in there, and there was an old lady who said, ‘Look, we had a room to let but it is not to let for the next few days because my daughter is coming, so I have kept it ready for her, but there is some place a little further away you can try out’. So we went and that place further away didn’t have any rooms, so we thought we shouldn’t embarrass her, so it was raining quite heavily, so we were just walking away to the railway station. Then we find in the middle of the road this old lady standing with an umbrella and she stopped us and told us I knew that you would do this, that’s why I am standing here. It doesn’t matter, I will make the room again for my daughter later, and she was so good to us. She said you are the first Indian who has come to stay in our house, and of course Durham has a few Indian settlers, so I will try to ring them up if any of them will join for breakfast. She did ring, it was not successful, I mean they were all too busy on something or the other, but then she was extremely nice and she wouldn’t take any money. So we had to go and get a big bunch of flowers and give it to her.

One of the more enriching experiences of going to the mediaeval churches was that there was a certain kind of unity of concept in the whole thing, the sculpture, architecture, even the artefacts they used for ritual. There was a certain kind of, a sort of a relationship because afterwards, I mean slowly I think during revolting times they get a little separate, the architecture, sculpture, these things and all, they held their own personality but they are not as related or as unified as you see. And the other thing that struck me was the kind of narrative of sculpture especially, where a narrative goes round the whole sort of a pillar or this sort of a thing, where you know, it coats the whole thing, and then the way they also cloud them with as little detail as possible, showing a certain kind of emotion in the whole thing. All that, I mean there were so many other little details that I saw, and then when I saw them, then I saw also certain relationships I can, or at least parallels I can see in the art of Sanchi or in the kind of ivory carvings of the early times, this kind of thing. So it appealed to me a lot, and then they were very inventive. Probably this whole thing has a kind of roots in the kind of Byzantine type of carving, especially the architectural carving, which I think nobody uses these days anymore because the way they don’t pierce the whole thing, but they cover the whole thing and transform the whole architectural body into something which can speak for itself kind of thing. So, these have sort of affected me in a loose way, and when even now you were to ask me about doing a mural or painting a mural, I have always that at the back of my mind. I mean a mural that transforms a building, a mural that goes around the whole building and wraps it up, that kind of a thing.

When I was doing the mural in Lucknow, the terracotta mural, I had told them that I want to cover the whole façade if I can, but then the architect wouldn’t hear of it, and he showed me spaces where the mural could go, which I didn’t agree to do because all these architects thought of murals as a kind of a minor appendage on the wall, like a postage stamp on the envelope kind of thing. So I said no, I want this kind of space and I will do this. Then we had a big discussion. He didn’t take too kindly to it because I told him that your whole plan is the front façade of the theatre, I was supposed to do mural walls, looked more like a radio cabinet . He was a little hurt by it, but I said, ‘Look, this is why I say, I am not meaning anything bad about it, but then I want to do a long thing, about 81 feet long’, which I did finally manage to do. But I wanted to cover the whole façade if I could. That I have not been able to do. When I was doing the Gandhi Darshan mural in Delhi, I wanted in the beginning to visualise it as a kind of a whole courtyard where three sculptures will stand, and if possible there will be water so that you will have reflections on it. But then they described it, they said if there is water the leaves will fall and it will sort of be messy there, nobody will look after it. So finally I had to think of doing it on dry ground, and those cast cement pieces looking like terracotta as three units, which are still there, not very well looked after, some of it is broken. But then I wanted small trees there, but they have planted a tree that has grown too big and it’s a sort of a big problem for them to contain it. But then after you do a thing, nobody looks after them. Things go into ruin very quickly in a place like India. But at least there, I could do certain things with the whole surrounding because it was a sort of a courtyard. Then, when I was doing it, somebody said - Zakir Hussain, who was then the President of India, died - then somebody came and told me that would you like to do a mural, this thing, if you think in terms of a memorial? I told him it’s an amount of disbelief that look, Zakir Hussain was an academic. He was not a politician, so I wonder whether anybody is going to do a memorial for him, though he was a very distinguished man. But if he did, I would be very happy to do a sort of a whole courtyard with walls surrounding on which I will have sort of a relief mural. If they agree that the memorial should be a rose garden in the middle, nothing else. I had a kind of an idea about this because somewhere I had read that in Persia one of the shahs or chieftains, I don’t know, he was a Sufi, he had died and they had buried with pomp, and then had a sort of a tomb erected over his grave, but he used to haunt everyone who did that and say in their dreams that, ‘Look, I feel choked within this. You break it all down and instead have a rose garden’. So, I said that this is a thing which read somewhere. Maybe that is what he deserves, but it never came true. So, to a certain extent these ideas came readily through. I mean apart from that I have seen such things in India on the temples and things of that kind, and later I have come to see it in what you call other manifestations of Indian temples in South East Asia on a grander scale, whether of the Buddhist or the Hindu persuasion. But then the first temples came from watching the...
From the mediaeval?
The mediaeval.

When was it you went to Japan?
After I returned from England, I started this exploration of the craft scene, then I came back. Then my other sort of next visit outside was to the United States when I got the JDR Third Fund grant.
So you went west before you went east?
Yes, I went west before I... and then of course while going west, because my wife and daughter were with me, I wanted them to see a little bit what could be seen on the way. So we stopped in Egypt and at least had a look at the pyramids and then the museum in sort of Cairo. Then we spent I think a few days in Paris, and I had my old friend Krishna Reddy there, so we stayed with him and went around a little, then came to London and stayed in a hotel, but then we were guests of the Tennyson’s. Then at that time I think it was in Golders Green, Charles Tennyson and Margot were living there separately, so we spent, I think, a day with them. Then from there we went to... and on the way we also saw, I had a glimpse of Athens and in Italy a glimpse of Rome, but we couldn’t spend as much time as we could at that time there. It was while returning from America that they had booked us around the world ticket, so we went to Hawaii and then to Tokyo, then from Tokyo and Kyoto, and we went to Kyoto, then my wife and daughter came directly back, then I thought I have come this far so I would rather see Cambodia too, so we went to Cambodia. In fact that visit, while in the United States of course the art scene did not excite me terribly much. I mean, of course it was very much in the air, but the artists craftsmen’s work, and then because some of them had seen some work of mine in the New York World Fair and all, I had introductions to some of them, some designers and some artists craftsmen. But most of the artists craftsmen at that time that I met were people around, I think, San Francisco. It was the time when they had that craft fair and things of that kind, there were a number of people sort of in Berkley and in the other universities around who were interested in having a sort of an original way of using craft materials to make art objects.

Before I sort of went to the United States, I was trying to decide of doing a certain kind of painting or even sculpture where I could sort of drive on a middle line between abstracts and figuration kind of a thing. In fact, I did an exhibition in Bombay just previous to my going to the United States, which more or less indicated what I was trying to do at that time. Then when I went to the United States, of course there was a lot of abstract painting going around, but an absolutely sort of an object-centred abstract painting did not appeal to me at all. I could see that they had interesting surfaces and things of that kind. They became a kind of an aesthetic object, but of course Aesthetic Object was the name of a book somebody wrote, isn’t it, or the whole scene. But then...
Actually, I think the name was The Anxious Object. 
The Anxious... ?
The Anxious Object.
The Anxious Object. Anyway, the whole idea is that I wanted to put in a sort of a reference to the kind of life around in some way or the other, and really speaking, the kind of a thing that struck me at that time was something quite ancient as the Duccio’s panels in Italy where you had those various scenes put together. When you looked at it, it has a certain kind of an abstraction which ran through the whole thing, but each little panel, it was very descriptive. It sort of tried to represent a scene which could be read. Then it came also sort of brought it home to me that this is what has happened in the art of my own country. If you think in terms of a temple with all those reliefs and sculpture and all, from the distance it’s a sort of an abstract piece, and when you went nearer, it is like you were turning over one page after another of sort of a descriptive figuration.

So I started doing those polyptychs, first a three-piece then nine-piece. I used to put them together and make it, and one thing led to another, then I did a series of polyptychs which had kind of a gestural descriptive illumined in each, like what you see through a window pane in New York. Then I continued that when I came back to India, this sort of thing, and slowly they became more and more figural, and realising that in any case there was no great conflict in the whole tradition of Indian painting or sculpture between abstraction and figuration because what was figural was generally a composite abstract, and what was abstract was really, had sort of a bristling descriptive element in it sort of thing, and then certain abstract elements in especially the craft tradition where a single abstract shape which is functionally abstract, that was interpreted in terms of figuration in various ways, like the axle of a wheel or this sort of a thing, the spoke of a wheel. Sometimes it is like a creeper, sometimes it is like an animal and things of that kind. So, this over-projection of abstract elements with figuration has been there in the whole of our tradition. So it became very interesting to me, especially when I was now trying to find out sort of meeting points between craft and art and things of that kind. So after that, so when I came back, then I found that this thing remained in all those other countries I visited and especially in Cambodia. In fact, in Cambodia, and I also visited Indonesia at the same time, and Cambodia and Indonesia, you have buildings, you have temples which are much larger in size than anything in India. In fact, if you think in terms of Angkor Wat or the concept of Angkor Thom, their concepts are more complicated than anything in India. This I could see, and then similarly Borobudur Stupa, there isn’t anything like it in our Buddhist art, I mean of that magnitude or of that kind of... and then also in its execution. It’s remarkable to think that it was there one day and it is not there now. I mean that kind of an activity, because just, I think the last, I have visited Borobudur twice. When I visited the last time, somebody had, some mysterious man had blown away one of the Buddha figures from inside the bells. It’s a ridiculous thing to do. In fact, where will they find such a sort of a site? I mean such sublime art anywhere else? I mean they wouldn’t. Luckily it was only one Buddha figure. The other things were more or less intact. If any harm has come to him, it should have come from the conservators because some enthusiastic conservators are trying to clean the surface of that, those reliefs with almost like sort of a rough broom. So they were rubbing off the surface a little. It is true they were overgrown with fungus and black and white fungus, so you couldn’t sort of visualise the thing when you look at it with a naked eye. Like if you have a black and white photograph, probably you could make it, and they were trying to sort of reveal the yellowness of the old stone, but I don’t know in what condition they have left them. Anyway, what I am trying to say is that I found that there is a whole tradition of this bringing together the abstract and the descriptive together in very salutary ways and which is one thing that I have since been trying to do.

I found the pop movement on one side an invigorating change, on another side I thought it was a little comic. I mean, they were trying to, and many of the works became too trite. But then it is true that the whole question is they were becoming a laboratory scene that was, not thinking in terms of a certain studio scene which they are imagining, and that, there was a kind of an aesthetic reward in even seeing that. That I can agree, and then to that extent I also was interested in using methods where such things could be sort of brought. Maybe that is why I reacted, or at least learnt lessons from what you call bazaar painting, and then started doing glass painting, though I didn’t know the whole method of glass painting at that time. When I saw a whole assortment of glass painting with one of my old students who had made a collection here, that is when it all started. That should be I think in the end of the ’70s.
As late as that?
Hmm, then I saw that glass paintings had many variations. Of course, I didn’t know the history of glass painting at that time, but then he had a whole variety of glass painting. There were portraits, I mean there were icons and there were mythological stories, all illustrated. But the common air was that immediately you were rendering and kind of when it was close to the surface, there is no way of either you rub it out or you keep it on, and then when you put the colour behind it comes out, glows out of the glass. And that kind of a transformation and immediate rendering takes on, that seemed interesting to me. As far as the kind of a thing, the common things that it sort of tried to represent, but when it comes through with such a, sort of the glass, so close to the glass and then you put all the colour in, then they become iconic in themselves, even the common things become iconic. So that is where I started doing glass painting, then later I found that a glass painting has a great advantage for a man who is interested in using drawing in various ways. So because I always worked with wash colour then backed it up with oil or sealed it in, so with wash colour you can go on sort of experimenting on glass and wiping them away and putting things in and all. So you see, it was easy to engraft various kinds of things together and then finally finish it by this oil paint. That I still find very challenging and very diverting, and I enjoy doing it. So you can do something which is very informal in glass painting. You can do something which is more formal and organised in glass painting. Both things are possible and very easily done.

When you came back to Baroda as a teacher, was there a sense in which you were pushing slightly against the dominance of abstraction and towards... true, it was at a certain time you might call a post-Bendre phase.
At the time this school started, I mean there was one side, Bendre, who was very much taken up with what was called the high mark, the high water mark, so modern art, like the work of Picasso, Braque, Matisse, this sort of a thing, and then later of course even those action painters. He even sort of showed his students some of the examples of this work. They were affected by what he... but at that time a person like me was saying that well, they should be as sort of seriously affected by what they see around and what they see in their tradition, which is not terribly different. Maybe they are different in outlook, but in terms of the object. So there was, and later when I came to be the head of the department, I wanted that this extent, to the extent of you are reacting to the scene around, and some of my younger colleagues and then some of my sort of students, as resourceful students of that time, they caught up with it and they sort of took it into the field of sort of an emotional reaction, or trying to sort of interpret what is going around, or symbolise what is going around. That was there and I was very happy to do it.

It was also at that time when some of my work also, without my intending to do so, tried to come as a reaction to what was happening, especially those series of terracottas I did in the beginning, in 1971 during the war with Bangladesh or East Pakistan, and where there was a lot of suffering, and also the general ill effects of war. In terms of the development of course, how the whole immediate developed, it was not as a sort of a thing that I planned to do this and this is the theme. The whole thing started, I started working in terracotta at that time, from using terracotta to making toys for the fair, fine arts fair that we had. So I used to sort of get a sort of a thin layer of terracotta layer which I used to sort of use as a sort of rolling pin to make, and clothed it like skin on an armature of terracotta I used to make, and then I suddenly realised that that has great possibilities. So I used to make animals of that kind, and then I found that there was a kind of quality in clay that when you work it out, it is like you are working with your own skin, and then when it gets burnt, then it even becomes more closer to skin in terms of the warps and the cuts and things of that kind. Then suddenly we had the big flood here in Baroda, and then all of us got up to do something for relief. We went round and see the outskirts of Baroda where a lot of people were sort of washed ashore. There were dead, there were dead bodies everywhere. Then suddenly it occurred to me that I can do something to represent this through terracotta. So I did a few things and one of them is fairly common, it’s called Sunrise over Tarsali. Tarsali is a village not very far away, showing so many bodies lying, bloated bodies lying down, and with a sort of a sunflower-like sun on the top. And very soon after the Bangladesh, these things started, then when the Bangla - the Tarsali, when the Tarsali flood took place, the papers carried photographs of all these bloated bodies and the damage that had occurred in the villages and they wanted to show that the chief minister of Gujarat was aware of it and he was looking around for a photograph, and the photograph they found was of a laughing chief minister. They put it on one corner and they put all this scene below and it came in one of the papers. So that led me on to the theme of how people kill each other but there are laughing generals. There are generals who think that it is their achievement that they have killed so many, and it was at that time the reports of the Vietnam war were coming and they were always sort of talking about the head count, how many people did they kill in Vietnam and things of that kind. So those series of terracottas I did had some reference to this, but technically, it grew from my handling of the terracotta medium to build a toy, then it went further. After that I have done various things with it showing how terracotta, you can sort of get a feel of the body much better, the lushness of the body as well as the suffering that comes through body movements. Later in the day when I had moved to Santiniketan I did a series of terracottas, and the theme for it came from certain photographs I saw on a railway station after a big train tragedy. I mean there was a big train smash I think near Bina or somewhere in Madhya Pradesh, and a lot of people lost their lives and they didn’t know who they were, so they had stickers or photographs there with deformed faces and things of that kind on it, and saying that if you can recognise anybody. That gave me the idea of how, what you call a face has so many little bumps and slits and things of that kind, so maybe in terracotta I can do something. So I did, tried to do a thing called the birth and death of a smile kind of a thing, but it didn’t work too well because a mouth itself doesn’t make the face, you have to have other things. Then later on I started doing these various things, a stricken sort of a face and how, I showed a thing that people were peeling out or there is a moulting of person and things like that, and did a series of things with animals, that is a fish fossil kind of a transposition. But all that came initially from seeing those photographs on that railway station. So really, it was not a sort of a planned programme. I mean it came just like that.

One of the reasons why I was thinking in terms of referring them to the things around was that I found that in Gujarat there is a brick decorative tradition. It is true with traditional art of Gujarat as well as of the new, I mean they are fond of decorating a surface, this kind of a thing. So a lot of students wanted to do decorative kind of painting. I myself having been familiar with the craft scene, I have not quarrelled with the question of course, but I thought that when you paint, probably the decoration should be the minor thing and there should be something else coming through it, the experience of the normal world, and that experience need not be always pleasant, it can be unpleasant. It may not be entirely removed and descriptive, it can be involved and emotive. I mean this kind of a thing. So, amongst them there were students and of course the kind of students who reacted to it here were, at that time one of the major names was Gulam Sheikh. Gulam Sheikh was one of the persons here, and there were some others in the painting department whose names I don’t now too clearly remember. One died very recently, Vinod Patel, who used to be a person of talent, but he didn’t do terribly much after a while because he got too addicted to drink, so he became sort of... Now, there were so many others. I mean, it was a general wave. I can’t really pinpoint who all did what.
Vivan Sundaram?
Vivan Sundaram came much later. I mean, he came later.
In the ’70s?
Ah, ah, in the end of the, ah, in the ’70s, yes, at that time, but then this had started much earlier. Vivan Sundaram was there, then...
Bhupen.
Ah, Bhupen was there, though Bhupen was not a student of the painting department. He used to come and attend my lectures, and it did me good to see them all around, and that interaction was very useful. Anyway, whether this kind of a movement I am at the centre of it, I don’t know. The whole question is it happened that way, and since I was talking to them almost every Saturday, those Saturday lectures probably made some kind of an impact on the generality.
And those you gave at home, didn’t you?
Huh?
You gave those at home, the lectures?
No.
No? 
In the faculty.
In the faculty, sorry. 
Really speaking, I owe it to another teacher called Nasreen Mohamedi, though she was an abstract painter, but she was the person who used to organise these Saturday evenings - Saturday mornings. So she used to get people together and then we used to have a free-for-all discussion. I enjoyed it and I think some of them enjoyed it too, though it was not recorded at that time, and it was all related to various concepts and things of that kind, and what little I knew I shared with the others. But after that, I mean it used to work very well here. When I went to Santiniketan in ’80, some people said why don’t you start it there, but it didn’t work out there too much. So the interest was not that much there like it was here, but it sort of grew. I mean, all these things can be discussed only after the students have a background of the sort of ideas they gained from knowledge in other lectures.

Do you think words like ‘hybrid’ are useful for east-west… or…
‘Hybrid’ takes for granted that there are two things which don’t easily mix. Probably when you are thinking that one culture hits another, there is at a certain time a kind of a hybrid coming through, like in early Gandhara art for instance. Early Gandhara art you can see certain compositional sort of ideas which are local, but the figuration is Roman, muscular, this sort of a thing. There you can see the separate existence of two things which don’t mix, but then later Gandhara art is quite sublime. It is as sublime as any other art. So it means that when two cultural elements try to hit each other, at one time one, if they are trying to merge, it takes them some time. Really speaking what happens is this experience transforms the general structure of the other, then it becomes original in itself, and that is what happened in Gandhara and that is what happens everywhere. So I think in one of the lectures of tradition and this thing I gave in Santiniketan I was trying to point it out. When the bazaar woodcuts of...
Kolkata?
Of Bengal have certain cubistic elements which have come naturally. I mean it is not that they even knew about this, but then that’s transformed their sort of, their content as well as what they state. This is a thing that you can see, and I think that very often all art movements have somewhere where this kind of sort of conflict between two things come together and something fresh comes out of it. And so hybrid is a kind of a pundit for the pedantic, we will talk about, but then a certain amount of conflict to two separate things is always very useful for sort of art, and I think the kind of contact with the Roman or the Greek and Indian art was very useful for itself transforming itself.
And do you think something like that happened in Baroda?
Yes, I suppose so, and that was something which was even intended. In fact, that is what we intended, that this should be a kind of a clearing house for various ideas, and instead of one trying to sort of mixing it half-heartedly, it should transform its sort of general nature by this. That is it.
Do you think that might have been less easy to do in Santiniketan?
No, it is no...
Because it’s less...
At one time it was so easy, but now it is not.
But it was less of a westernised town, wasn’t it, Baroda?
Really speaking, Santiniketan in its early days didn’t have this problem. It was easy for Ramkinkar to sort of take on western elements, or even Benode Bihari to understand the western kind of ideology. If you are thinking in terms of even Nandalal, he might have had a kind of a resistance to western things, but still he was responsive to gothic painting, he was responsive to all eastern painting, and there was nothing against it, and with the presence of Tagore, there was an openness at that time. But what happened later, after post Nandalal, it became a sort of a citadel for resistance for various other things, and keeping a certain kind of purity, and only after we started going there, then other things started. So I used to send students here for postgraduate training, and people used to come from here. So this happened, otherwise when it happened Santiniketan was the best place, and at that time the Kolkata art school people did not know about the basic European tradition as much as the people in Santiniketan knew because they had the material there to know.

I mean, imagine Stella Kramrisch came from Vienna to Santiniketan I think in the early 1920s. Santiniketan, Kala Bhavan had her for a year lecturing on European traditions and things of that kind, and modern art. Probably she was also involved in that exhibition of the Blue Rider group, or a selection of their work which had come here. That all happened there, and Guru Dev was very fond of her, and I understand people tell the story of she had learnt ballet when she was young, and she tried to demonstrate it to him and she fell and sprained her ankle. Then anyway, she was not too happy in Santiniketan the way it was, so she moved to Kolkata, and then of course later in Kolkata she got this offer to be in that chair, Vageswari chair. So that is the time of course when she was studying the Hindu temples and did all those books on the traditional Indian art and became more and more of a, let us say theorist, and less and less of an art critic. Otherwise, she had a very, very keen eye. In fact, I think still her essay on Khajuraho house sculpture is one of the best I have seen on Khajuraho house sculpture, because there she separates that a certain kind of Khajuraho house sculpture is very linear and a certain other kind is more related to mass and things. But then later, like Ananda Coomeraswamy they all went into the theories and the background and the theoretical background of things and philosophies. Otherwise, her eye was very sound, and so was Ananda Coomeraswamy. She was a great connoisseur. There is no doubt about that.

Why in 1980 did you leave Baroda?
Partly because I think it was, people were depending on me too much. In fact, when I sort of went as a visiting fellow to Santiniketan, it had a certain kind of a background. I mean it’s like that. You see, Santiniketan as an institution was always in my mind because I think Tagore thought about it being an exemplary institution, a resource institution. I was always wanting to think that what it could be, I mean if the right people got there. Many people thought that it was to going the right way after it came into the hands of the Education Ministry and it became a central university. So they had from time to time various committees going through it and suggesting how to improve it and things of that kind. The last one of them was called a Masud Committee. Masud was a high court judge there, and various experts were interviewed and called and people answered the questionnaires they sent around. Then they thought they should change the nature of the institution a little and bring it back to the old glory, but that report was more like a textbook. I mean, it didn’t have a plan of action. So they appointed another committee, which was called a Taskforce Committee, in which they called me as a member. So I went to Delhi at that time. It was in 1976 I think, or a little earlier, and the vice chancellor of the university was there at that time and there were people, I mean from the Education Ministry were there, and they had all various solutions to suggest. I was there as an old alumnus and also somebody who had been in the art educational line in Baroda for a long while. I didn’t want to get into the discussion too quickly, so I was watching what all. One of the suggestions was of the administrators. They said the institution is going downhill because there is no code of conduct. So we will have to draw up a code of conduct and then make people sign that they will behave this way and things of that kind. Then when they finally asked me what do you think about it, so I told them look, I mean you are teaching people who want to sort of man this institution thinking that they are little infants that they have to sign up a sort of signature for it. Either you get the right people or you sign the wrong people, but there is no other way. I mean all kinds of signing up sort of a thing doesn’t make any difference, and suppose people sign up and don’t observe it, what do you do, you know? So, I think this is a most infantile suggestion, so I do not agree with it, but the whole thing is that there should be a sort of a community of people who can sort of rebuild the institution here, do you have that community, or is there some way? So the vice chancellor said we don’t have that community. They said now most of the people who come to Santiniketan are coming there not because they are convinced about the validity of Tagore’s ideas, some of them even don’t know fully what he meant. So they are all wage earners like other wage earners, and they are an institution whose head doesn’t have the power to hire or fire, so I am helpless in that. So finally they came, they came to the conclusion, the Education Ministry said well, why don’t you sort of have a little transplant?  That is, have a small group of people who are distinguished in each field, come as visiting fellows to Santiniketan, and they sanctioned 50 visiting fellowships. And that is how I went there, on a visiting fellowship, to start with. It included a lot of interesting people and people with a lot of experience, like Sombhu Mitra in the field of theatre, like Nikhel Banerjee in the field of music and things of that kind. It started very well. Unfortunately, the institution as it was, was not always uniformly receptive to these people.  Sombhu Mitra was there for 2 years, but they didn’t allow him to produce a play. So, he wasted his time. He himself has told me so, and he on the other hand tried to do some amount of research. He has come out with a very beautiful essay on normal conversation, the relation between normal conversation, dialogue and the play, kind of a thing, very... written in Bengali. Well anyway, I had the advantage of being an alumnus, so people knew me better, so I had better reception so I could do quite an amount of work at that time, and then it looked like people wanted me there for a longer while. So the vice chancellor came with the proposal of 3 years, why don’t you sort of move? So I said I can’t do that immediately, but let me go back and think. And then I started thinking that in Baroda, though I had a lot of affection around and people who had grown in my vicinity were all there, I found I was becoming a little like a mother hen. Whenever they had a problem, I had to sort of find out a solution for them. Then I thought that is not good. I mean, they are grown up enough to solve their own problems. Then the other thing was Uma had grown up and she got married to the son of a person I knew who was then here, so like a normal ageing Hindu will think, I thought my grihasth-ashram is done here. Now I can go for what they call vanaprastha, to the woods. So when they had this kind of an invitation, I moved there. Of course, the students and the staff members here tried to persuade me not to go. They even wrote a petition sort of a thing, but I told them look, this is very unfair. Students come and go, but the teachers can’t go. I mean they cannot but anyway, I said that I am not happy to go, but it’s just... then somebody asked me, ‘Why sir, why are you going to Santiniketan?’ So then I told them a kind of a story: that is when I was a student in Santiniketan, those days, Nandalal would take us for excursions to a place called Rajgir. Rajgir is Buddhist centre, and also it was probably a Jain centre at one time. And then whenever we camped there at Rajgir for a tour, then he said let us walk up to a hill called Gridhrakut . Gridhrakut is the kind of a vultures nest. It’s a sort of a tall cliff where there is a cave. Apparently when Buddha was alive, he used to go to Gridhrakut and sit in meditation there. So I said look, whenever he used to take us over, Nandalal used to say do you realise we are walking on the same turf that Buddha walked at one time? So I said look, if I am going to Santiniketan, that is only for that one reason. I will probably walk on the same ground where Tagore walked at one time, and that’s a good thing to think about. Many others have walked over it, but at least for me it will be a kind of a transformation. Well anyway, I went in spite of that, and I think they have done quite well even after that.

When you were living in Baroda, you were sharing – not sharing but you were living in the same residency bungalow that Sheikh and Bupen were also living in?
That’s right.
So you saw them quite a lot, then?
Yes, I did.  Really speaking, that residency bungalow, that is after I came back from Bombay. I wanted a larger space to work, so I had told the vice chancellor well, if you can give me a place where I can easily work. Then he allotted me a house. The residency bungalow before that was used as an office at one time. Then the office had a new building so they had moved out. So when they did that, they had allotted me another house which was a sort of an old colonial house which they couldn’t in the end give it to me. Then the vice chancellor at that time said there is this place, would you like to? So I went and saw it and said that if you give me the whole upper floor, then I am interested, and he very generously did. Then nobody else wanted to come there to live because it was a little further away and people were... but the people who were, were artists. So Sheikh and Nilima was just going to be married there at that time, and there were, I think Jeram Patel was in the other portion, and in the front two others came. I mean, they were in different disciplines, but before them, we had two Americans there. They had come on what they called the Urban Community Project to help, and one was, I think, Dr Cousins and one Abraham. Abraham was, I think, a Quaker, and then sort of head of a Quaker agency, but they were all sent here through an American aid programme. That programme probably continues here as an NGO of some kind, but they used to stay there. Like that, various other people used to say there too. I mean, especially Fulbright professors, but these three were people known to me, that’s right. We stayed there. So we used to, it used to be like a sort of an extended family.

Did you find more time to work in Santiniketan?
Well, after I laid off my duties as the Dean of the Faculty, I was finding more time here too, the whole position, but still when there was a problem I had to sort out. There people wanted me to be around, but then after I went to Santiniketan it was much easier, and then really, soon after I went to Santiniketan, of course on the basis of whatever work I had done so far, I was given what they call the Kalidas Samman Award. That was in 1981 I think, the first award. Then after that came the India Festival and when the Tate Gallery wanted to show, and I think Howard Hodgkins selected my paintings along with those of others, so all those things. Some of them were started here, some of them were done in the early years there, then they went there. After that, I found that it was easy to work there, and I didn’t have any administrative responsibilities. I had just to be around, that’s the whole thing. So, ’80 onwards, well, I had a lot of freedom to work and be busy the whole day on something or the other.

I am still a little old-fashioned. I do not want to keep up with the times. I think that at every stage in time there are wonderful things have happened and they still remain wonderful. The question of the arts changing with the calendar doesn’t make difference to me. Similarly, there are many things that I understand, there are many things I don’t understand, and I am the worse for it. I know even if I want to understand I wouldn’t understand everything there is, but what I need to understand is what little impulse I have and how to use it best, and that’s where I am. So, I don’t... when people ask me, ‘What do you think of this, what do you think of this work?’ I am unable to say anything. I mean, there are many things probably I am quite dense to, and then I do not want to be sort of either too abrupt in giving an answer and in that way seem offensive, so I do not. At my stage in life, still probably another how many years to live, I want to live in peace and come to terms with myself. That’s the best I can do.

Those essays were written on different occasions and they cover a large area of time. The only thing, it was addressed to audiences who were quite unaware of like for instance Abindranath and this sort of thing. In fact, particular, I mean apart from the other essays, the Abindranath essay was done for his centenary seminar, which I couldn’t attend, and I had gone to Santiniketan on a visit at that time, and they approached me with the kind of request. So I said how can I write about Abindranath when I haven’t seen anything of this work? I had seen a few things which were around in Santiniketan, but there were very few. There was a large area of work which I had learnt from a kind of a listing done by Benode Bihari in one of the Visva Bharati Quarterly numbers, and I haven’t seen all this. Then I discovered that it was in the hands of the Rabindr Bharati Society. The background of it as I understand it is like this, that when in his later years Abindranath went bankrupt, the whole family couldn’t sort of pay back their debts, so their part of the building in Dwarakanath Tagore Lane was sold off to somebody. They sold all his paintings, and finally he moved to a small house in the outskirts.
Of Kolkata?
Of Kolkata, and of course he sat there and read some delightful things there. I mean, he sort of wrote, and one of them is his experience of moving and all the revelries around. Now, this man, when this happened, when certain part of the Kolkata public thought that this was such a shame, so they raised some money and bought back that thing and put in this sort of Society, and it is in the sort of safekeeping of the Society, if you call that safekeeping. They have about, I mean, works of Abu Nindranath and certain, and the larger collection of the works of other people of that time, about I think more than 2,500 works all locked in three trunks. There are only two rooms where they keep these things, and it is presided over by one secretary who is always very unwilling to show it out to you. They have a chairman who is generally hardly there. He only comes for the meetings. So when I wanted to look, I went to see it, luckily the vice chancellor of that time who is a known historian called Partul Gupta, he said I can arrange it, because he was on the committee and he had some say in the matter. So, before coming to Baroda I stopped by for 2 days in Kolkata and had a look at it. Then I found this fabulous treasure trove. I mean, there were about 600 works of Abu Abindranath out of which this Arabian Nights series were the cream of the whole lot, and it was done as recorded. In the course of 1 year, 40 paintings of big size, it was done in the course of 1 year, almost at the same time when he was delivering what I call the Vageswari Lectures in Art.
Was that in the 1930s?
Huh?
In the ’30s?
No, it ended in 1929 or ’30, but it started much earlier, the Vageswari Lectures, probably from ’26 to ’30 or something of that kind. Now, I mean that was really an eye opener. I had never seen anything like it before. So that is why I wrote that essay. The other thing that had come there is of course on the basis of a lecture here or a lecture there and things of that kind, and the art and change thing was delivered in Santiniketan again when I went from here on an extension lecture, or visiting professorship. So it was all brought together by Sheikh, and now here it has gone into a new edition.
 

In general, the whole Bengali revival tradition or cast list was somewhat absent from most Indian’s consciousness, weren’t they, by the 1960s? Very few people were looking at such things.
No, no, I know. I know. In fact, the whole question, they are also, the trouble has been that what is called the revival of Bengal. There are artists of various denominations in that. Sometimes Santiniketan is put as part of it, sometimes outside it, but most people who talk about revivalism in Bengal are on the basis of the works they have seen, of the works of the lesser contemporaries of Abindranath art who were sometimes students or who went by the image that he had floated around, and then people like Sarada and Barada Ukil and Kishindranath came, and Rabindranath Tagore and people of that kind. They were sort of mostly very sentimental and then not too sort of proficient in drawing construction and things of that kind, and they had their own kind of enunciation of what tradition was. Even one of his close contemporaries, Nandalal’s close contemporaries, Asit Haldar who later became the principle of the Lucknow School of Art, he also falls into that category. He started very well, but later of course he gets bogged down. Otherwise he was one of the persons who went and copied the Bagh Cave Murals and things of that kind. That part of Bengal revivalism, but then many of them did not know real Abindranath. What Abindranath they knew were often the few things they had come to Abindranath probably. We didn’t publish any of these paintings at all. So, I thought that this has to be brought to the notice of the public and they should see it better. It’s only recently that this book has come. Occasionally this society, this society by coming into it also came into some portion of the royalty of Abindranath works. So the society was subsisting on the basis of that royalty, but they didn’t do anything. They only made a kind of an exhibition of a few of his paintings in their own rooms during the monsoon season which was deadly. So all these things started deteriorating very quickly, and this time when Sivakumar went to photograph them, he said that their position is still very bad. So I have been trying to persuade the present director of the National Gallery of Modern Art to put pressure on the government that they should take it on extended loan and have it shown in Delhi. And the other lecture there is on the basis of one or two lectures I delivered I think in Canada when I went on the Shastri Indo-Canadian Foundation’s invitation, especially religion and art in India and the kind of relationship, and the loose relationship and the various ideas that came out of it.

Well, the next book called The Living Tradition, it came out of the compilation of certain other talks, both in Santiniketan and otherwise, and soon after I went to Santiniketan the Seagull brought it out and it was released in Santiniketan. Then after that the Kolkata University invited me to deliver, I think it was called some memorial lecture, and then I did five lectures for them. But it was not delivered in Kolkata because this university didn’t have the funds to arrange the whole thing. So they first came with the suggestion, the registrar, of course there are four or five lectures but there is not enough  money in it, you can put all the five into one lecture and we can arrange this. So I said look here, that is very unfair and person like me cannot do that. You can ask somebody else to do it if you want, but to me, five lectures means five lectures, and I can quite see that most of these endorsements have this problem. It is endorsed long, long ago, and the money provided is so little that you can’t do it. So why don’t you do this for me, arrange the lectures in Santiniketan and it will be shown here, there will be an audience here, or if you want to bring the audience, you can come. So finally that’s how it happened. The Kolkata University lectures were delivered in Santiniketan in Ranbindranath, and Navin had already agreed to publish it. So The Creative Circuit is on the basis of those five lectures. Now recently, he has published that thing called Magic of Making, the collection of other articles which are around, which are on various topics, sometimes related to art and some on the general condition. If he gets all the texts together and Feshur Kumari [?] signs, all those writings I have done in Santiniketan or about Santiniketan artists and the other things which come together in another book I suppose, when it’s ready.

I have seen you placed as the godfather of the Baroda school, and I have seen you placed perhaps as almost the last person in the Santiniketan tradition. Would you resist all that?
No, I let it be. Really speaking, the placing is for others to do, it doesn’t really matter. But then really I have myself said that if there is, I mean if you can think in terms of the community interests I have with other people I would say that I have a lot to share with Nandalal, Benode Bihari and Ramkinkar. And then as far as this place is concerned, it is true that I grew up with this institution, so to a certain extent it has been a two-way exercise; teaching here and being part of the building or the institution I learned a lot, and to that extent I should have contributed to it too. So that is how it is. I know that you can’t do everything that you wanted to do because the circumstances do not always permit it, but then I enjoyed doing what I did, and I hope that these, both institutions, will really find themselves in the time to come. I know the institution as it is, in fact I have written somewhere about this too. It has not become the kind of institution that we wanted it to become. I wanted it to be a kind of a resource institution, something which will put new life into the whole system and will make people rethink. Now it is an efficient professional school, but that is the same case with Santiniketan. They are not trying to do anything further than that, and of course they always say we do not have the resources to do it and it may be true, but then you will have to raise the resources. The other thing that I find with all these schools is, and this I have recently talked about in a lecture in the memory of Hebbar in Bangalore, in which I have said at one time, and the whole question is do you need these schools at all, because many of the people who are going to these schools, at one time they wanted to learn skills and they wanted to find, come to terms with themselves. They had something to say, but a lot of the training now is in terms of the skills, so how to negotiate with the market. In fact, the market forces have a very big say in what the artists are wanting to do, and they learn more from the market oriented magazines or what is in vogue and what is not in vogue, and they do cultivate the kind of resources to meet the market. To that extent I am very happy about it. I mean they are much better craftsmen than they were aware, but then the whole focus seems to be sort of losing a lot of importance. So if it is that, I mean it’s like a sort of a design school. I mean you want to know your market without sort of putting the dissent through. I mean you are not doing anything exploratory at all, and this is happening even in Santiniketan where the initial attitude was a little utopian. It was, to a certain extent, unveiling of yourself and knowing your personality, coming to terms with it, kind of a thing, which is no more there. I mean it’s at least the young people who are coming there to train. Well, it is probably inevitable, this is the first time that artists are making some money, and who will sort of grant them that? And then if they do not make their market, how will they make their money? Of course they will. But I should think there should be a certain section of this activity should be thinking a little further than that and think of not only making art goods that sell or art goods that please or inform, but also probably think in terms of making a better world than the world is, kind of a thing, a total view of things. Many of them do not have that. The other thing is the thing that I see, is that of course the method of working has changed. Most of these schools now, I mean the way the artists work in these schools also has been affected by the commodity-making process. Formerly when we thought that there was something to learn by handling the material yourself, handling, making everything yourself and making a thing is not only making, it is also thinking with the mind and muscle together kind of a thing. That is no more there. You go to these schools, you find somebody makes a drawing and then makes a sort of a small maquette and gives it to somebody to carve and all, they sign their things on it, and it goes into the art gallery. I heard with some sense of horror that in the bronze casting department that there are very few people who work with their hands. I mean they only make the maquette and give it to others, the specialists to do, which is quite understandable in the craft scene. That was what was done at one time. You make a prototype and it used to be remade and remade. Now, the question is that as far as art object making is going, that’s okay, but art as a sort of a voyage of discovery through your own sensibilities, that kind of a thing, that suffers a little in this, and that voyage of discovery is there, is something that they will have to say is it there or not, and I should think that it is there. You see the world a little better by being intimate with it, intimate with the various aspects of it, feeling it with, seeing it with your eye, feeling it with your hands, things of that kind, which is becoming less and less. They are now almost in a sort of a factory situation.

There was an exhibition here some time back, one of these young artists had brought together a lot of material in terms of books and equipment, things of that kind. He had exhibited it as sort of okay, only these books and all the other pictures you can see, and he had called it LaVa or something of that kind. LaVa means laboratory for aesthetic purposes. So I had mentioned that in that article, saying somebody, then why do you need the school if you can learn everything from books and everything, other material available? It is true, but the whole question is how long will you learn and how much have you to learn? There are many people in this world who have been artists without seeing or opening one book and seeing it, and then they have produced works of art which you find still challenging. So the whole question is you can oversimplify the statement of it. Information itself is not enough. There has to be something which translates it into a kind of a personal life experience. Well, but I can see there is a difference in scene. So it is often diverting, but it’s diverting in the sense that it is being affected by the information technology that is current today. Many of the methods of information, whether it is film or this thing and all, well, the intentions are more specific, like in the case of advertising and things of that kind.
In the case of...?
Advertising, advertising goods. So, if the... it is there. You see, there I find that these people who are doing it and following something very specific, they are livelier than what the artists do. The artists don’t know or don’t analyse that method as well, so sometimes I find those kinds of shots in either film or the other videos much more interesting than the other one. So that is how sometimes the market is more lively than the art gallery. So there is a kind of a give and take in that. So I can see that today the artists are finding new tools, but I only wish that they use the new tools with as much resource as the other people do.

Do you think that drawing is a big issue?
It is for me a big issue, but I don’t know whether it is so to everyone, because I still sort of go with the doodle and the drawing, almost with the same spirit as Leonardo once wanted to say that you discover various things by this doodling, and it happens in my case because from one thing it goes to another, there is a sense of metamorphosis in the way the images flow. For me it’s a great thing, but I don’t know for the others. Many people don’t draw anymore. They make diagrams, but they don’t do this, they don’t grope. Well, we cannot say the last word on all these things. I suppose when the whole wheel of time goes on, people have various kinds of emphasis in their work, and not something, will come out of it. But then this kind of, kind of an easy prolifigacy kind of a thing, making things quickly and more and more in terms of serving a market, but that is true in every field. In fact, I know at one time we used to think that the book publishing trade will probably sort of cease when you thought the electronic projection and things, but then it hasn’t. In fact, you are completely smothered by the tons of books that come out every day, and each book is becoming bulkier and bulkier. I mean it strains my wrist when I sort of lift some of them. Then the other thing is that if you go through a whole book, it takes a lot of time, but what they have to say should have been said in the first 10 pages. But then they have all kinds of verbiage that they clothe it in, so it is very, very difficult. I don’t know whether it is a good thing or a bad thing. It is a good thing for the book publisher. It is not so good for me because I do not have that much time.

Part of the Baroda project was not to have just art history but to have critical studies, and that seems to have been lost both in Baroda, and perhaps more generally in India?
I know, it is true. It is quite true. The whole idea is that when the art criticism thing started, of course it did not have all the kind of necessary resources for that because the first thing is that there are two or three kinds of criticism we can think about. One is somebody, sort of a criticism that leads onto connoisseurship but in a certain way of creation, what is better than what and that kind of a thing, then criticism that puts various works of art in a kind of lineal succession, that this goes from this to this. Then that is historical criticism. Then there can be another kind of a thing which is explanatory that with all these resources behind, what are the other tendencies going and all? Really speaking we started it, but then the general framework was not enough. I mean, there was some amount of effort at analysing the work, for putting it in a kind of a perspective, and sort of finding out the building blocks kind of. But then when Markand Bhatt started the whole thing, he had built it on certain premises which were rather primitive. That is the Branes Foundation’s premises. They generalised everything, they compared a Titian painting to a Cézanne still life and things of that kind, and that all on the basis of black and white photographs, so, which was ridiculous. But later it didn’t develop, and there was a great resistance even within the university in the academic council. They thought that criticism cannot be taught because criticism needs tools from various disciplines and then you will have to put it all together. That is how, and then critics did not have a job opening at all, so that is why they went into history. So at least history, sort of people trained in history, will be put in the museums or will be put in the schools to teach criticism and the history of art. So slowly criticism sort of wiped out and art history came in. But then even if it is art history, I suppose there should be an amount, a sort of a section of it which gives a lot of importance to criticism, what are the critical tools? Unfortunately, nowadays, these things are also governed by certain trends. Most of the critics want to find out whether it is modern or postmodern, colonial or postcolonial, and there are certain sort of terminologies which are floating always all around, whether it is construction or deconstruction, or whether well, what are the various biases? Is it gender bias or sex bias? Now, the whole question is that these might be elements that govern your final judgement, but then making a whole thesis out of the whole thing, I think doesn’t make much sense to me. But then here I am prepared to accept that I am an old-fashioned man. I don’t want to complicate things with these terminologies.

In the late ’60s and early ’70s, the first distinguished writer, in my view at least, on contemporary Indian art emerged, Geeta Kapur, partly from the Baroda content. I mean that’s where she was situated. What did you feel about all of that at that moment?
Well, at that moment it all sounded very promising, but the whole question is that it didn’t continue that way. First of all, all those people who, I mean it had been probably even the world critical scene, at one time, at that time, you had some very perceptive critics who started as artists and went into criticism, even in the West. Now, I still think in terms of Doré Ashton and then who else?
Leo Steinberg.
All these people, but then it hasn’t continued, and then the recent criticism, they still are trying to sort of find a kind of global place for themselves. I mean that is where the whole problem is. In fact, why have you to think in terms of kind of a global rating of everything? You do not need to. Each culture can have its own premises, and you try to refine those premises to the extent you can and give more attention to that instead of thinking what happens in New York and Chicago and things of that kind, or London for that matter. So unfortunately this is what happened there. Attention has gone global and I think so that attention is again covered up with a lot of pomposity of expression rather than otherwise, not clarity, but pomposity. But anyway, that... I like seminars which sort of clarify ideas, but I know most of the seminars don’t. I mean they are just sort of talk shops, so many of these people go from seminar to seminar and finally nothing comes through. So it has become a trade by itself.

Is it too difficult to talk about, say, Geeta Kapur’s book about you?
Really speaking, when Geeta wrote that she asked me whether I want to go through the text. I said I don’t. If you are writing a book on me, you have the freedom to say whatever you want. She had made some kind of a statement which I do not dispute. In fact, I like to think that 10 different people will think 10 different ways about my work, and probably all that will have something to contribute to my own thinking. But I certainly think that I am happy that she wrote a thing on me rather than somebody else. I mean who would not - in fact, there are so many people writing, Ella Datta or somebody writes on me, which doesn’t have any reference to me. Geeta is a little more sensitive and she has known me better sort of a thing, and she has known the scene better. So to that extent I am very happy with her, and then whenever I talk with her during the casual encounters I have, I still find her very likeable.

You have written that at bottom, art renders visual experience. Would you stand by it?
I stand by it in the sense that if the visual experience is not meant to mean only things that you see with the naked eye, because there are various other kinds of visual experiences that may be in dreams we see various things, and then we imagine various things as we see them. So in that sense if you broaden it out I stand by it because this kind of cross reference to what you see, either by the eye or in the mind, this connection with the art is what gives it life. For me, that is why even if you are thinking in terms of the most abstract kind of works, again you do not enjoy it without its reference to something you have seen in the visual world, or something you can relate it to in the visual world. So I still stand by that, if you sort of broaden the reference, yes.
But it is striking that in that large book of sketches, scribbles, drawings, there aren’t any drawings straight from... perceptual drawing.
That’s right, there isn’t.  In fact, probably it is a kind of habit that I have come into through observing my teachers. Really Nandalal used to be one of the persons who wanted to draw from life, but he drew from life only small little scribbles. Then he developed then, even all his landscapes look so real, but they are all done like that. I mean he sort of more or less takes the general motive while he sees a thing, then he develops it, and later he has developed a kind of a theory saying that that’s a kind of mind image that he has which if he does day to day it will have sort of new things coming through, even from that kind. On the other side, the other teacher I owe a lot to at that time was Benode Bihari. Really he had to sort of negotiate what he saw. With his kind of eyesight he couldn’t see things which were very far. He could see things which are near quite well, and even then he had to take his eye very close to it. And between what he saw from near and what he saw in another place, I mean he had to work out a kind of system, and they all did it that way. So I also tried to do it that way and it became easier. The other thing probably was that I felt very uneasy to make somebody sit, or sit before a thing and do the thing straight away. And even when I tried in the beginning as a student, I thought I got certain things in which should not have been there and I couldn’t get the whole motif or what do you call it. In fact, here I can probably refer to something Nandalal told me when I was still in the first or second year. I was at that time a kind of a tireless sketcher. I used to go round and fill sketchbooks full of things. So one day he wanted to see what I was doing, so I showed him. Then I thought that I did very well. I put in whatever I could get into the sketches. Then he looked at them and said you see, they are good. I mean you have done a lot of work, I am very pleased with it. They look a little like a launder’s list. You have enumerated everything, but then you have probably missed something that way, you have put in too much. Then he used to always sketch a lot while moving around. He used to always have in his pocket a little bottle of ink with a brush in it, and also a lot of cards. He said I will give you something with which you may try to write, and he gave me a stubby piece of charcoal. He said now you draw with it. I tried that, and I saw the major change already. So I have mentioned it in one of my lectures saying that how, what we see and what we do of things we see, there is always an intermediary, like the tools we use and this sort of a thing, apart from the mind and the way of vision. So, I have always done so, even in the case, all these Chinese sketchbooks. I had a sort of a pad in which I used to try to recall what all I saw in the evening, but then they were not complete sketches, only some notes. All these were done after I returned to India, all those things. And so in the meanwhile I had noticed many of the images that went into my experience of China, and it came out reasonably well. I didn’t have to throw away too many. Of course I do throw away sketches when they do not come to represent what I want to. Even when I sort of prepare for a painting, I cannot follow an initial drawing on the canvas, I always go on changing them, and then maybe it goes, the changes may go a long way, almost to seem that it is another painting that I am doing, that I do. But that exercise is very satisfying.
 

My paintings probably are influenced from certain kind of images I get from traditional painting sort of a thing, the space system, except in the case of let’s say Chinese landscape, I mean the kind of space there is in Chinese landscape. Well, there is a kind of a fluid kind of space which you rarely see in modern Chinese landscape, which you see only in traditional Chinese landscape, in paintings. If you think in terms of, I mean in my, in the way that I read these things, a lot of Indian painting, the space that you work on is a kind of flat space in which you arrange various incidents of life. It doesn’t have that kind of built up space of this kind. So naturally it covers a lot of ground, flat ground, and that often happens in what I do. While what I see in a kind of traditional European painting, well I see that there is this depth and this stretch together, this three dimensional thing which, it happens in my painting, it happens in bits and pieces. So that is why it is a kind of a multi perspective thing that I generally built up, and like you say, sometimes they are quite crowded.

My Oxford paintings, the use of an old man figure in my painting, it started earlier than I went to Oxford. I suppose at some stage I suddenly felt that after I went to Santiniketan, that age has its own advantages. It gives you a certain kind of a room in which to distance yourself from things, and that kind of a distancing probably, it makes you see the world a little differently, remote, but the world outside becomes more vivid. Then suddenly, I got reminded to something I had read I think in Dostoevsky’s Idiot or somewhere. Well, there is an old man he talks to, an old cleric, who is on the verge of death, but he says that I see life as sharp as diamonds now, that everything glows. So I did a series of paintings like the old man looks at life which is full of colour and activity, and a kind of senselessness which he thinks he is distanced from, but then he enjoys seeing. That is how the Inayat Khan thing came to mind, because Inayat Khan, though he was meant to represent physical decay because of his rakishness, but then sort of the body has wasted but the eyes are sharp, kind of thing. So that, I started doing those series without fully knowing that the original was there in the Ashmolean Collection.
Do you want to say a little about that?
Huh?
Explain a little about Inayat Khan.
Then the whole idea is that suddenly the way I looked at Oxford, and I was not there for a very long time so I couldn’t say that I felt Oxford in my blood, but then I saw the scenes of Oxford with great pleasure, the landscape, the streets, and the really sort of various kinds of those cats. In fact, the first time I could see that cats could have so many kinds of sometimes frightening personalities. The cats here are too slick and sort of, and they are, even in spite of their wanting to, very elegant, but there they can be quite awe-inspiring kind of cats, and that street was full of cats. They used to be crowded with cats in the morning. Then the kind of buildings, I mean they also, I mean very unlike the buildings we see, and they are not all bathed in sunlight as here all the time, but still they had their own sun, and all those landscape drawings I have done again are not done from life. I mean they are all reconstructed in the studio. But then I used to go round and see a lot of them, and the landscape certainly, because it is a different kind of landscape than here where there is a great variety of foliage and things of that kind, the Oxford landscape. Because Susheela was not in good health I didn’t travel around very much there, which I wanted to at that time, even though many people made me offers to come here and let us go, but I couldn‘t do that. But anyway, for 6 months, Oxford was enough for me.
That is a whole vein of social comedy which...
That is there, that is partly what I got from reading the papers or seeing the films. Comedy and innocence tragedy, in fact one or two of them are related to things that came in the news. One is the suicide of a cleric who had spoken against the Archbishop of Canterbury and apparently he was a highly learned man and highly thought of. He was probably teaching religion somewhere, and he probably criticised them, but he was cold-shouldered by all his, all the people around, that he got depressed and killed his cat and killed himself and his body was found. So I did a park with this dead man in there. Similarly, there was another feature which came out of I think they are talking about the assaults of children, I mean infantile sort of, and then I sort of did something like Peter and the Wolf so that this discovery that children could be used as sex objects, and when it is widely there, now the whole question, every child will be thinking there is a wolf in any shadow he sees. So, like that there are one or two, and the third one is what I captioned later called Ethiopian Nativity. That came out of I think on the Christmas Eve, they wanted to raise money for Ethiopia, and there was a programme on the TV saying all the funny actors of the TV here, they will make people laugh throughout the whole night, and then ask them to donate money. It sounded a little awkward to me. There on one side Ethiopians were dying of starvation, which was bad enough, then here to make money to alleviate their suffering you had to make them laugh throughout the whole night and on New Year’s Eve [sic]. So, that nativity painting came after that, not that it had any direct reference to this, except that it shows in the background people coming with aid to them. Certain of those things had that, and then I remember that when the whole thing was shown, you thought that my featuring cats had some reference to St Catherine’s College. I remember that. But then of course that was unintentional. I didn’t even know Catherine’s people were called ‘cats’.
Do you remember that occasion when a feminist asked you what exactly is your attitude to women? Do you remember that?
No.
Do you remember what your reply was?
That I don’t remember.
Shall I tell you? 
Yes.
There was a long pause and you said, ‘I am obsessed’. 
In fact, some of the critics here after seeing my painting, they even go to the extent of saying I am a misogynist, I hate women, which is not true, but then what can you do? Different people have different readings.

How I met Somnath Hore is in a very strange way. I didn’t know him in the beginning, for a long time, though he was elder to me, and he had been an artist on the scene much earlier than I was. I met him in Delhi. I was returning after doing a mural in Lucknow on what was called the Rabindralaya, that is the Rabindra Memorial Theatre, which showed a terracotta mural on the front. Then while I had photographs of them and while coming back I was staying for a night in a friend’s house and there, Somnath was there. He was at that time teaching in the art department of the Delhi Polytechnic. Somehow, we took to each other very soon. I think the next day I was still in town and I went to his studio, he showed what he was doing, then I found that he was a man who was completely taken up with doing his own work, and he lived almost like a sort of a poor man, by conviction. I mean it’s true, he was not earning very much, but then I later came to know that it was also because he started as a Marxist, and he wanted to live and even wear clothes like an ordinary worker. And it, I mean I was very much impressed by a certain man’s determination and a sort of a devotion to a certain ideology. Then I found that he had a very sensitive way to draw things, and a kind of a sense of tragedy in whatever he saw, and that continued throughout his life. Of course I sometimes used to think isn’t he overdoing it a little? He called all his works wounds, and all this came out of his experience of working for the Marxist Party when the peasants were trying to claim their rights and were beaten down by the landlords. That was even before he went to the art school and started studying art. Recently those sketchbooks have been published by The Seagull. When I did the, when I went to Santiniketan and showed him photographs of these terracottas I had done, then he was terribly struck by them. He said I am also trying to do something, so he was at that time doing what they call pulp prints on the surface of moulded cement, and then sort of showing them as graphics. But on the side he was also trying to work in wax, and what did he, what work he did in wax came in a certain sense close to what I was doing with clay. So that attracted him to my work in clay, and it was the time when Bangladesh became independent. He was a Bangladeshi, he came from Chittagong, he spent all his childhood there. He had close friends in Bangladesh, in fact, one Brigadier Osman, who was behind the movement as one of the men of their kind of an organised militia. He used to come and visit him apparently from time to time, under cover. Then he made an offer, will you give me a photograph of one of your murals which I thought you have done it at the time of this Bangladesh war, whether they would like to use it for a memorial. Then he did give the thing but it didn’t come through, and I know even if it had come through I would not have been able to do it there by translating what I did in clay into bronze. But thereafter I thought that he was a sort of a special person, and he was very unwilling to travel from where he was, and he and his wife were greatly concerned about each other’s health. Then I brought him somehow to Baroda and he spent about 3 months here later. At the beginning he came for a few days, then he liked the place, then he came for 3 months, and he did a lot to tone up the activities in the graphics studio. Then, when I went to Santiniketan in ’80, he became my close, close friend, and we always sat together and discussed various things, and our associations were long and quite intimate. Even today when I go there, I visit his wife, who is not in terribly good health, and his daughter has become an artist of some value. She is a young one who studied there. She has some kind of success now. I really miss him. I mean he died only about a year back, or two back. When I go there I do miss him. That kind of company I can’t get with anybody else. He was very shy. He deserved many awards, but he always shied off any offer. So I remember when there was an LJ Gupta Award offered by the LJ Gupta Trust in Hyderabad, I was on the committee and I said this is one man who should get the award, and people agreed with me. When I told him that you have got the award, will you go, he said no, no, my health is too bad, I cannot go. I had to almost push him off and he went and received the award, and while coming back he said travelling is not that terribly bad. Then in the next 2 months I think he decided to go and have a trip and see the Sanchi stupas with his wife and all. But then to get him into that mode, it took some effort. He was a very nice man, and he was a great influence on us, and if there is some kind of special quality amongst the printmakers of Bengal, his influence has been considerable. He is the only person that I have known in printmaking, the quality of whose prints concept level of the best in spite of his not going, knowing... going out of the country or knowing Hayter and things, people of that kind.

Well, Jogen Chowdhury, I liked his work quite a lot at one time, and then he was in the wrong place as a curator of the Rashtrapati Bhawan Museum and then I tried to get him into the academic field twice in Benares, in the university, which didn’t come through due to certain sort of official resistance there, but finally we got him into Santiniketan, and by that time I had retired. He is still there. He is quite an active person. I probably think that he is a highly talented person, but his works are terribly uneven of late. He used to do a certain kind of a sense fully sort of prurient sort of kind of painting at one time, but then, now he wants to do something openly sort of cutting out into the other side, which he is not probably the right person to do. But the good thing about him is that he is a great influence on the youngsters. I mean he encourages them, so as a teacher he has been quite successful. Maybe he doesn’t give them the ideas of how to discipline themselves, but he does give them a lot of push and enthusiasm, and then the other thing is that he is somebody who can get along with various people. In fact, in a place like Santiniketan, he is trying to get a kind of institution where its studio facilities where the young people can come and work, and he is the man behind the whole thing. Whenever I meet him I like him very much, but the whole idea is that he keeps too busy. So last time I said I think you should help yourself up a little and not become a man of the world so much. But I like him very much, yes, I am among those people.

Siva Kumar, is – I think, in my opinion – among the young art historians. He is one of the best we have in this country, because he wanted to study art but then somehow it chanced that he was selected for art history and not art, and he was in Kala Bhavan’s art history department when I went there from here, and he sought to help me in everything that I did there. So in a sense our close association has worked both ways. He has been a great help to me, and various things that I didn’t want to do with my publications and proof read them and things of that kind, he always used to do. On the other hand, I think formally he used to be a little Geeta Kapurish in his writing, but it has opened out now. It is simpler, it’s more lucid, and I suppose he is going to be one of the noted historians of his time. The only one thing that I regret is that he hasn’t, due to some reason or the other, had a chance to go and see the other parts of the world long enough. Of late, he has had two sort of short visits to the United States, and also in connection with some exhibition or the other. But he is some person who can probably do a lot more if he spends some time outside and saw the various collections and what they do and interacted with people there. I don’t see any other person, I mean within the country. I mean probably without the country there are many Indians are doing sort of a solid study. I don’t know too much about them, but within the country he is one of the best that I can think of, and I am very grateful to him that every time that there is something I have to do, in fact my retrospective, he curated and he edited the catalogue. He did all the, even now, many of my books. I mean he tries to help me in putting together all the things. I do not find the energy enough to do all that. So to a certain extent our relations are terribly intimate, and he has a wonderful wife. Whenever I go to Santiniketan she thinks that it is her duty to supply me Kerala breakfast and she cooks and sends her husband with the breakfast early in the morning at 7:30. And now I see he has a bright son who is coming up who is studying there, he will be finishing school soon. Well, that’s how things are. At the moment, immediately, she is not in good health. She had I think some malignancy in her breast, so she is under treatment, but she will come through.

When somebody asked me about the kind of, I mean, you shouldn’t say role models, about the people who inspire my ideas or let us say clear or widen, clarify or widen my horizons. It is on one side Tagore and another Mahatma Gandhi. They have been an influence on my life from my early years. It is true that when you think in terms of them in their totality with all their idiosyncrasies, I probably don’t agree with everything that they did or said, but still they were larger than life figures and their thought is much more comprehensive than the thought of many other people that I have known. In fact, Mahatma Gandhi said or did various things which are, which any young man of my generation would have questioned, but then he roused the whole nation into a position of strength. I mean, that nobody can deny. Not only that, he made common people very uncommon in their activity. In fact, I remember having read somewhere, though I cannot locate the context or the kind of document where I read it, but Gandhi had first come and he was in Bombay. Then I wonder who was then the British Governor, he found that he had three close friends. One was Horniman who edited The Bombay Chronicle, then another was I think one Jhaveri, who was a rich man who dealt in diamonds and jewellery, and another was Bhulabhai Desai, who was a lawyer, an established lawyer. In fact, there is a Bhulabhai Desai Road in Bombay now. Now, the governor wrote a clever letter to Gandhi saying that look, you are a saintly person, you are the man who is trying to purify politics, but your associates are not that good. One of them can be seen in the red light district every evening, another is a boy chaser, and the third one is a drunkard. So, how do you explain your association with them? Then apparently Gandhi wrote to them, actually wrote to him back that well, you see, I cannot make people better than they are, but the only little ambition I have is get all people together with all their defects and at least they act in the right direction in one context, and that is good enough for me. Now, that kind of an attitude of a man like this was a great thing. I mean sort of, that is how he was able to transform the whole country, and many people. And of course it was the occasion too, I remember my mother telling me at one time when I was 6 years old and I was ill and delirium, and when my fever went down and I was out of my delirium, she said you said a strange thing. It was the time when Gandhi was on a long fast, and I seem to have asked her whether he has broken his fast or not. But for a boy of 6 to know much about Gandhi is inconceivable, but it is also true that he was in everyone’s minds. My mother had no pretences to know politics or even talk, think about the independence of India and things of that kind, but Gandhi was there all the time. So Gandhi was almost part of Indian atmosphere at the time that we grew up. The great thing about Gandhi that I came to realise later, in spite of his certain idiosyncrasies, was that for every question his sort of solution, he wanted to make that small question be answered by a very big solution. That is, if India wanted to get independence, that was only a small thing, but it has to get independence in a way that the Indians will be better persons than they were. He didn’t want to sort of fuel animosities, he didn’t want to hate the foreigner who sort of ruled over you, but he wanted that when the problem was solved, everyone will be better than they were. And in fact, in the world of today when we have so many problems and it is terrorised by a group of sort of headless youngsters, this is the only thing we can think of, and the same thing was in the case of Tagore. Tagore thought in terms of his institution, because it is not that he didn’t see that there were so many institutions trying to do things and educate people well and make them efficient, but he thought that was not enough. In fact, any education should make men who have the dreams of making the world a little better than it was, making life a little more beautiful, and doing things which will rouse the creativity which is in each one’s heart, and he used to firmly believe that each one can be creative to a certain extent. I mean even the man in the street, if he is put in the right circumstances, he can be creative, and that was the intention he had when he started this institution. So these two people are, I can’t say role models, they were mentors of a kind, under whose shadow I feel comfortable.
