martin.raff

Martin Raff is a Canadian-born neurologist and research biologist who has made important contributions to immunology and cell development. He has a special interest in apoptosis, the phenomenon of cell death. Recently retired from his professorship at University College, London, these stories were recorded in 2000.

So when I was a child my interest was almost 100% sport. I lived it, I played it, every minute of every day. I went to bed with a football in my hand, or a hockey stick. I mean, there wasn’t a moment when sport wasn’t dominating my life, until I was in my late teens and into my 20s, so there was no question of science in my life. When it came time after I finished my science degree, a degree in… did a degree in… a bachelor degree in science, I mean, that wasn’t really science. I did history and English and philosophy and blah-blah-blah. I did a little science. I did physics and maths, but basically it was a humanities dominated degree.
I went into medicine because my father was a doctor and all my friends were going into medicine. I didn’t have that much interest in it. I didn’t know anything really about it. I’d done almost no biology, I’d done very little bioscience at all, but I went into medicine. Now, to me this was terrific because all of this was new. I didn’t even know where my heart was, let alone what my heart did. The only biology I had in school was they taught us how to brush our teeth when I was about six years old. I’m not kidding. We had no choice. There was no option to do biology at any time until I entered university and I chose not to do it at university, for whatever reason.
So I’m one of those people who fell into science. There was no curiosity really, deep curiosity about how the world works at all. So how did I get in… Oh, I should say something more, is that I felt I hated science and was no good at it because the only experience I had was in laboratories as an undergraduate and as a medical student. So I’d done chemistry labs and physics labs and physiology labs, biochem… and I never knew what the hell was going on. I never understood what the purpose of these labs were. I hated them, as did most of the other people in these labs.
So they’re not only useless I would say, because they go on today indistinguishable from the way they were then, they’re actively destructive. They are actually telling people you don’t like science, you’re no good at science, and the odd part is that this isn’t science at all. What these labs are have nothing to do with science. You’re not trying to discover how the world works. You’re trying to discover what your teacher has put on the paper as the right answer. That isn’t science, for god’s sake, and that’s why these laboratories were so awful and destructive and why people come out like me thinking that science is awful and not for me and I’m no good at it.
So when I came to Britain, I came to get shot of the Vietnam War and I thought I’d go into a lab for two years, have a great time in Europe and go back into a clinical neurology department in the States. That was the plan. But then I get into this lab and this is wonderful. I mean, I go home at night and I’m thinking about what does all this mean? It was just like diving into a fresh lake when you’ve been walking through a desert for a year.
Secondly, my colleagues, instead of being gung-ho warmongers as many of my medical friends seemed to be during this war – you know, we ought to nuke these Vietnamese because they’re putting us to shame – suddenly all these people thought the way I thought, so you find yourself among soulmates. So this was just too wonderful, and… and Europe… coming to Britain was the first time I really felt at home. I don't know what it was, but it just… this was where I belonged. So it was Europe, it was science, it was soulmates and, yeah, I became a scientist at age 30 overnight with no background.
In fact, I had an anti-background. As I was saying, I had a medical education which is the worst, certainly among the worst educations I think you can have for science. So I just happened to end up with a spectacularly good mentor that was perfect for me and in a very rich environment that enabled me to… to thrive very, very quickly. That was a fluke, it really had very little to do with me. That whole… all the early success just fell into place with very little contribution from me, so it was just luck, absolute luck, and if I had been almost anywhere else my suspicion is I’d be a neurologist today in the United States of America, probably with several myocardial infarcts behind me by this time.

You know, people in science break down into those who want to do science from the time they were three months old to those who just fell into it. Well, I’m in the second category, I fell into it when I was 30 years old. So I had done medicine at McGill in Montreal and then did clinical neurology in Boston, and I was in Boston as an immigrant because I thought I might want to stay in the United States. And this was at the time of the Vietnam War, which is a pretty awful time, and they changed the draft law while I was there which meant…
So I was about 30 years old and I would’ve had to go to Vietnam because as an immigrant you had no alternatives, not like Americans who could join the reserves, the National Guard, or go to the public health service and so on, so that meant I had to… I left the country as soon as I heard this was going to happen. Left the country, turned in my green card, came back as an immigrant… as a exchange visitor, so then I had to leave at the end of my training.
So now I had to find a place and something to do for two years, and so when you do academic medicine you go into a laboratory usually for two years. So I’d never done any science so I met a friend in the hallway in Boston and said, you know, what should I do, I should go into a lab? He said, ‘You should do immunology, I did immunology, great subject’. I didn’t even know what it was really and, he said, ’I’ll fix you up with a friend of mine in Paris’. And he called up this guy and within a day I had a spot and a salary to go to Paris. Anyway, so I was telling this to some friends a month or so later and he was a physicist and he sent me this article that was in Science Magazine where it was a review of what’s going on in immunology and it sounded like all of it was happening in London at this place called the National Institute for Medical Research in Mill Hill.
And so I went to this friend, the immunologist, and I said, ‘Well, sounds like I should go to London to this place, sounds like a great place’. He said, ‘You’ll never get in there, I know friends who’ve tried.  You know, Medawar is there and John Humphrey, you’ll never get in’. So I looked at this article, I couldn’t understand a word of it, but I went for the person where I could understand least, a guy called Av Mitchison, and I wrote to him and said, ‘You know, I don't know anything about science or immunology but this sounds really interesting’. And he, being the type of guy he was said, ‘Okay, I’m coming to Boston, let’s talk’. And, anyway, I ended up going there.

This happened to be the centre of the immunological universe at that time. So many exciting things were happening right there in that institute with just wonderful people, and I just fell into this. So it was kind of a weird situation because I went into this place knowing no science – it’s not a university, it’s a research institute so no one around me was in this position of knowing nothing and I’d never been in that situation. You know, usually you could look and see half the people know less than you and that’s sort of comforting, but here there were no other fools, I was alone. It was very anxiety producing.
But, anyway, I was given a project by my mentor, Av Mitchison, who turned out to be just a fantastic guy, very unusual, a brilliant scientist and I couldn’t understand a word he said. I mean, every time he would talk to me I’d have to go in the library for an hour trying to figure out what he was saying. So this was very tough-going, but he gave me a project that turned to gold. Within six or nine months we had something that really worked, that was important, that… the idea was to use antibodies to distinguish different classes of lymphocytes.
And at the time it was just the beginnings that one realised there were more than one kind of white blood cell involved in the immune response, but you couldn’t distinguish them because they all looked the same, these lymphocytes all looked the same. So his idea was to use antibodies to try to distinguish the two major classes called T and B cells, and… and it worked and we had this tool immediately that enabled us to distinguish these cells and study them in a way that nobody else could.
So within a year I was in this position of just having a very powerful tool and so the incentive to learn immunology was enormous, because to figure out what I was doing I had to learn fast. So within a year or so I was an expert in immunology and it just taught me the importance of motivation, because before I’d come I’d read a couple of books on immunology, that was a complete waste of time, I didn’t remember anything, I didn’t learn anything, but here within weeks I was learning fast because I had to.

Av Mitchison, my mentor, didn’t put his name on the first paper on this subject that was accepted finally in Nature.  So here was… he had actually started this project, it was his idea, he had started raising the antibodies before I got there, but he wouldn’t put his name on the paper. As a result of that, I became an international figure in immunology because of this one paper that I was the sole author. So… this wasn’t an exception for Mitchison, I mean, he did this over and over again with students and postdocs and it just had a huge impact on their careers. You see this very rarely done today and, anyway, it was… it was very important to me.
So after I’d been here for, I guess a year and a half… had been at Mill Hill for a year and a half, Mitchison was offered the chair of zoology at this university, University College London, and decided to take it. So one night he asked me, he said, ‘If, you know… if you ever decided you wanted to stay in science and stay in Britain, it’d be great to have you’. And so that night I decided, cut out all this medicine stuff, become a scientist because I’d done eight, ten years of medicine and I’d only done a year and a half of science so, you know, I was now 31 years old, it was not an obvious thing to do but, anyway, the smartest thing I ever did.
And so we moved to here and it was Mitchison’s idea to say, you know, you’ve spent all that time doing neurology, maybe you should use the same kind of approach to study cells of the nervous system, you know, make antibodies to distinguish one type of cell in the nervous system from another, and so we wrote a grant to do that. Neither of us knew anything really about the science of the nervous system.  I mean clinical training is quite different from science. In fact, it’s a terrible training for science really because in clinical medicine you’re always looking back and comparing a patient to what others have seen and said and wrote, and comparing what you’re seeing to that. In science it’s the exact opposite; whatever you see, you’re trying to see it differently, in a way no one’s ever seen it. So the training in medicine… I mean, you really have to get rid of all that way of looking at the world and dealing with it, and so my own view is that medicine really is a very poor training for science and I… if I had to do it again, I would two years of medicine so that you learn how your body works and what to take seriously and what not to take seriously, and it’s enormously helpful for life but useless for science in my view.
Anyway, we did that… I did that. I started making antibodies in the cells of the nervous system and basically it didn’t work. I mean, we tried this for years and it didn’t work, and finally we got our first breakthrough and began to be able to use antibodies to dissect cells in the nervous system, but it was very tough-going and switching fields was also very tough-going. The system doesn’t make it easy to do it. We should make it a hell of a lot easier because history tells you switching fields is tremendously creative. Because in science, as I said, what you’re trying to do is always see things in a way no one’s ever seen it before because you’re always seeing it in a way that isn’t right. You don’t know enough to see it right so you’re trying to always change your perspective, and it’s… it’s very hard to do, but it’s much easier if you move from one field to another because now you come into the new field without all this baggage of traditional way of seeing it and you bring a new way of looking at the subject.
So my moving from immunology to neurobiology I think took a hell of a long time. It was hard, but I think it was very useful in the end. Feynman used to say wouldn’t go to meetings, wouldn’t read journals because all this dogma coming at you, how everybody is seeing the world, it’s very hard to fight your way out of that and see it differently. So one way of doing it is moving from one field to another, and I’ve done that probably four or five times in my career.

Jim Watson’s view is if, I think it was Jim, if you want… you want to be a great scientist, do important, great science, and although that seems absurd, the point in science is to try to do something important early. The earlier, the better. Because if you make a discovery, there’s no other way to gain the confidence that you can make a discovery, because when you find something… So when I told you about that first year when we made a discovery that was, actually turned out to be quite important, it took me months before I could see that this was an important discovery, because how could I have made an important discovery, it makes no sense. If I made it, others must have already made it, or probably it’s wrong because I made it. So the only way to get the confidence to know that just because you found it doesn’t mean it’s wrong or that somebody else must’ve found it… is to do it.
So my advice, I guess to a young scientist is to put yourself in a position where your chances of making a discovery that’s of note is greatest. So that means going to a place where you will be given enough freedom to make a discovery; you’re not simply being used as a pair of hands by the lab chief. To my mind that’s absolutely fundamental. You have to be given enough freedom to make a discovery for yourself that you know it’s your discovery and you can gain the confidence from that and that’s… that turns out not often to be the case. Too many young scientists in their training period are being told what to do and their mentor is doing the interpreting and writing the papers and so on, and I think that’s… that’s a bit dangerous.

It took me months to realise that this was an important discovery. In fact, I didn’t realise it. The truth of it is, the embarrassing truth is that somebody had to tell me at lunch. You know, I was describing these experiments and saying, you know, I was given this project and I’ve done this, I’ve done this, I’ve done this and, you know, I’m now going to do that. He says, ‘Well, it sounds like you’ve nailed it’. This is a colleague, this friend. ‘It sounds like… I mean, what else could it be?’ And I said, ‘Well, yes, it does… does seem sort of convincing, but I… you know, how could it possibly be? I mean, I’ve only been doing this for nine months or a year. I mean, how could it possibly be?’
And so it took somebody else telling me that this was really important and probably right and you had enough, stop and write the damn thing. That is what I needed. So, yeah, I think it’s not that straightforward.  And some people never get it, I can tell you. They will never gain the confidence. Even if they make the discovery, they just don’t have enough self-confidence to state it, write it. Because once it’s in the record, it’s in the record, and if you’re wrong, it doesn’t look so good. So, yeah, you want to be careful, and…
But my own view is, so I… to come back to the question of advice to a young scientist, one thing I think that’s very important is to interpret your experiments, your results in the boldest way you can and get away with it. So you want to make it seem as important as you possibly can and not be cautious. Caution is a mistake. You don’t want to get the facts wrong, the data have to be right, but the interpretation is your right and there I think everything says be bold. Be bold. Make it as important as you possibly can.
And, you know, if the interpretation is wrong, there… it’s always wrong in detail because you never know enough. But if you make it bold so that people will read it and pay attention and their heart will start to race, often they’ll get angry and they’ll want to show you’re wrong, so that’s exactly what you want. You want other people to pay attention and try to show you’re wrong, because otherwise you’re going to spend the rest of life trying to show you’re wrong. It’s better to get more people involved trying to show you’re wrong, because you’re always wrong in detail, so… anyway, so that’s an important piece of advice that I think most scientists wouldn’t give to young scientists. There’s no point giving them advice that [unclear]… everybody else gives them. Give them advice that they’re not going to get from… from others.

He’s part of a dynasty that’s pretty amazing. His… his uncle was JBS Haldane who is one of Britain’s most eminent ever scientist… geneticist. His mother was Naomi, the novelist who died at 101 just a year or two ago. He has two brothers that are professors in life sciences, all famous scientists. He has a son, Tim, who’s one of the outstanding young cell biologists now in San… now in Boston, was in San Francisco for a long time. So this is a very unusual dynasty of creative scientists and Av is eccentric. I suppose they’re all eccentric. JBS was certainly eccentric.
I read a biography of JBS after I’d been with Av for a year or two and it was like a description of Av. I mean, they were so similar, quite remarkable, and both remarkably eccentric. But Av is brilliant, a great sense of humour, and just to give you a type of thing he would do, we were up in the animal room once taking thymus glands out of mice and he had just had a technician starting and you could see that she was very squeamish about all this, you know, cutting open a mouse, taking out the thymus. And just to make her see how trivial this all was he took a test tube full of these thymuses and went… one gulp, all the thymuses down, and this poor technician just about passed out.
But he was unusual in many ways, not only was he remarkably generous with his students and postdocs in that he wouldn’t put his name on their papers unless he had done many of the experiments so that many outstanding students of his, you wouldn’t even know they were students of his. I mean, I think he and I published I think one paper together, whereas in that era where he was my mentor I must’ve published 25 papers and only one with his name. So in history you would have trouble tracing me to Mitchison, even though he was my only mentor and taught me everything I know about how science works.
The other thing about him that I think is pretty unusual is when I started quite early in the game and had this antibody that was a very powerful tool, I would say the major competitor to the Mitchison lab from Australia came to visit and, as often happens in these visits, he went around and talked to the various scientists in the lab and he asked me, you know, what I’m doing and I hadn’t published anything on this subject and I was… I was a little uncomfortable.
So I went to Av and I said, ‘Look, he’s asking me what I’m doing, do I tell him everything?’ He said, ‘Oh yeah, you tell him absolutely everything’. I said, ‘But, you mean, even stuff that I’m not even ready to write up?’ He said, ‘Yes, you tell him absolutely everything, you’ll learn something, he’s a great scientist’. Anyway, so I tell him everything, and after I told him everything you could see he was getting very excited because this was a tool that would enable him to do many things. He said, ‘So now could I get some of this antibody?’ I said, ‘Well, I’d better go ask my mentor, I don’t actually know’. So I went and asked Av, he says, ‘Yes, absolutely, give him whatever you can’. So I gave him the antibody. Now, I can tell you that none of these things are instinctive behaviours. The instinct is to not tell and the instinct is not to give, not to share reagents because you’re losing a competitive advantage, and therefore you have to be taught to share and to talk about your results early.
And I can tell you it paid off just so enormously for me because by talking about it widely long before I published it, I was getting feedback from people so that by the time I published it, I had had criticism and honed down the arguments. And by sending antibody around to everybody who wanted it, I was getting results back from all these labs doing things that I could never have done. You know, I was only one pair of hands, but here all these labs were using the antibody and checking it out in this system and that system.
So I can’t tell you how important it is in science to talk about what you’re doing early, before you publish, and give out every reagent as early as possible, even before you publish. And yet, the instinct is not to and most people don’t, so this is something that has to be taught and Av is one of the great teachers of this and I think had a very big impact on immunology early on in this way, opening it up and making it fun. The whole process moves so much faster if it’s open in this way and this is even greater problem today when there’s money involved in these reagents and some of the findings and so on.
So, yeah, I think this is advice to a young scientist that they almost never take, is talk about your stuff from the moment you think you know something. Anybody who’s willing to listen, you tell them because you’re going to learn fast that way, and give them reagents because if the reagent’s no good you’ll find out fast, and if it is good you’ll find out faster. So, yeah, I think it’s… this is as important as any other advice you can give and… and almost no young person will take it.

Jim is an amazing character because… and even be unique. I mean, here is somebody in his 20s, early 20s made a discovery that became apparent to him immediately that this was one of the great discoveries of all time. So imagine you’re 23 or four years old and you’ve made a discovery that you know will live forever – well, as long as there are people. I mean, you would think this guy would be pretty weird and actually he isn’t. He’s remarkably normal and yet he will tell you that he knew immediately that he’s going to be like Charles Darwin and Isaac Newton, you know. You know that in your 20s? I mean, that’s a pretty amazing thing.
So he also, like Av, of course having made a discovery like this you don’t have to do anything else, it doesn’t matter. So he, like Av, didn’t put his name on his students’ and postdocs’ papers and so it’s very hard to link his students to Watson. So I would say having come to know him reasonably well, because we have been co-authors of this book that has taken a lot of our time, the thing that distinguishes Jim… I mean he, like many others, is brilliant, but what he has that even brilliant people don’t often have is the ability to see ahead. I… it’s amazing to me. He’s not always right, but he’s been spectacularly right on some issues.
One is, for example, the human genome project. I mean, Jim was there very early on and saying, you know, this is absolutely critical, this is going to change the world. I mean, while most scientists were dumping shit on him from on high and on anybody else who supported the idea because it would divert money away from real curiosity-based science and so on and so forth, Jim just said, ‘Nonsense, without this everything’s going to go very much more slowly, this is…’ so, yeah, I thought that was real genius to see that so early.
You know, he was a kid when he saw how important solving the molecular basis of genetics was and said, you know, there’s no other problem that’s really important, this is the only one and I’m going to work on that, and damned if he didn’t solve it. It’s pretty amazing. And then with the book I think the same thing; he saw the need for this book at a time none of us could see it. He could see the way science was moving and this was going to fill a niche, I mean, years before anybody else.
And his own book, his first textbook, Molecular Biology of the Gene, was just a milestone in science publishing… textbook publishing. It was just way ahead of its time, so I think that’s the thing that distinguishes Jim from all the other brilliant people I know. It’s as if he’s standing on some higher place and can see further.

There’s lots of things, but one of them that I think tells a lot about Jim is when he recruited me and the other authors to write this book, the way he did… the way he did it was to say, ‘You know, you’re going to work at the bench and do science and run a lab’. He said, ‘Whatever you do in the lab, somebody else is going to do it within weeks, months, maybe years if you’re spectacularly lucky, but somebody else will do it. But this book, if you guys don’t do it, no one’s going to do it. The time will come and go but no one will do it, so it’ll be more important. It’ll be a more lasting contribution and more singular contribution’. He said, ‘And besides, you’ll have to put in almost no effort. I mean, you will write’, talking to me now, ‘a chapter on immunology and one maybe on the cell membrane and we’ll buy in all the others. You know, Bruce will write on the nucleus and somebody else will write on this, but all the other stuff that you don’t know anything about we’ll buy in. So, you know, we’ll spend a summer or two on Martha’s Vineyard at my house and, you know, a year or two we’ll have this book, we’ll be making a lot of money and you won’t have done anything, you’ll just have a good time at Martha’s Vineyard’. Well, I mean, it’s just so off the wall unrealistic that, you know, but he believed it. That’s the thing about Jim, he believes it. He’s… he’s like a child in this respect. You know, he can be very naïve. He actually believed that you could buy in all this stuff and just put it together and get a book.
Well, seven years later it turned out almost everything we bought in was in the garbage can and we had to write almost all this stuff ourselves and it just was brutal and it took us forever. So it’s a typical Jim thing, that he can see very much further ahead than anybody else but it doesn’t mean he’s always right, and he does have this naïve view of the world, which in my view is probably why he could see so far ahead.

Okay, so this is a very recent interest of mine about sex and the brain and it was stimulated because I had a really unusually talented postdoctoral fellow, Barbara Barres, an American, and Barbara is now Ben Barres. So he is a female to male transsexual, now with his own lab in Stanford and a very successful scientist, but the first scientist I know who is a transsexual and came out while a very successful scientist.
So it got me interested in how this all happened and I’d been watching him because he had his ovaries removed and has been treated with the male sex hormone testosterone for about a year and a half now, and watching the change in him, you know, he now has a one-and-a-half inch black beard and looks absolutely terrific as a… as a guy and feels terrific. For the first time looks in the mirror and feels great, whereas before always made her want to weep when looking in the mirror.

So he’s been treated with testosterone for a year and a half now and because this is all being controlled by a clinic at Stanford, he’s psychologically tested every few months. And so interestingly, I mean, even though this is now sex hormones being given to an adult, his brain is clearly changing dramatically so his ability in space… spatial ability is increasing. It’s… males do this better than females, where his verbal abilities, females do this better than males, is decreasing with time.
So it got me interested in this whole question of sex hormones and brain plasticity, and so the history here is quite remarkable. It was believed until the early 1970s that the brain of a male and a female is the same in a mammal, like us, and that the reason our behaviour is so different is that, you know, the external genitals are different and social influences affect your behaviour. So the first clue that that wasn’t right was in 1971 where someone in Britain discovered that the female rat brain is quite different, at least in one area, from the male rat brain and now… this has now been shown in many animals and it’s been shown in humans and there are many differences between the male and female brain.
And then in 1990 I believe Dick Swaab in the Netherlands showed that homosexual men, their brain in this one particular area, in one part of the brain has twice as many nerve cells as males that are not homosexual, that are heterosexual. And then a year later someone else in the States found a different nucleus where in homosexuals it’s different, it’s like a female, so that’s rather remarkable. And then in 1995 the same guy who made the first discovery about homosexual differences in the brain looked at transsexuals, male to female transsexuals, and showed that yet a different region of the brain is different in these males. They, in this region, look like females.
So it’s quite a remarkable thing and the… the second thing that’s I think quite interesting is that there’s a very big difference between your sexual identity and your sexual orientation. So Ben Barres is a transsexual; from as long as he can remember he never felt like a girl, even though he looks entirely female… always felt male. He never felt comfortably in his body and that’s true of all transsexuals, but their sexual orientation can be heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, asexual. So Ben is now homosexual because always has been attracted to men and still is attracted to men. So your sexual orientation is quite different from your sexual identity, and it turns out it’s different parts of the brain that are doing it.
So how does all this happen, and how much of it is genetic, and how much of it is hormonal, and how much of it is behavioural? So it turns out that a hell of a lot of it is hormonal and it sort of works like this: we are born… earlier… not born. A fertilised egg as it develops can become either a female or a male. It depends on one gene sitting on one chromosome, the Y chromosome. So the male has an X and a Y, the female has two Xs. On the Y chromosome there’s one gene. If you have that, you develop as a male. You put that one gene into a female embryo and, bang, it becomes a male.
What that gene does is turn the gonad that’s developing into a testicle rather than… into a testis rather than an ovary, and the testis makes testosterone, the male hormone. And during a critical window of development that hormone makes your brain male, and all your sexual behaviour later is dependent on that sex hormone influence on how your brain develops. Quite remarkable.
Remarkably, it turns out that the male hormone is changed biochemically into the female hormone, oestrogen, in those cells in the brain that are going to be affected. So in the end it’s the female hormone that does it, but it comes from the male hormone, so it’s quite a remarkable thing. So if you take a rodent, a developing rodent and give it testos… a female rodent, genetically female rodent and give it testosterone, its behaviour will be in most ways male when it develops into a sexually active animal.
So these hormonal influences on your brain almost certainly determine your sexual identity, your sexual orientation, and if you ask Barres about mother and pregnancy it turns out that his mother was treated with a synthetic oestrogen, a female hormone, during the first three months of pregnancy. Now, in the 40s, 50s and 60s this was quite a common thing to do if there was bleeding in the first three months. It was thought that this would prevent any abortion that that might be leading to.  It turns out that’s not true, but it was a common way of treating it.
If you follow the female children produced of those pregnancies where the mother received oestrogen… synthetic oestrogen, it turns out that the incidence of lesbianism is very much greater in that population, and Barres’ mother was treated with this kind of drug and almost certainly that is why he’s a transsexual.

Now, it turns out the amount of sex hormone that the foetus is exposed to varies enormously apparently during pregnancy for reasons that are not well-understood and so it could very well be that the levels of these hormones, the degree to which your brain is masculinised, has a huge impact on your later behaviour.
But even more remarkable, and this is something I just discovered a few weeks ago when I was visiting Barres actually in… in Stanford, is that behaviour… social behaviour can influence your brain in rather dramatic ways which is something I must confess I… I didn’t realise, and it’s dramatically illustrated in studies of this particular kind of fish that’s found in Africa and Asian lakes, cichlid fishes, and there’s a guy called Russ Fernald at Stanford who studies them. So this, it’s a miracle really, it’s so interesting.
If you look at the male fish, they’re divided into two kinds of social behaviours. There’s the territorial ones at about 20% that are constantly… I got interested in this because I saw them in his tank and some of these males were just constantly shooting around in the tank, fighting off anything that came into this territory, and 20% of the males do that. These males are brightly coloured, they’re bigger than the 80% of males who look like females and swim with the females and behave like females, and they’re sexually inactive so the only sex going on is this 20% of males.
Now, they’re not only brightly coloured and bigger, but their brains are different. You go into the region of the brain that’s very important for sex and their neurons are four or five times larger than in the 80% of males who are behaving differently, and their testicles are three, four times larger. Here’s the miracle: you take one of these territorial males and put it in a tank with another territorial male that’s bigger than he is, within seconds his colour is gone, his behaviour is now like the 80% non-territorial, and within a few weeks his testes have shrunk and those critical nerve cells in his brain have shrunk.
If you do the experiment the opposite way, you take a non-territorial male, put him in a tank with a non-territorial male that’s smaller, within seconds he becomes a territorial male, he’s brightly coloured, starts to grow faster and these brain cells within a week are three to four times larger. So here your social status is influencing your brain in this dramatic sort of way, and behaviour and brain are very closely tied in this dramatic way.
So when you see a homosexual or a transsexual and so on, how much of the brain difference is behaviourally determined, and how much of it is hormonally determined during this critical period, and how much of it is genetic? I mean, these are really interesting questions that very few people study, I mean, almost no one. Quite remarkable.

Sexual behaviour is very, very interesting to me and this has opened up a whole area of study that’s fascinating to me. Dick Swaab… I happened to be visiting him in… in Amsterdam when he had just made this discovery about the homosexual… hadn’t published it yet, but had this discovery of the difference in the brain of a homosexual person.  And the way he got to it was very interesting because he was looking at Alzheimer’s disease... he’s a human neuroanatomist… was looking at Alzheimer’s disease patients, the brains of these patients, and it was known that these patients have trouble with circadian rhythms; you know, they wake at odd hours during the night, their 24-hour cycles are all screwed up.
So he looked at the region of the brain that’s known to be involved in this kind of rhythm and found that there was a great loss of neurons there, of nerve cells there, which made sense. So then he looked at some AIDS patients that were demented at this same region and to his shock he found that instead of there being decreased numbers there were double the number and he said, god, that’s odd. But then he noticed that all of his AIDS patients were homosexuals, so then he went on and looked at homosexuals who didn’t have AIDS and found the same thing, double the number of nerve cells, and then went on and did this study that had an enormous impact.
And surprisingly, when he talked about this work at the Royal Academy of the Netherlands his life became hell. I mean, people threatened to… homosexuals threatened to burn down his house, burn down his institute, kill his children. Quite remarkable. So the response of homosexuals to this discovery that their brains are frequently different, there was a dichotomy; some thought this was just horrible, that you’re telling us that we’re freaks, and others thought now this is wonderful because now this isn’t a social disease, this is, you know, this is the way we are. It’s not because we’re morally deficient, it’s simply the way our brains are wired. So, yeah, I’m interested in that aspect of behaviour.

I now don’t do experiments. I haven’t done an experiment in a year and in the few years before that I was doing relatively few experiments. But up until I guess five, six, seven years ago I was doing a lot of experiments and I enjoyed doing experiments, partly because doing the experiments is actually a very good way of thinking about what you’re doing. I… I think best really when I’m doing it, or talking to somebody and bouncing ideas around. I don’t think that well under a tree, or in a bathtub, or waiting for a bus. I think better when talking to somebody, or doing experiments was actually a great stimulator of thinking for me.
So I… I actually liked doing the experiments and I liked thinking about them while I’m doing them, and you’re sort of closer to what you’re doing so I liked that. But now I actually, rarely get a chance to do experiments because in order to do experiments usefully it can’t be interrupted, you have to be able to spend weeks at a time, and since I travel so much I’m not here for more than a week or two at any one stretch, so it’s very hard. That’s why I don’t do it.

Like so many of the things in my scientific life, it happened pretty much by chance. So we had been studying and still study a particular precursor cell, a cell that when it differentiates becomes a type of supporting cell in the brain called an oligodendrocyte. It makes myelin in the central nervous system. This is a cell that gets killed for reasons that nobody understands in multiple sclerosis so it’s an important cell, but we don’t study it because it’s an important cell, we study it as a model system.
And we had found that this precursor cell divides and then it stops dividing and becomes an oligodendrocyte, it differentiates into an oligodendrocyte that doesn’t divide again. And what we found was that the cell needs signals to stimulate it to divide and if you take the signal away, then the cell immediately stops dividing and differentiates to become an oligodendrocyte. And so we proposed that the differentiation is not a signalled event, it happens automatically when the cell stops dividing and you take away the signal that normally stimulates division. So the proposal was that differentiation happens automatically, it doesn’t require a specific signal to induce it to happen.
Another laboratory in Philadelphia in the States proposed that there was a type of growth factor, a protein signalling molecule that was required for this event, something called IGF1, insulin-like growth factor one. So I asked a graduate student of mine, Ian Hart, at the time to do a simple, simple experiment that should solve this once and for all, whether we’re right or they’re right, and that is to take a single precursor cell, put it alone in a little culture dish, no signalling molecules, it should stop dividing and should become an oligodendrocyte. And if it did that we would know that this is an automatic event, the cell is programmed to do it, you simply have to take away the signal that drives cell division.
So he did the experiment and, lo and behold, what the cell did was die, and I was a little surprised because we give it the right conditions and so on but it died, whereas if you cultured it with its normal neighbours it lived. So when it died, it died with the features that suggested it was going through a form of death that is called apoptosis or programmed cell death, which at the time was thought that you activate an intracellular death or suicide programme and the cell kills itself. So that got me thinking, why should this cell…?          
Anyway, the controversy seemed to me to be solved, that the reason these guys thought you need… oh, what I didn’t tell you is that if you take this cell and put it alone in the well, if you add IGF1, this growth factor, now the cell lives and now it becomes an oligodendrocyte. It stops dividing and becomes an oligodendrocyte, so what it needs the IGF1 for is not to signal it to become an oligodendrocyte, but to keep the damn thing alive so that it can become an oligodendrocyte. So controversy solved, we were both partly right. You do need signals, but you need the signal to keep the cell alive.
So it got me thinking, why should you need a signal to keep the cell alive, that’s a little weird. Now, it was known for some specific cell types, some types of nerve cells, some types of blood cells that they needed signals from other cells to stay alive, but this cell had never been suggested to be one of those special cases. And it got me thinking that maybe all cells need signals to stay alive, which would be pretty weird and pretty interesting, and so I started asking people. Going back to this idea that whenever you get an idea, just discuss it with everybody, and did anyone ever suggest this, that all cells need signals?  And no one ever did as far as I can tell.
And so I started working on other types of cells and asking do they need signals and some other people in the lab, like Ben Barres, joined in and before I knew it more than half the lab was working on cell death and checking out this hypothesis that all cells need signals to avoid killing themselves. I mean, that was the interesting idea and, as far as I can tell, that’s the way it works; every cell in your body is alive only because other cells are constantly signalling them not to kill themselves, which does seem a little bizarre.  And at first… it’s interesting that I’m sort of disappointed because this idea is now just kind of accepted dogma and it became an accepted part of the dogma very, very quickly, long before it was really adequately tested, but now I think enough cells have been looked at that it certainly works that way for most cells. Whether it works for all cells is not clear, but I suspect it’s… it’s right, the idea is right, and so for several years we were into cell death with this… with this idea. So in terms of an idea, this is probably the most important idea I guess I had.

I guess you could start by asking, why would evolution have selected this rather peculiar way to build an animal, and I think the simplest way of thinking about it is that this is a mechanism that ensures a cell only lives where and when it’s needed. So if a cell ends up in the wrong location, it’ll automatically kill itself. If it’s needed at one time in development but not needed at some other time, it’ll automatically kill itself. Cells are constantly changing the signals they need to survive during development and so if the cell doesn’t keep up and develop on exactly the right schedule, it’ll automatically kill itself.
And many, many cells die during normal development. In fact, even in adult tissues cells die in large numbers. So during this conversation we’re having, hundreds of millions of your cells die in this way… they kill themselves. Perfectly normal, healthy cells are killing themselves all the time. One of the little miracles here is that for every cell that dies, a cell divides to replace it and we have no clue how you balance this death and cell division so that it is balanced. I mean, if it weren’t balanced of course you’d be growing and shrinking and of course that doesn’t happen, so we don’t understand how that balance is maintained but it is.
So you can now ask a number of questions about what the implications are of having this dependence on survival signals and it’s used for a variety of things. One is to get cell numbers right, adjusted properly in development, but it also has implications for cancer, because in cancer when you see… when you look in a cancer, there are many cells that are dead and there are other cells that are dividing, and the cancer grows depending on how much greater the division is than the cell death, and cancer is a disease where cells are not obeying these kinds of social controls.
So these social controls are these controls where cells control the behaviour of other cells by these signals to ensure that cells behave appropriately for the whole organism. You can’t have cells dividing when they want, they should only divide when another cell is needed, and that’s done by cells only dividing when they’re signalled to divide, cells only surviving when they’re signalled to survive, and so on. So in cancer the problem is it’s a social disease, if you like, in that these cells don’t obey these controls. They divide when they shouldn’t divide. They survive in places they shouldn’t survive because of these mutations that screw up their genes so that they’re now able to divide out of control and survive, even though they’ve moved to a place they shouldn’t be. So it has implications for cancer in terms of helping you understand cancer and hopefully one can use our understanding of the death programme, this suicide programme that’s built into every cell, to maybe kill cancer cells more efficiently.
Now, it turns out that all… virtually all of the cytotoxic drugs used now to treat cancer work by inducing cell death, by activating this suicide programme. So when we started getting interested in death, this kind of cell death, nothing was known about this suicide programme, not a clue how it worked, and now some eight, nine years later one understands it in enormous molecular detail and the reason for that is that there were genetic studies done in this simple nematode worm. This little worm that only contains about 1,000 cells gave us the answer for how cell death works in us.
So this… it’s I think a very important discovery of the last ten or 20 years, is how similar we are in the way we develop to things like worms and flies and all other animals. I mean, it’s shocking. Not even Darwin would have predicted how highly conserved all these mechanisms are. It’s quite remarkable. So in the worm there’s only 1,000 cells in the adult animal and during the development of the worm 131 cells die by this programmed cell death, this suicide thing. They were able to do genetic studies where you treat the worm with a mutagen, a chemical, it causes damage to genes and select for worms where none of these deaths occur, and they found two genes. When you inactivate these genes, none of those deaths occur and the worm goes around with an extra 131 cells. Quite remarkable.
Then when they cloned and sequenced these genes it turned out that they encoded proteins that were the same, were very similar to human genes that were already known, proteins that were known in humans, and one of these genes turned out to be an enzyme involved in cell death, and another one turned out to be a protein that regulated cell death. So you knew immediately that here this suicide programme has been conserved in evolution from these simple little nematode worms to humans. I mean, quite remarkable.
And now everybody became interested in cell death. Before that, almost no one was interested in cell death, a basic fundamental problem, and yet hardly anyone was interested in… which takes us to another point that we were not going to discuss but I think we probably should which is, how do people choose what to work on? How can you explain that there’s 50 or 100 laboratories working on one type of cell doing one type of thing when there’s huge areas of total mystery where no one is working that are equally important? How… how do you explain that?
I mean, if you were a young scientist you would think the imperative would be enormous to move into an area where there… which wasn’t crowded, where your mentor wasn’t working because your mentor, for example, usually has a big lab. When you start, you have a little lab. Why would you want to compete with your mentor? It would make more sense to move into an area where there’s very few people working, and yet that rarely happens.
So somewhere along the line the system isn’t working properly because if you ask a young person, why don’t you move into one of these areas where no one is working, and they will say, I can’t do that because I’ll never get funded to do it, I won’t get a job, I won’t get my papers published, and that’s sort of a universal conception that young scientists have. If it’s true, it’s a disaster. No one thinks the system should be encouraging young scientists to do conservative science, yet it clearly is so we need to change the way this works. I mean, there are such big problems that almost no one works on – that’s crazy. When you think that there’s hundreds, thousands of people working on some narrow little area, I mean, it’s madness. So the sociology of science, how people choose one area versus another is another interest of mine. I think it’s really an important area. We don’t do it well. We need to think more about what it is that pushes people to choose to do the same things.

Let’s make it clear that the idea of cell death as suicide is not my idea. That was an idea that came in 1970s by these three cell pathologists who proposed that there’s a type of death that was a suicide, that cells had a death programme built into them, at least some cells, and that could be activated under certain circumstances. But the evidence that there really was a dedicated suicide or death programme built into cells came from studies… genetic studies in the worm that identified genes that did it. Until then, this idea that there was a suicide programme lay dormant.
So my contribution was this idea that, yes, cells have a built in suicide programme but it operates automatically by default and the… that that’s what cells really want to do. All the time they want to do that. The only reason they don’t is that other cells are saying, don’t do it, don’t kill yourself. That’s what was odd. Now, it turns out that some cells are saying, yes, kill yourself, kill yourself now, and other cells are saying, no, no, don’t do it. And each cell is getting signals saying do it and other signals saying don’t do it and are integrating these signals and deciding, live or die, and if the signal integration process comes up die, then they kill themselves by activating this death programme.
So I guess another contribution that we… we didn’t make many contributions to this field I should make absolutely clear, but one of them was the suggestion and evidence that this suicide programme is ready to go. All the components are there and ready to go. You don’t have to activate new genes and make new proteins. All of the death machinery is in place. That turns out to be true. Often you have to activate new genes and make new proteins to activate the death programme, but the death programme is in place. And the good news, slightly off tack, is that cancer cells have the death programme in place, too. No one has ever been able to find a cancer cell where this death programme has been disabled, it’s always there, which is surprising.
You would’ve thought that a cancer cell, as it evolves and acquires more mutations, would’ve inactivated the genes for this death programme because then they wouldn’t need signals to stay alive. They would automatically stay alive because they couldn’t kill themselves. You would think that would help in the progression of a cancer. So it’s not clear why it doesn’t work that way, but it’s very encouraging that cancer cells do have the death programme in place because now you could try to activate it to get them to kill themselves and, as I said, that’s how anti-cancer drugs generally work.   
[Q] And when you’re talking about development and the importance of cells, these programmes activate themselves or not activate, is that to do with development like why you have, I don't know, why you have five fingers and a thumb and so on, or…?
You’re asking a question about the role of death in development?
[Q] Yes.
Yes, so death does so many things in development. I mean, one, it does help sculpt bits of your body. So the cells between the developing digits kill themselves, that’s why you have fingers and toes. Cavities in organs can be built that way by the cells inside killing themselves. Mistakes, and mistakes are made all the time during development, are cleared by… by cells killing themselves. If cells don’t develop exactly right, in the right schedule, they kill themselves automatically and that’s very, very important. If you get rid of cell death in… in a mouse or a fly, the animal dies very early in development.
The worm is exceptional. You get rid of cell death in the worm and the worm lives a normal lifespan, but it only had 1,000 cells. It’s a very simple animal and cell… they’re not great, these worms, but they can live, whereas anything more complicated than a worm, such as a fly, you eliminate cell death and you don’t get very far in development. You need it for almost every aspect of development, or certainly many aspects of development. So it’s very, very important that… that cells can kill themselves when things go wrong because they go wrong a lot.

When you get sick, what you should do? Yes, this is why I think everybody should have at least a couple of years of medicine during their education period so that you… (1) know when something’s serious because most things, pains and problems and so on, are trivial and are going to go away and going to the doctor is probably the wrong thing to do. But every now and then something serious comes along that you can do something for, and so you need to recognise what those are and it’s enormously handy to have a medical education for that. But equally important, when you do have something seriously wrong, to be able to choose a doctor who is good.
Now, imagine you’re trying to pick a plumber. How the hell do you know that this plumber is good? Because, like any other endeavour, if you look at 100 plumbers there’s going to be ten that are excellent, there are going to be 60 that are okay, there’s going to be ten that are absolutely hopeless and so on, and doctors are no different. The difference is that if the plumber’s no good, you end up with a leaky pipe and some problem in your house, but if your doctor’s no good you could end up in serious trouble.
So being able to choose a doctor when you don’t know a goddamn thing about medicine is very tough-going because patients are hopeless at this; you know, they will pick a doctor on, you know, their personality and whether they’re nice and understanding, but what you really need is a doctor who knows what’s wrong and what to do and so, yeah, you’d better go to a… so even among your friends you don’t know who are the good doctors and who are not. So when you ask a friend for advice, you want… who’s a doctor… you want to go to a friend who’s a good doctor and will have good taste. So, yeah, this is like everything else, the more you know, the better off you are, but in medicine it’s actually… could be quite important.

I would go… I think you’re… you’re best off at a… I guess a teaching hospital, a medical school, and then go for youngish people who are looked upon as being hotshots probably and ask their advice. Now, to get to that person of course 90% of the population have no access, they’ll never be able to use this strategy, but middle-class folks frequently can be… get themselves connected somehow to get to that person to get the advice. I mean, it’s one of the great advantages of being middle-class, is that you have access not only to money but to advice that… that if… yeah, this is very important.

So I think there is a big difference between science in Europe and America. Part of it is the Americans really have the view that Jim Watson has frequently expressed which is that science is motored by competition and anxiety, and if you stopped the competition and anxiety, then the whole process would stop. And in Europe I think there’s more of a feeling that curiosity is part of the drive and if you were to take away anxiety and competition, it would slow down but it wouldn’t stop.
So the Americans, as a consequence of this view I suppose in some form, they maximise anxiety and competition. The whole system is built to maximise the feeling that you’re in a competition so that scientists there are constantly looking over their shoulders, comparing themselves and what they do to what others do, and it’s… it’s I think quite an unpleasant type of environment to do science. So in Europe, of course there are labs that behave in that way and there are some labs in America that don’t behave in that way, but generally I think it is true.
A second difference that I think is quite fundamental is that the Americans value the 'doing' more than they value the 'thinking', the ideas. So Europe values ideas for idea’s sake, Americans are more enthusiastic and value more the showing of something. So somebody comes up with an hypothesis, it’s not the hypothesis that’s important, it’s demonstrating that the hypothesis is correct or incorrect that the Americans value more, whereas in Europe the people who come up with the ideas are… are valued enormously, and I think that is a fundamental difference and I think it reflects in the way science is done generally. I think it is a little more thoughtful in Europe. People spend perhaps more time thinking about what they do, less time generating data. In America, particularly among young scientists, there’s a feeling that if you were to go into the library and read and think for a week, this would be very anxiety producing because you’d constantly be thinking about your colleagues who are back in the lab generating data while you’re just sitting under a tree or sitting in a library reading and thinking and, I mean, you’re just wasting your time.     
And… and I think the mentor, the… the lab leader, would probably think the same thing and would be quite unhappy about having their postdocs and students in the library for a week, whereas I think it’s not that uncommon in… in Britain certainly for this kind of thoughtful science. So I’m much more enthusiastic about the thoughtful side; it’s actually the intellectual part of the science that interests me and attracts me most, so it’s one of the important reasons why I’m in Europe and doing science in Europe.

There’s another thing that the Americans do differently from the Europeans and that is how they deal with the end of career time, retirement time. So in Europe everybody pretty much quits at 65, some may extend for a year or two, but most people stop what they’re doing at 65 or close to. That some may have a lab for a year or two or three and putter around, some may even have a grant, but it’s very unusual in Europe.
In America, almost no one I know in science quits at 65. They just keep going. They go till they die, and there are some remarkable stories of people dying 100 years old. I mean, Michael Heidelberger died at 101 or 102. He had an NIH grant at 101, going into work every day. It’s just quite a different way of looking at the end of a career. So I… I think the Americans have given up an enormous amount here, because I’ve looked forward to retiring. I can’t wait. It’s going to be wonderful. I love what I do, it’s going to be hard to match it, but I’ve been doing it for 30 years, I’ve done enough, it’s time to do something different and this is a great time to do it.
So I think built into the psychology of humans are these milestones. One needs them. You need to move from primary school to secondary school, and there’s… it’s nice to move from secondary school to a… a higher form of education, and then you get your first job, then you marry and you have kids. All these things you look forward to them, it’s an achievement to do it, and I think we function best when we have them, we pass them and move on. And retirement is like that and to give up on that, you’ve removed a really important milestone and I… I think the Americans are going to pay a very big price for this.
I mean, part of the reason is because of the way they do science and devote such enormous amount of energy to it that often there’s very little else in their lives, so the thought of stopping science is, Christ, what am I going to do? I mean, I don’t do anything, this is all I do. What am I suddenly going to do? I mean, it’s frequent not to have a hobby, not to have other interests and then, bang, suddenly nothing. So, yeah, I think… I think one has to… Americans have to think about the price.

I do feel passionately about death and the way society deals with death and euthanasia and the way we don’t allow euthanasia, and I… I’ve had a number of experiences that were so horrific that they had a huge impact, still continue to have a huge impact. And one of them was a very good friend of mine who had watched his father die of cancer over many months and he unfortunately developed cancer as a young man when he was around 50, and we talked about this and I had promised him at the time that I would not allow him to die in the way his father died, which was awful, in pain and just terrible.
And he was operated on and everything looked great for a year and then suddenly this tumour exploded and he had metastases, islands of tumour in virtually every organ in his body. And so he called me and said, the time has come, and he checked himself out of the hospital and went home and the idea was he was going to kill himself with a shotgun. He was a hunter and we were going to go to his country house and he was going to shoot himself and I would be moral support there.
Anyhow, by the… I took the plane out and was in New York within ten hours of his phone call, but by this time things were moving so quickly he was delusional, was having hallucinations, he couldn’t get out of bed and so he was in no position to kill himself, unquestionably, but he was begging me to kill him. But the fact is he was now at home in an apartment with 24-hour nurses there all the time, with nothing, not… I mean, you know, he had some oral medication but it was of no use at all and there was no way to help him die. And his brother was a lawyer and he was present at the time and said, you know, you can… you have to be very careful here because there are nurses and people around and, you know, you’ll spend the rest of your life in jail if you try to do anything here.
And so I was in this impossible position; this friend was in excruciating pain, he was unbelievably scared and anxious, and it was all uncontrolled. It was all completely uncontrolled. So here we are in the middle of Manhattan with very powerful friends we knew between us, between Jim Watson and Gavin and myself we knew the presidents of every university and the heads of every medical department, and yet we couldn’t get our hands on drugs that would deal with this problem, I mean, even remove the anxiety, let alone the pain. I mean, it was totally uncontrolled.
And so we got the hospice organisation involved and they were hopeless. They were giving him homeopathic doses of drugs that didn’t control the pain at all. They were giving him nothing to control the anxiety and the fear, and it was just a nightmare and, yes, it was just… this was about the worst week of my life, to see in this day and age someone who I had promised, would not allow him to go through this horrible type of death and to watch it in New York City, it’s just unbelievable to me that this should happen.
What I shouldn’t tell you is how in the end it ended, not on tape.

Yeah, I’m very interested in the problem and I think we as a society, a civilisation does it, handles this problem badly since we’re all going to die. Many people die horrific deaths when it’s totally unnecessary. The technology is available, at least in the western world and a lot of the eastern world for people to die with dignity, without pain and so on, where they are in control of their own death, and that is not the case for the vast majority of deaths, even in the most civilised, so-called civilised cities.
So my own sense is that people will look back on this era and the way people are allowed to die as among the most barbaric parts of our society. So I’m a great fan of euthanasia, I think that that’s what one needs to do and put in all the controls to make sure it isn’t abused. But my parents killed themselves and it was just a great experience. Although it was enormously difficult for them to do it, it turned out to be a wonderful thing for them to have done, in my view.
So my father was a doctor. He was at the time 87. My mother was around the same age. She had the beginnings of Alzheimer’s disease and he was in pretty good health, although he had a controlled form of cancer. But they had good lives and they had been planning this for years. They didn’t want to rot in an old age home, they did not want to live without each other so they wanted to die together, and had been planning it for years.
Now, I’m a physician, my brother is a physician and my dad is… was a physician so we had all of the available technology in our hands. So we had stored large amounts of barbiturate and things that one would need to do it, and it turns out it’s quite complicated to do it properly. You want to be absolutely certain that you both die if you’re going to do this, and this was arranged. My brother and I… and my brother actually practices in the city where my parents lived which was Sarasota, Florida, and I visited for a week and this was supposed to happen at the end of the week that I was there.
And the plan originally was that my brother and I would be there and assist in any way we could, and my parents were very gung-ho about this, very cheery. But it turns out that a few days before this we went to a lawyer to ask them, to ask this lawyer what he thought, what precautions we needed to take and so on about this. And he said, look, it’s absolutely mandatory that I should not be in the country when this happens, my brother should not be in the building when this happens, he will have to… and shouldn’t even know about it before it happens. He should discover their bodies and be surprised and you really have to be very, very careful and all of this advice is off the record because I’m not allowed to give you this kind of advice.
So that changed the plan, but still it was going to happen at the end of the week on the Sunday, I would fly out on the Saturday. And on the Thursday my parents went to see a doctor friend of theirs, a good friend of the family and had operated on my mother some years before to say goodbye. And this surgeon for some reason took great offence that they were going to kill themselves and called my brother and me in to see him and said, you know, I just think this is a terrible thing, it’s obvious that they’re depressed. My brother and I said, look, they’re not depressed at all, they’re very cheery, there’s no element of depression here. He said, well, in my view nobody would do this, unless they were seriously depressed, and I must tell you that I’m very much against it.
Well, he was so much against it that he called the police and got a lawyer and a judge and himself to sign a form, and the police came and took my father away and incarcerated him in the insane asylum in Sarasota and put him on this ward with all these various very mentally ill patients. And he was finally seen by a psychiatrist after a couple of days who, when we tried to talk to him, couldn’t get to see him for another couple of days. When we finally got to see him he said, well, your dad’s clearly depressed and so we’re going to have to keep him in for at least six weeks to see how he responds to antidepressant drugs.
It turned out he’d seen my father for about 30 seconds, took no history, didn’t do an exam and it was just hideous. And we said, look, he’s not depressed, his eyes are watering because he’s 87 years old and it’s a common sign and symptom in a… in an old person. Anyway, we finally got hold of a lawyer friend in Chicago who gave us some advice. We got hold of the constitution and Florida laws and found out that they’d broken every law when they incarcerated him. They never read him his rights. A psychiatrist has to see him within the first 12-24 hours, which they didn’t, and none of these things were done. And… and so went back to the hospital, called the psychiatrist and said, we’re going to sue this hospital for every penny it has, we’ll close it down unless he’s out of there in an hour. And in the end they allowed him to sign himself out, which is actually quite amusing; you can’t sign yourself out when you’ve been incarcerated against your will, but anyway that’s what happened.
So it was a nightmare and my mother during this period when my dad was incarcerated completely lost it. So she didn’t know where she was, she didn’t know who we were, I mean, it was a nightmare for a week for her being there without my dad. It was… it was terrible. So then when my dad finally was let go, they postponed a month and then they did it. When they did it… so I went back and spent a week with them and I can tell you on the… they did it that night, that they were just so cheery. We talked about what they were about to do. They… my mother, even though she had the beginnings of Alzheimer’s, was with it enough to know exactly what they were doing, looking forward to doing it because they’d had good lives, they knew any moment some terrible thing could happen, and it was just wonderful. There was not an element, no hint of fear or depression, or… it was just terrific. They were clearly thrilled to pieces. They’d had a good life and this was it.
But of course when this happened it got all over the newspaper and the radio and television, and their bodies were taken by the police and they held onto them for ten days, and my brother was questioned. I mean, they’re 87 years old and they did this rigorous investigation. I mean, it was ludicrous, absolutely ludicrous. So in the end it all worked out well, but just think, I mean, here we are, three physicians, how difficult this thing was and it’s… it’s just frightening and it, you know, it’s outrageous.
So my own view is that every individual should have the right to end their lives the way they want to end their life. It’s outrageous that somebody else should impose suffering and indignity on you because of some value system that you don’t share that they hold, like a religion. I mean, fine, I have nothing against people having strong religious beliefs, but that that should dictate how I’m to die, this is just outrageous. So when I retire, this will be one of the things I get my teeth into.
