michael.atiyah

Eminent British mathematician Sir Michael Atiyah (1929-2019) broke new ground in geometry and topology with his proof of the Atiyah-Singer Index Theorem in the 1960s. This proof led to new branches of mathematics being developed, including those needed to understand emerging theories like supergravity and string theory.

Well, I… my father worked in the Sudan, in fact his father had worked in the Sudan before him, so it was long established. And so we lived in Khartoum, which is a rather small community as far as the sort of Western community is concerned. So for example, I went to a very, very small school called The Clergy House. It was run by the Church, and I think there were 25 pupils altogether in the school, of all ages and I was there from, you know, five until the age of 12. So it was a very, very small amateur sort of kind of job in a way, and I’m sure it would have fallen foul of all the educational theories about the right kind of teaching you could have and so on, but I seemed to survive and it was a rather unusual experience. And then at the age of… well… the age of 12, where I would have gone at the age of 12… they didn't take them beyond that age and I had to go to a secondary school. We tried out for a short while a secondary school in Khartoum run by the Italians called the Comboni College, but that turned out to be a disaster. I survived only four days there. It was quite different kind of school, big… I think they used a lot of Arabic, it was more an Arabic medium as well. So they pulled me out of that, sent me back to The Clergy House for another couple of years – it was during the war so you were limited – and then finally, in 1941, I suppose, they decided to send me to a school in Cairo – English school, English type school which in fact my father had been at before – called Victoria College.  And so I spent the next four years there at this school, and that was… that’s a sort of, you know, English type boarding school, but a very interesting school because a lot of students of different nationalities were there. We had Egyptians and Greeks and Armenians and a whole of range of Mediterranean people. So that was an interesting experience. And that was, you know, again a respectable school, where there were good… good teachers, nothing, sort of, tremendously outstanding, but I got a good grounding, I think, and at that school I was, for various reasons, I was put a couple of years ahead of my age. I wasn't a great prodigy necessarily, but I was a bit more advanced, so I was always two years ahead and I suppose that meant I started things earlier. So I remember for example, I'd start… they started doing calculus when I was about 13. So I had a fairly good grounding mathematically. They had some quite good teachers, and so that's my memory of that time really.

Well, fairly good at most things. I wasn't particularly good at writing essays, I think. The literary side was probably one of my weaknesses. My father always said that I obviously showed mathematical talent at an early stage because when we travelled around the world, the Middle East, we would exchange currencies and my pocket money would always seem to make a profit out of it. And he was convinced that I was going to be a mathematician, and there had been some members of the family, earlier generation, who had mathematical talent. So they were convinced I was going to be mathematical, but I was fairly generally good at most… most things at school to a certain stage.
And then towards the end of my school when I got on to A levels, at that stage I was very, very keen on chemistry – I had a good chemistry teacher – and I think at that stage… and I did some… chemistry has nice experiments you do, and I had a friend of mine and he had a lab at home and we used to do a lot there. But after one year of advanced chemistry I decided that I just couldn't… I didn't have a good enough memory. You know, you have to learn these voluminous books, Inorganic Chemistry, Physical Chemistry; and so mathematics was much simpler, you didn't need to memorise things. So that was more or less the determining stage. From then onwards it was quite clear I was going to pursue mathematics. But until then, there were other alternatives, yes.

They said in the Sudan there were only two… two seasons, there was the hot and the very hot, and so… and you had long… people who worked in the Civil Service – my father did – had long vacations when they can get away and come back to. Well, you know, the journey took a long time, so we would spend four or five months out of the Sudan and we – because my mother was from this country – we would tend to come to England for long periods in the spring and summer, and also my father's family were in the Lebanon, so we would also spend time in the Lebanon. So we used to travel from there right across Europe, every year. In those days you took either long steamers, boats all the way round through the Straits of Gibraltar, or you took boats across the Mediterranean and across France and England. So we did that every year, backwards and forwards for, you know, all my childhood. And in the Middle East, through the Lebanon; and also my aunt and her husband lived in Palestine. I spent time with them there… so… all… and my uncles in Cairo, all round the Middle East, that part, and England we… we travelled constantly right up until the war.

There was a stage… when, I mean, during the first… just at the beginning of the war… we were in England, and then when the war started we were sort of stuck here. My father had to go back, and then we… later on we followed and we went through France just before the collapse of France. And we went to the Lebanon, and I was at that stage put into a school in the Lebanon because it was, sort of, still during the school term and I had to go to a school which was a quite different kind of school – French type school – totally different kind of education. I survived for a… only there for, I think, a term and I wouldn't have liked to have stayed there much longer. So my schooling wasn't that disturbed by the travelling around. That was the only time when I had a sort of bit of strange surroundings.
But the travelling, I think, as children you enjoy it. And we did the journey back from Khartoum to Cairo on our own, my brother and I – my brother's two years younger – when I was 12 and he was 10 we would do this four day journey involving one day on the train, two days on the Nile steamer, another day on the train, all on our own, with a few people helping us when we got to the station. And I think it probably develops a bit of independence and you know, resilience as you get used to that sort of thing, you're not so dependent of other people chaperoning you around. So I think it was probably helpful.
My father's position was in the… he was with the Sudan government and he was the…  he took over the job in fact from his uncle before him. And the job really was more or less kind of liaison between the British government and the Sudanese, because my father went to Oxford and English educated and so he could put the British point of view to the Sudanese, and he knew the Sudanese. So was kind of the go-between… between, in the political service, between the Sudan government and the Sudanese. And then during the war he got involved with the broadcasting, you know, Sudanese radio and that side of it. So it was an interesting job and then led right up to when the Sudan became independent at the end of the war, launching that movement.
And then after the war when he came to this country he was more freelance and he tended to… he wrote, he wrote a lot of books and also did a lot of broadcasting for the BBC and taking part in writing for the media, political, on general political questions to do with the Middle East. So he was Civil Service, moving into the political area and enjoying himself writing books on the side. So it was quite a varied sort of background, but very much you know, a non-mathematical one. He studied history and nobody else in the immediate family was at all mathematical. But it meant that I had a kind of cultured background and lots of books round the house. I was introduced to, sort of, literature and music and art things in a way that perhaps my own children didn't perhaps get such exposure to.

Well, my mother, as I say, her father died when she was quite young, so she tended to live with her mother and her brother. My uncle became a classics don at Oxford, and it was through him that my mother met my father, because they lived in Oxford. And she had studied drawing – she went to the Ruskin School – drawing… and quite talented artistically… and did a fair amount of work later on, not on a major scale, but for people locally in Khartoum and [so] on. She was, I think, very disappointed that her children didn't seem to inherit her artistic talents, but so she was… her interests were very much on the arts side.

When it was clear I was going to be mathematical that was the intention. Although my father had been Oxford – the rest of the family had been to Oxford – so I think they anticipated my going to Cambridge.  And so when I finished school in Egypt – or Alexandria, it was the last year – I was 16 and so the question was how to prepare me to come to Cambridge. So when we came over here in 1945, my father asked what was the best school for mathematics in the country, and they said Manchester Grammar School. So I went to Manchester Grammar School just for the two years to prepare to get into Cambridge. So I think they'd always anticipated that that's what I should be doing, even if I didn't anticipate it, and they gave me a good preparation. MGS was a good school and I had two years there, which certainly was as good a preparation to coming to Cambridge as you could get.
[Q] You were boarding then in Manchester? 
No, I lived in digs. We had some friends in Manchester, when I first arrived I lived with them for a couple of weeks while they found me a place. Then they found me some digs, boarding house, very close to the school, which was mainly occupied not by other students, but by other professionals, doctors and others. It was quite interesting. I was living with a sort of group of adults in a sort of a lodging house, but having been at the boarding school, you acquire a certain amount of independence. So I think although I would have been hesitant to send my own children at that age, that sort of thing, it again… I suppose it helps to develop your independence and maturity at that stage. So I got on quite well.

Well Manchester Grammar School is a very, very competitive school. And, I mean, I… by the time I'd arrived I'd already taken my A levels, but I came in and I thought I'd be well ahead of the rest of the class, but that wasn't the case. I had to catch up on a lot of stuff. They didn't take them for another year, but they covered much more ground. So it was a very high pressure school, very good mathematical training. I worked very, very hard.
I had a very dedicated teacher… maths master who'd been at the school for a long time – a good mathematician – probably these days he wouldn't have gone into school teaching, he'd have been… you know, got himself a job in a university. But he was very dedicated. He used to write up vast quantities of mathematical notes. He didn't believe in the books. The books were, you know, usually bad, so he'd improve on the books. And we had copied out enormous sets of manuscripts – his way of doing the problems – so until recently I had trunkfulls of these things at home. But he was very inspiring in a way. He really did inspire his students, made them work very hard, very competitive, but I think if you're receptive to that sort thing it's actually very effective. I enjoyed it, but as I say, I had to work very hard even though I'd come, I thought, with a good start. But I don't think I've had to work as hard ever since.
[Q] What was the teacher's name? 
Heywood, Mr Heywood, yes FL Heywood. Very nice man, though he tended to be a bit philosophical. He was a, sort of, slightly elderly; elderly meaning he was probably younger than I am now, and had a bit of a stoop and glasses and he would every now and again stand back and start to philosophise, give a full… we would listen with interest. I mean he wouldn’t just talk about mathematics, he'd talk about bigger issues and so on.

And then the Headmaster, or the 'High Master' of the school, was Eric James who subsequently became Lord James and the first Vice Chancellor of York. He was… I saw a bit of him. Well it was through him I got to the school, because they had to persuade the school to take me and my father had a few friends who knew the people, and so he looked after… took an interest in my being there when I first arrived.  And he was a quite young headmaster and lively, but I also was taught by him too – we used to play chess together. He was a good chess player.
[Q] Were you good at chess? 
I was quite good at chess. I played for the school team, and I have a record, I don't think I ever lost a game, something like that. Then when I came up to Cambridge I played for the Trinity chess team and for the university chess team and things, and I was reasonably good but not… I think the standards have gone up much higher since those days… and I found that eventually, you know, chess is not much of a relaxation for a mathematician. You know, you do your hard day's thinking, and then you sit down and do four-hour chess game – it's pretty exhausting. Eventually… if you're a serious mathematician, you can't do both, you know. A lot of chess players have been mathematicians, and at some stage they become professionals, either one or the other, and you know, you can't really… or it's very difficult to keep them both up simultaneously as it's much, much too similar activities.

[Q] Were there others as good at mathematics as you in Manchester Grammar?
Well, there were. There were some very… Manchester Grammar School recruits very able pupils from a whole wide range and there's a lot of… so there were some very good people. When I came up there were, sort of, three of us got scholarships to Trinity and two got scholarships to St John's and so on. And over the years they've had strings of people and many of them gone on to have quite distinguished [careers]. So in my class there were several others who were… with whom I would compete to be first or second or third. There was by no means you know, a sort of big gap between me and the others. No, they were very… I was under a lot of pressure.
[Q] Did they carry on as mathematicians in later life? 
Well of the three that came here, one of them unfortunately was killed in a mountaineering accident. One of them, say, became a mathematician and eventually worked outside in the, sort of, various… he worked, I think, for the nuclear power industry and other forms of applied mathematics, so he probably didn't have as successful a career as one might have predicted from his ability at that stage […] a bit of a luck in the draw, you never know what's going to happen to people. And other mathematicians we've had from the school, subsequently, there are several who have gone on to have quite distinguished academic careers. So it was a good school but there was always a sense that they trained them so well that when they got here, somehow they'd been better trained than everybody else and after a while other people caught up with them, so there was a bit of a sense that sometimes their performance was a little bit disappointing. They were so well prepared, they walked away with all the scholarships but they couldn't be that much better than everybody else, so when they came to university there was a bit of a, sort of, a drop-off and some, you know, would be a bit disappointing.

Mathematicians, I think, are trained to be very precise and very brief – no padding – you don't pad things out in mathematics, that's criticised. And as you go on in a professional life in mathematics you aim to become more and more adept at distilling out the essential point as simply as possible and you cut out all the paraphernalia. So brevity, succinctness, sharpness are all key factors for a mathematician. Whereas if you want to… in the literary side, it's things… people have to be decorated, embellished, elaborated, expanded, so then there's a conflict, and so I find finding long things with padding them out inherently difficult. I'd finish my essay and find it was half the length, or less, and I couldn't see how you could improve on it. I think there's a kind of… I've always found that difficult and subsequently I even have the same problem when I have to give a speech or a talk and I have to do a lot of these things these days. I'm getting better but I find it's very hard to, you know, fill the time. I say it briefly and that's it.
[Q] I’m sure it’s much appreciated.

Physics somehow in my memory figures lower than chemistry for some reason. For example, when I went to MGS I'd done A level mathematics and A level chemistry. I hadn't done physics except at O level. So when I went to Manchester Grammar School for example, they'd already done a whole year. I'd never done things like heat and light or whatever it was, I had to catch up. So I did a bit, but I was not particularly good at experiments either, and I remember clearly, you know, the kind of situation would happen in the final examinations at A level you had to do something, bit of experiment. They'd give you some bit of wire for example, and they'd say, ‘Measure the resistivity of the wire and plot the graphs’, and I did all the experiments and only at the end did I read it said cut the bit of wire into 10 centimetres length. So being a mathematician, I just said well re-scale the answer to this. But it shows that I wasn't really cut out to be an experimentalist.
And so, when I came to Cambridge, I discovered that you had to do physics – applied, theoretical physics – and I was very pleased to discover that theoretical physics here meant Maxwell's equations and potential theory. It was really very mathematical, so I quite enjoyed that; but at school you don't get so much of that, you get much more of the wire and the concrete down the hands stuff which I wasn't very good at, and so that put me off. The sort of higher intellectual challenge of physics, which you reach at the higher stage, which is mathematical, you get at university. And then I got moderately interested in it, but at university I chose the pure mathematics options; I did the physics, I quite enjoyed the theoretical physics up to a point, but I didn't… I wasn't at that stage won over by it. But so gradually I acquired more interest in it over many years, but not at an earlier stage; the early stage I was really a pure mathematician and I did the other things because I had to.

Manchester Grammar School's a very, sort of, a traditional school – had clear objectives – and although the maths master himself was an Oxford man, he was regarded… the best students were sent to Trinity and the next best students were sent to St John's and there was a kind of clear pecking order. He more or less determined who would apply where and somebody wouldn't be sent to Oxford.
It was quite clear in the school's mind where you send your pupils to maximise their prospects of getting in and so on. So once I suppose I'd been at school for a while it was clear to the maths teacher that I was amongst the abler ones in the class, I was put in the group that were sent into Trinity. Decided for me. I wouldn't have known, you know, at that stage, which… what colleges were what, really. My father might have given a bit of advice, but he wasn't a Cambridge man. He'd heard about Trinity, I suppose, but it was the school that determined them, and the maths master knew his job and he sent his best pupils to Trinity and that was it.

I finished school actually at Easter, in my third year of sixth form, because I'd already taken A levels twice. I didn't see any point… I got my scholarship to come to Cambridge, I saw no point in staying on and taking it a third time. So I left at Easter and decided to get my National Service out the way before I came up. There was a kind of slightly, I suppose, a bit of idealism in it. I was a young chap… I thought actually I should do my National Service and not try to get out of it, and actually I wanted at an earlier stage even to be one of the Bevin Boys, you know, the people who went down the mines. There was alternative National Service, which was during the war… I even sort of contemplated that, but somehow… but somehow I think that it either stopped by that stage or was no longer an option. So I deliberately chose to do that, and many of my contemporaries didn't. I mean they decided to go up straight away and by doing that many of them actually avoided National Service altogether because three years down the road, if you stayed on and did research, you know, you didn't have to do it.
So… but, my time in the Army was not I would say tremendously productive. I mean I went into REME, which is Royal Electrical Mechanical Engineers, but they didn't use my mathematics at all. I could have been trained in radar or whatever it was, like a lot of my contemporaries. I tried to get into the educational department. So I ended up as a clerk at headquarters in REME, which was an uncomfortable, sort of, job. I used to cycle home at weekends; it was not very far from where I lived. But I think what you got out of it was some exposure to a cross-section of life that you don't meet in the academic world, which I think is a helpful part of, sort of, forming your character. So I think that was beneficial in that sense.
I had spare time, and I corresponded with my contemporaries who'd gone to Cambridge and they would tell me what they were doing and I’d sort of spend my spare time thinking a bit. I remember thinking about higher dimensional polyhedra, you know, trying to classify higher dimensional polyhedra, regular solids, on my own. I remember getting as far as discovering there was a difference between odd and even dimensions. I think I was mainly in four dimensions, and I discovered there was in fact four dimensions because there was no Euler's formula – that you could work out the sort of ratios of various sides, but you couldn't determine the absolute values easily […] memory… and I think I have some notes somewhere. So I played around with various little problems to keep myself mathematically alert, and so they sent me problems that were being set in Cambridge, the kind of clever questions that they throw at students in the first year and I tried my hand at that. But that wasn't very time consuming. I read some books. I remember reading Hardy and Wright, you know, Introduction to Number Theory [sic], a very good book to read. And articles in Encyclopaedia Britannica. So I did a bit of background reading on the side. And I think the main benefit of being in the Army was that… when I came out the Army actually a little bit early.  I did just less than two years because it was possible, although I'd left in April, for [the] Army for reasons which I can explain, didn't actually call me up till October, because the reason was that my father wasn't a British national. You see he's… complicated… he was actually a technically stateless person. So when I left, asked to be called up, they didn't call me up, and I wrote and asked, ‘Why aren't you calling me up?’ They wrote back and said, ‘Well you've got dual nationality. You were born in this country, but your father isn't British, so you've got to wait until you're 21 to decide which nationality you want to have’. Well then I explained to them that actually my father didn't have a nationality, he was stateless, so it was a choice between British nationality and nothing. So it was no choice… so really, couldn't I be called at up at 18 instead? Well, very reluctantly the War Office accepted this logic and finally they agreed and then they sent me a notice summoning me to appear at Carlisle within 24 hours or be court-martialled, or something like that.
So that anyway, I went in, in October and so… but instead of staying two years till the following October, I got out early to come up for the long vacation term in Cambridge beforehand which you could do. There was a kind of… scientists particularly did lab work in the long vacation term… mathematicians didn't have anything to do but they could come up and spend six weeks studying. So my tutor, being [an] enlightened chap, wrote to the War Office and said, you know, ‘It was very important that he should be allowed to come up and do his study beforehand’, and it worked, so I got out early and I came up.
And I remember very clearly the sort of transition from being in the Army, and then coming to university instantaneously, a tremendous sense of you know, liberation. So I think what I gained from it was coming back to the university with enormous enthusiasm to study. Whereas those who'd gone straight from school to university, some of them I think had a bit of, sort of… were a bit exhausted. They'd studied, worked hard, passed exams and they came up here and carried straight on, and some of them lost their sort of enthusiasm. And I came up here having been in the Army two years and went into the Trinity College library and it was marvellous. So I was full of enthusiasm, and I think probably, might have said I’d wasted time, but in retrospect the effect on your psychology is so important that probably it might even have been beneficial. And I didn't find that… there's a danger that sometimes people think you get rusty, you know, you lose the… but I don't think that really worked. You brain at that age is still pretty active and so I think the two years were not productive in any very obvious sense, but they had some side effects which probably were not bad and you were exposed to a bit of rough and tumble in the Army, and probably toughened your physique a bit. I remember winning some cross country race when I was in the Army – running in battle-dress through many miles of countryside. And I know that the irony was, at the end of this I went to see the commanding officer who congratulated me and gave me the prize which was a packet of cigarettes. I've spent most of my life since arguing against tobacco.

When I first came up I didn't have much exposure to the faculty, the staff. I was on my own. I went to the library, I read books, I was given the literature and so on. And… but once the term started, well of course your first exposure is your supervisors and the characters vary quite a bit. My first clear memory is being supervised by Besicovitch who was a real character – a big Russian, large shock of white hair and strong Russian accent and very particular kind of questioning techniques – and so he was a very impressive figure. He made an impact on me.
The person whose mathematics I found most interesting at that stage was Todd. I remember reading his book, which I found very fascinating – all this algebraic geometry in the old style – although as a character he was the opposite extreme, very self-effacing, quiet, difficult to converse with, but I went to his lectures. So I found the geometry was still the subject I enjoyed most. I benefited quite a bit from the lectures. I went to… I suppose, again having come out of the Army I was just full of enthusiasm… I went to enormous numbers of lectures, you know all the lectures you could go to, all the optional lectures. I remember in my second year I think I was going to four lectures a day, six days a week, whatever it was, dashing around on a bicycle from here to there. Probably quite ridiculous, you can't really benefit from all those lectures, but it was… you know, I really felt I should get everything I could out of what was going.
And the other thing of course, you benefit a lot […] is your fellow students. Especially in Trinity, there were large numbers of other mathematicians, a lot of them very able. You got to know them, and you spent a lot of time… I mean one of my early friends there was John Polkinghorne and we used to spend a lot of time discussing and arguing with Frank Adams and Ian MacDonald. It was a good year. We had a lot of able mathematicians in that year and we spent a lot of time discussing things amongst ourselves. I think you got more benefit that way than you did actually from the people who were there to be supposed to be teaching you.
[Q] So Adams, Polkinghorne and MacDonald were all in Trinity?
Yes, Adams, Polkinghorne, MacDonald, and also the subsequent Dean Mackay, the Lord Chancellor. They were all in our year, and John Aitchison became Professor of Statistics. Yes, it was a very good lot, all in Trinity, and I think we had the top few people in the Tripos all that year, so it was a particularly good year and I think you benefited a lot from the stimulus that they provided – and the competition. I mean you were aware that when you came in, you'd been at school, you think you're the bees-knees; then you come to Trinity and it's a little while before you realise… find out what the competition's like and it was pretty competitive for the first year or so until you knew where you stood. Ronald Shaw was another of the interesting lot.
[Q] Were they all taught by Todd, or were you specifically allocated Todd? 
Well, you'd be taught by different people, different years, different terms for different subjects. So, I'd get taught by Besicovitch to do analysis; I'd be taught by Todd to do geometry; I'd be taught by Kemmer to do the physics side – so I think they were all, went through the same collection of supervisors, more or less. Subsequently I got Todd a bit more often when it was clear my interests were geometrical. But at the beginning it was everybody was cycled round all the supervisors really.

The traditional geometry approach at Cambridge was the synthetic approach, which concentrated on the geometrical pictures and the interactions, and that's really what appealed to people who liked geometry; the beauty of the patterns and the interrelationships. The algebraic side was brought in by people like Todd and others out of a sense of conscience; you had to justify some of the arguments and therefore you brought it in, you know, you knew you had to sort of play around with this stuff to be respectable; nobody liked it. He didn't like it. He would bring it…and sometimes of course the algebra would be helpful and useful in some formulas, but nobody took it as more than just, sort of, what you had to do to justify the arguments. And some didn't bother with it at all. Babbage and White and the older school, they never had any algebra in their stuff. So Todd had the algebra in it, but he wasn't really enamoured of the algebra; it was just there as I say to make respectability and clear his conscience, and he never got involved with the more abstract algebraic variety of stuff. I got that a bit from Hodge later on, with Hodge and Pedoe. And what appealed to me certainly was the geometry side; the algebra I didn't like either… but we had to do it.

Having come from Manchester Grammar School – very competitive – John Polkinghorne and I decided that we had to, sort of, practise for the examinations together. So we actually used to go in every Saturday morning into the library and sit, take one of the old papers out and sit opposite each other and actually sit the exam. So we worked through, I don't know how many, papers practising, so we ended up first and second in the Tripos. We'd worked hard for it… to everybody else. And the second, I think in Part II, we'd kept it up and I think we were more or less again the top two, possibly in some other order. So that we were… yes… and then I think Frank Adams was next in line and so on. It was a pretty competitive lot, and we were pretty well trained in examinations in those days.
But even by the time I'd done Part II my interest in examinations was beginning to wane. I remember the Part II examinations were three day examinations… very stiff. It was two hours, three-hour papers, morning, afternoon, three consecutive days; and I remember by the third day I knew I'd done sufficiently well… okay… but I was really mentally worn out. I remember being a bit… and by that time I also, in my second year I started getting interested in going to these Part III courses which weren't part of the examination. I wanted to go on… so I was… already my sights were on doing other things and I'd written this paper, so I'd lost interest in examinations a bit by the end of the second year.
And Part III was quite a different kind of examination where, you know, you had all these different courses and you went to many, many courses and you offered so many for the examination and they had to put together a complicated package. Well, actually our group I think were the last under which the old system functioned. We broke it down, because we got together, a gang of us, and decided we wanted to go to all these courses, so we fudged the answers. We put in lists of the examinations of courses that we weren't planning to do really, but just to make sure they were distributed well. It must have been chaos for the poor examiners. I went to probably 20 courses of which you were only supposed to be going to six or something, and then you'd pick and choose whatever you wanted in the examination. So Part III was a beginning; it was a rather unusual examination, introduction to broader pastures and different… so, but I think I was good at examinations and I'd been well trained and it was your way into the system.

Once you'd picked on your field, assuming you knew what you wanted to do, then there'd be a certain limited choice of people who would take research students in that field. So when I was clear I wanted to do geometry, the choice was between Hodge and Todd.
Todd was the person who'd supervised me several years through and knew me very well and helped me with this paper and so I in some sense felt a sense of obligation to him. On the other hand Hodge had the bigger international reputation, and he did… he had this broader aspect of differential geometry and so although I didn't know him that well, by the time I came to make the decision it was clear I should opt for Hodge. I felt a little bit, you know, unhappy about deserting Todd; he'd looked after me and I was one of his star pupils and so on. He was probably expecting me to work with him because… you know, natural… but I decided that Hodge was what I needed. So you chose your own supervisor, you know, within the limits of what was available and subject to their being prepared to take you on and so on. But I… as I say, I'd talked with Hodge before, got him to give us this course on algebraic functions, so I think he knew who I was and he agreed to take me on, yes.
He didn't take on many students at all. I think I was… he hadn't had many students before, only a few, and I think in my year we started off, he actually had four which was very unusual: one of whom was Roger Penrose who'd come from London, another of whom was Michael Hoskin who then moved into the history of mathematics and science and was a lecturer here, and the fourth was somebody called Reynolds who went into school teaching. But that was rather unusual. In previous years he'd had very few.  And I think partly the sort of things he did were a bit hard for the students, he didn't attract students so easily, because the sort of thing he taught wasn't part of the normal undergraduate syllabus very much.

I went to the topology courses. You know, people – Hilton and Wylie gave courses on algebraic topology – and so I did quite a bit of that, which was helpful background to the sort of differential geometry – global differential geometry – that Hodge did. Characteristic classes were just in the air and so it wasn't a single subject, there was a bit of back up on the topology side. But I didn't know much differential geometry. I'd been to a course he gave on Riemannian geometry, I suppose. But it was… and once you start you do research, of course there are all sorts of difficulties you know, everybody has. It was certainly different from what you… it was a quantum jump from what you did as an undergraduate, the kind of geometry there to what he was doing. He was going a bit into, sort of, unknown waters. The topology gave one a bit of a clue, but otherwise it was a bit of a gamble, yes.

Everybody knew there was this book which he was famous for – Theory of Harmonic Integrals [sic] – but we didn't study it, and even when I started working with him he gave… he started me off on characteristic classes sort of things, work that he was doing with Allendoerfer and Chern – Chern classes and things like that. But pretty quickly I suppose I had to pick up the harmonic integrals theory at least to know the results, know the outlines. But there was never a course on harmonic integrals, it would have been much too difficult, and it wasn't regarded as, sort of, a suitable book even for Part III students. But I must have been exposed to it in my first year of research. I pretty soon had to learn, know all about harmonic forms, and when sheaf cohomology came along which it did in my first year, I had to know. So I'm not quite sure how I picked it up, but it was known. Mind you the results are easy and the proofs are difficult, so you can learn the formalism. I did actually read through it some stage in part, but I didn't learn it directly from him and there were no courses.
So you pick these things up. My memory is a bit vague now as to exactly how, but… and later on, after a while, it was… clearly it was central to the subject and you have to relate to sheaf cohomology and so on, and so by that time you had to know more about it. And later on, I learnt a bit more of the analysis. Early stages I didn't know the analysis, but later on when you got more involved I brushed up on the analysis and learnt about it. The early stages, you just know the applications, the algebraic geometry side and things like that.

I think what Hodge put me on to was the vector bundles and characteristic classes. I read Chern's papers on Chern classes, and there was some work that Allendoerfer and Weil had done. And so… he gave me that direction and that got me started on the characteristic classes and vector bundles.
There was then, secondly, we had a visiting American, a chap called Newton Hawley, who spent a sabbatical in my first year, and I got to know him quite well, very friendly with him, and he was just beginning to work on vector bundles, [...] vector bundles. And… but it was rather ironical actually, it was rather delicate, because what happened was that he was giving – he'd written a paper which had been published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences on [...] vector bundles. And he explained this paper to me and we discussed it, and then I started working on vector bundles and algebraic geometry, and I soon realised that actually his paper was all wrong – fundamental error – it was absolutely totally fundamental. He'd claimed that the topological classification worked and everything okay, so that all the jumps that we know about didn't happen. So my first paper was a bit embarrassing. I had to sort of have a little appendix pointing out this thing, and Hodge told me I had to tone it down a little bit, you know. So it was… I got friendly with him and he liked me and we got on very well, but my introduction was slightly bizarre that he’d introduced me a bit to the subject and I discovered he'd made this fundamental error and that helped me get started. That was one side.
Then of course the second side direction – that was the vector bundle side – then all the stuff to do with sheaf cohomology, well that was being published at that time, all in the Comptes Rendus notes in Paris, and I don't quite know how, but, I mean, I got on to that. And I used to go into the library every week and there'd be another note by Cartan and Serre and all these people, explaining all this sheaf cohomology, which I sort of, you know, picked up. And I discussed it with Hodge. He was interested too, but he didn't really know… understand it that well, I think, and the topologists didn't really know about it here. But I wrote my… the Smith's Prize Essays that you submit in your first year… well my Smith's Prize Essay which was done in the first year really, was about the application of sheaf cohomology to the classification of Ruled Surfaces. So I obviously had an… I'd seen at that stage a letter that Serre had written about the Riemann–Roch theorem which was going round informally.
So in that first year I must have picked up all about sheaf cohomology and the Kodaira and Spencer work was all coming in pretty fast, and of course by the time of the international congress in Amsterdam in ‘54, which was the end of my second term as research student, by that time, you know, Serre got the Fields Medal and Kodaira also. And Hodge had been over to Princeton a little before that and met Kodaira and Spencer, so I pretty rapidly fully integrated into the sort of information network about these things. But I think it was just, you know, it was good timing. The time I started these things were just taking off and with a bit of help from Hodge and bit of good fortune in the library, I sort of found out this was the exciting thing to learn about and then subsequently I met Hirzebruch and others. And Hawley helped a bit.

And then we had André Weil came and gave a course of lectures here, I think end of my first year.  And he'd written this paper about vector bundles and algebraic geometry, with [...], but my relations with him were a bit strained. Actually, what happened was that he gave this course which is in the third term on developing what lectures he'd given before on algebraic geometry, and fibre bundles, and it really overlapped a lot with what I was writing up for my Smith's Prize Essay, and so I was very chuffed – here was this great man giving lectures on one of the things that I was working on independently.
So I showed him my, sort of, typescript, first version of my typescript, and was hoping to get some encouragement, you see. He took it away and then he kept it a week or two and then he gave it back to me and there was no comment, you see, and I was a bit disappointed. And I looked very carefully and on the sheet, cover sheet he had written on this bit of paper, if you held it up to the light like they do with all this new electrostatic device or something, you could see some writing. Somebody'd written on another sheet above so it came through, and what it said was, ‘Rien de neuf ici’, and I thought to myself, ‘He probably didn't mean that, that must have been accidental’. But I got to know him subsequently much better when I was a colleague at Princeton and it's just the kind of thing he would have done. He wasn't going to tell me to my face that there's nothing new here, but he wasn't above writing it so I could work it out for myself.
And you know, in some sense it was true. I mean obviously what I was doing was somehow more or less continuing what he'd been talking about. Although I was doing a bit more detailed… but still I was a first year graduate student and he was a famous professor, and that's not the way you encourage research students. So, you know, if I'd been a bit sort of less resilient it might have put me off and made me quit. But I persisted, but I've never forgotten it.

You know, when you start doing research it's a very sort of, pretty sort of psychologically difficult time. You start, you have great ambitions, but you know, you've got to struggle and things don’t work and unlike the earlier years you've got long periods when you're on your own, you're not dashing to lectures all the time and not being, sort of, held by the hand. So it's a pretty difficult time… so you go through a time of much self-doubt as to whether you're ever going to be successful.
And so partly for that reason and partly, sort of, to fill in the days and make a bit of variety, I used to go to lectures. I went to a whole course of lectures on architecture and another one on archaeology. I'd sit in with the students who were doing, you know, drawing pictures of buildings and I quite enjoyed it. And I went to these courses on archaeology and I found that by comparison with mathematics it was all dead easy. You know, you sat back and you understood it all, instead of having to struggle over every [...] So, you know, it was light relief in some sense, but intellectually interesting and I enjoyed it, and I think that I could see that there were other possibilities you could pursue.
At various times I'd also thought about possibly taking the Civil Service exam; Ian MacDonald did, went into Civil Service, a lot of people did. One of the options you had available to you if you're good academically, you’d stand a good chance of getting a good job in the Civil Service. So these were all… I think many people shared these sort of uncertainties, but I did, I did the other lectures which I enjoyed. But the Smith's Prize Essay was… I think that was the end of the first term of the second year and got that, showed you know, that I was being successful and then onwards I could have expectations that I would go on well, and so that was all right.
But if it hadn't been like that or things had been worse, I could easily have decided… and you know, many of my contemporaries… I had contemporaries who were quite good who would do a year and then would quit. I remember one chap called Brownhills [sic] who was very good, but he quit after a year and went to work for GCHQ. So, you know, it's a toss-up. People who were very able, partly I think you have high expectations, and if you're good enough to have high expectations, you're also good enough to know when you're not succeeding. You know it's the person who's just a bit below that who doesn't realise that what he's doing isn't great stuff, who ploughs on… no doubt we've had some students like that ourselves and they do think they're doing very, very well and are very pleased about it, and you don't like to disillusion them. So if you're a bit better than that, you know what the distinction is… what's a significant result and what is not a significant result. If you're not getting something significant, you decide that it's not worth doing.
So I think a lot of people will quit who are actually extremely able and, you know, it's a bit of a toss-up and luck as to whether they make a breakthrough at the crucial stage or they don't. I remember even talking to Serre, and him telling me that in his first year of research he nearly quit, because he wasn't… didn't think he was getting anywhere, you know, he would have big expectations. So I would think it's quite common amongst people doing research to have self-doubts and the doubts maybe justified sometimes. You know, some people aren't going to produce great things and probably it's a good thing to get out while the going's good, if that's the case, and do something, you know, alternative… many other things you can do.
But I would be surprised if there are many people who haven't really had, sort of, periods of significant doubt and thought of doing something else. I mean I don't suppose I got very close to it. I didn't actually… but Ian MacDonald for example, was a person who went into the Civil Service, took the exam, and then five years in the Treasury, wherever he was working, finding he spent all his spare time doing mathematics at home, decided well this is crazy, he better go back. He came back as a, you know, mature student many years later and I sort of helped him come back in and so on. So what happens in your career is a toss-up, anyway, is a combination of chance and psychology and various factors. Our fates aren't determined that precisely.

You got a Smith’s Prize here, you're reasonably confident that you're going to succeed and get a fellowship somewhere and you know, reasonable job, so that gave you a kind of longer term horizon on which you could plan things. I think that was a sufficiently defining stage that… then onwards I didn't expect to quit, yes. So I think these prizes, although you get a bit blasé about them for students, are probably very important psychologically for the students concerned. They are a mark of encouragement at a critical stage, and I think that particular stage of the first year is very helpful because you're beginning to do original research, something on your own for the first time.  You've had that kind of attempt, you've got to […] it up, so I think it does serve a very useful purpose, certainly did in my case, yes.

It was fairly normal practice, when you finish your PhD, to try to go in those days… to go to America, and Princeton was the obvious place for me because of Kodaira and Spencer were at Princeton and the Institute for Advanced Studies had all these visitors. And so Hodge was... Hodge had been himself a year in Princeton way back in the ‘30s and Lefschetz was at Princeton University, so Hodge as well. So he actually went to a conference in Princeton, round about ‘53, ‘54, and talked to Kodaira and Spencer, and showed them work that I was doing at that stage, which they were interested in, so more or less Spencer said, you know, ‘Come over’.
And so I finished. I applied for a Commonwealth fellowship which I got and that paid for me to go. If I hadn't got that I might have got helped by Princeton University, and then Spencer said, ‘Well don't come to the university, go to the institute because the institute has better facilities for visitors’.  And so he... he suggested I apply to the institute. So I went there. But, I mean, at that time there were… opportunities for people to go were much more limited than they are now, and very few places you could go to so easily as the institute. So there was a big concentration of visitors to the institute, and also it was the kind of post-war period.
A lot of people's careers had been upset by the war, so there was a kind of whole concentration of many, several generations, you know, overlapping together. So when I went to the institute in Princeton, there was a galaxy of talent, the people that I met. Bott was there and Serre was there and Hirzebruch was in the university. Singer came… so there was a whole range of people, many of them older than me, all arriving at the same time and spending a couple of years at the institute. So it was very… and then we had the older people, Spencer and Kodaira in the university, and Lefschetz was still there, and Hermann Weyl had just died before I arrived, as had Einstein. But it was obviously the right place to go at that time and you know, enormously beneficial in terms of opening up your outlook.
I mean Cambridge was pretty… was reasonable, you know, with Hodge and people; but we didn't have many of the kind of visitors you get streaming through nowadays. You had… you kept in touch by looking in the journals as they appeared and you corresponded with people internationally. Much weaker than now, they didn't have email. But, for example, I got my fellowship at Trinity, end of my second year of research, and my work on, sort of, vector bundles and also the work on integrals of the second kind which I did with Hodge simultaneously. My third year, I think here was probably a kind of fallow year really because there was… my research had sort of come to a natural end. I wasn't quite sure where to go. There was nothing more I could get from the environment around me, you know. We still had seminars and so on, but… so, I don't think the third year here was terribly profitable in some sense.
I enjoyed being a fellow of the college and all that sort of thing and I… no doubt I learned a few things, but it wasn't… but when I went to Princeton it was totally different. I went to lectures, Bott gave lectures on Morse theory, and Lefschetz and Kodaira was giving lectures on sheaf theory and algebraic geometry, and Spencer… and Serre was giving seminar on this and that. So in a very short period of time I was exposed to a whole range of new things, new… I didn't know much about Lie groups before, and I picked that up a bit from Bott, and I learned a lot from Serre, direct contact with him and with Hirzebruch with characteristic classes. So, you know, the opportunity was enormous and as I said, I didn't have that at Cambridge.  So that year – I spent a year and a half in Princeton – I learnt a whole lot of new ideas, pushed in new directions a bit. I came back with, sort of, lots of things to work on and also made contact with all these people who I subsequently saw much more of over the years to come. So it was a tremendous impact on my whole career really… and the right stage. I mean, although I could have gone a year earlier and also benefited probably.

Princeton, oddly enough, is a very, well as you know, it's a rather atypical American town. It's small, smaller than Cambridge and has some of the attractions of bits of Cambridge, and I like Princeton, very much. But I remember when I was there the director of the institute was Oppenheimer, and I remember when I arrived he used to go… and seeing you in his office and asking me how I was getting on, settling down. I enthused a lot about Princeton, saying, ‘Oh it's a marvellous place, all these nice trees’. He wasn't… he obviously, a bit more experienced than me, he wasn't quite so impressed, he thought it was a bit of, you know, an inferior copy of Oxford and Cambridge or something like that. He was a bit more critical about it, but it was a very nice place to [be]… but that was untypical of America really.

I had this Commonwealth fellowship which was… one of the conditions of which was you had to spend three months travelling. So in the summer, I mean we bought an old car and we drove right round the United States, spending three months going through Chicago and the mid-west and visiting all the national parks, and California, and then as a bonus we drove down to Mexico where Lefschetz was organising a conference. And he more or less invited me to come along. So we went down to Mexico for a month, came back, so we did a tremendous trip round the United States and got to see large parts of it that way and that was really very interesting and made me contacts in other places which I've followed since. So it was a… but I mean if you go as a young person, America's obviously… is a country for young people. It's not so good for old people, I think.

Well my research at the institute, in terms of my own published papers, ended up, there was… I did this work on complex analytic connections in fibre bundles, which was partly influenced by Serre, and I talked about it in Mexico which was how you can describe Chern classes as obstructions and doing things in terms of sheaf cohomology. So that was one of the things which partly I learnt from Serre and partly I put together other bits of connections.  Well, it arose out of my own original work on fibre bundles, but that was a dimension of one and then I learnt the general theory and what was going round. And then I pursued in much greater detail the classification of bundles on elliptic curves, and that was the other sort of topic.And aAgain Serre was quite interested in that.
And the third one was this rather odd paper I wrote about the Krull-Schmidt theorem for […] sheaves, which arose again out of my discussion with Serre and he encouraged me and I wrote up this little rather abstract paper. The one on classification of bundles of elliptic curves, I do remember rather clearly, because I was working on that I think over the summer, when we did this big tour. And I remember very clearly these long drives – you know, in America you drive for sort of five hours non-stop across these big spaces, nothing much distracts your attention, not much traffic in those days either. I remember sort of spending many of these hours thinking about this problem, you know, my mind solving little bits and pieces of the problem. I have a very clear memory of exactly various bits to the puzzle being solved, because you had many hours to think and you know, it was fairly safe to think about those problems on that kind of roads.
[Q] Did you have to stop to write them down? 
No, no, no. You solved the idea and then you… once you'd seen how to do it, you'd check it up next time. I shall have to ask my wife whether she remembers whether I spent my time writing up, but I remember just thinking about them on the journey. Well one does… mathematics I always do. You have a problem which you're engaged with, it tends to sort of dominate your whole life. You know, you think about it when you can't sleep at night, when you're shaving in the morning, over your lunch break – so it's constantly there. Much of the time it doesn't make much progress, it just goes round and round and round. Every now and again you make a bit of an advance and then you sort of chalk it up and you write it down. So when one was driving, the same sort of thing would be happening, you know, you'd keep thinking about this problem, you're half way through, you'd turn it round and then an idea would emerge every now and again and you'd write it down.
So I do remember that period. So those are the three papers that emerged out of my stay at the institute. I was interested in many other things, went to all these seminars, learnt much which had influence over me later on. These were kind of, I would say, transitional, they partly emerged out of what I'd been doing before.

Serre was running a seminar on analytical bundles and things like that. I talked… I gave three talks in that seminar. I remember, the first time I'd given a seminar – people like Serre and Borel were in the audience and it was quite intimidating. I mean, I hadn't been used to the kind of precise style they expected. I would make some statement, and they would cross examine, ‘What do you mean and what it...’  It was quite different from the friendly, gentlemanly atmosphere that there used to be in Cambridge where people would, you know, wouldn't treat you like that; but there they were very, very tough. They wanted precision – Bourbaki style – and I remember being exposed to that, and learning a bit as a result.

I'd got married just before we went to America in fact. We'd been… we were sort of engaged the year before in ‘54 when I got my fellowship and then – we went to America in ‘55 – we got married in the summer we went over. Of course these days people… things are done differently. Lily had a… she was actually a year ahead of me, and she actually already had a job at university. She had a job in Bedford College, but in those days you thought nothing of getting married and telling your wife to give up her job and following you over across to America, which these days I think would be regarded as totally impossible. So she did that – came over. It wasn't that easy, I suppose, having had a job, something to do. When we went to Princeton I had my research; she got a kind of part-time job helping Spencer in the maths department, or people in the maths department doing some sort of bibliographic, rather low-level work and she would turn up to a few seminars. But it was rather low-level work and so it wasn't particularly easy for her to adjust to this sort of different role. But anyway… but we had this great tour round America together which was quite a unique opportunity, seeing three, four months travelling round. But I remember also trying to teach her to drive in America; that was not such a success. Teaching your wife to drive is one of the hazards in life, but we were going to do this enormous driving so I thought it necessary to have somebody to help.

I thought my job was to bring back the excitement, so to speak. I came back as a young lecturer and having been in America and people expected me to come back with what was all the hot news, you know. In those days you didn't get much travelling around. You didn't get streams of people coming through, so if somebody… young chappie here's gone and spent a year and a half, come back, it was his job, you were supposed to… so I tried to, sort of, tell people, run seminars and things of that kind.
And I also tried to introduce into Cambridge what was common practice in America. They had these general colloquia, every maths department would have ordinary seminars and then they would have once a week a colloquium where different topics would be addressed – invited speakers would come – on issues across the board. That was the normal practice in American universities. That was unknown in Cambridge. Cambridge… every group would have their little working seminar and there would be nothing. So actually I instituted such a general colloquium series and I think with retrospect I'm quite surprised that my senior colleagues took it so easily. I mean I would go round to all these professors, Professor Hall and others, and there was I a, sort of, young brash lecturer saying, you know, ‘Will you come and organise… run these?’ And they all came along and played well and it was totally against the tradition of the time and I'm not sure it survived, you know, because it doesn't fit very easily into the Cambridge system, but for several years this general colloquium went and brought together all these distinguished people who came and gave talks, which they could have given any time before.
We didn't have so many outside speakers, it was mainly people inside Cambridge talking to their colleagues, because they'd never done that before, and never thought it was appropriate to do, and so I did stimulate that. And well there were, of course, some other younger people also; Christopher Zeeman, well he had been… he was a year ahead of me and he was, he came back… he'd been in America on a Commonwealth Fellowship… came back the year before, so he was here and he was stirring up the topology group a bit. And so there was some other younger people helping to get things going. And I got a lot of backing from Hodge and people. They were all very glad to have somebody coming back from America and telling them what was going on.

Let's see, I came back in ‘57, beginning of ‘57 I think, and… so obviously I came back and continued to talk with Hodge. But shortly after that, I think it was… must have been ‘58, Hodge suddenly got all these jobs which many years later I got myself. He became Master of Pembroke and he became Secretary of the Royal Society, so he became very much involved in administrative matters. He had… I mean Hodge to be fair… I mean, he had, you know, a very remarkable career in the ‘30s when he did all his work, and he was just taking off. But then of course the war came, and he was of a generation that was, that really had a big impact on their subsequent career, because nothing much happened during the war, in fact during the war he stayed in Cambridge but he had to become bursar of the college and do all sorts of things. So by the time the war was over, there'd been a long gap in which he hadn't been doing very much, and so although he'd tried to be active, he really had. So when he moved on to these other jobs… by that time he really was quite a long way away from active research.
He kept interests, and he would talk, but for example, I inherited his research students that he had. He had at that time two students, Rolf Schwarzenberger and Ian Porteous, who started with him, but when I came back from America and he was obviously on the verge of doing these other jobs I took them over, you see. And I talked with him, and he had a few ideas still but he was really on his way out as a kind of… and then he eventually became head of the department and I more or less took over his job, as being responsible for the running of seminars and doing things in that area.
He was supportive and he helped invite people. For example, we had… I've forgotten when it was… well eventually he got me a fellowship at Pembroke. When he became a master, I got a teaching fellowship at Pembroke, and so I saw more of him in that context as well, and somewhere around that date, I forget when it was, we invited Karl Stein to come and spend a visiting term in Cambridge. He was doing all this functions of several complex variables, Stein manifolds and so on, and so he was a… and so he came over and he was actually put up in Pembroke College. And Hodge arranged the finances and did all the stuff, and then he gave a set of lectures here, which in fact I was sort of in charge of organising that, I got… in fact I got John Kingman to take notes of those lectures.
So he was supportive and I worked under him, and especially when I was a fellow at Pembroke, he was my boss so to speak, and helped out in different ways getting visitors. Hirzebruch visited here, again, I think that was the year before, Hodge arranged for him to visit, I think it was round about ‘55, ‘54, before I went to Princeton. And he came and gave a few talks, and I met him then for the first time and he was just doing all his stuff on Riemann-Roch and that was the big period. So he was very helpful, but he was no longer doing active research himself I think. And so my work was… I was already on my own as far as carrying on with my research.

Well the topic that the people were working on at Princeton in retrospect, I suppose one could see that they were all parts of some big interactive puzzle. Bott's work on Lie groups and Morse theory has had a long subsequent history, impact on things, and I… from that I learnt a lot about Lie groups and their details. Serre's work on algebraic geometry and sheaf cohomology was being developed in a particular direction and developed subsequently in other ways.
I think the other big strand was the work of Kodaira and Spencer which was the other part of the sheaf cohomology from the analytical point of view, which they were doing kind of in parallel to Serre. And Kodaira was giving lectures at the university on the detailed applications to the poly-algebraic surfaces – currents and surfaces and the things which eventually led to his proof of the fact that Hodge manifolds are algebraic. So he was applying the sheaf cohomologies in great detail to theories of the families of curves and surfaces and so on. And then there was Hirzebruch's, and he was giving lectures that he'd sort of… the Riemann-Roch theorem and all the background to that. So those were the kind of corpus of ideas that were sort of Lie groups, sheaf cohomology, algebraic version of it, analytical version of it, and all the whole formalism of characteristic classes, which Hirzebruch put together. And of course there was the paper of Borel and Hirzebruch on characteristic classes which emerged later, which became the kind of lingua franca of everybody working in the area.
So it was really a whole collection of interrelated ideas which have all somehow come to maturity more or less around the same time, and there were all these young, very active people doing them. That really made the whole intellectual climate… I mean, there may be other things going on as well, but that's the bit that sort of impacted on me and a lot of people involved with it. And I think it was the dominating factor at the institute at that time, and many young people, other visitors took part. So it was learning about that and subsequently following them up in different directions and collaborating with them was where everything… much of my subsequent work emerged from. And it was an extremely stimulating period, and a rather unusual one in some sense in that all these different strands I think really, sort of, came together round about that time and all interacted one with the other. And of course it was a few years later, I guess, that André Weil came to the institute as well, but Borel was at the institute… I'm not sure then, maybe a little later. So, my memory of  time is a bit confused, and I went to Princeton many subsequent occasions as well, but that first time, these were the kind of general… this was the general level of mathematics that was going on.
There were other people involved, of course there was Deane Montgomery who represented the sort of topology of the more hard, classical type and people who proved the Hilbert's sixth problem and that sort of thing. And of course, there were people like… there were the hard analysts like Beurling and Selberg doing the number theory, but I had less to do with those, and I don't think they, to be fair, had the same kind of big school.
In fact the interesting thing about the institute in those days was that the people who had the biggest effect weren't the main professors, they were these visitors, I mean the young chaps, and they were the people who… plus a few of the people at the university who were giving courses. We used to go backwards and forwards between the institute and the university, constantly attending seminars there and coming back. I remember this car load of people, Bott and Singer… to go to these, three days a week we'd go to hear Kodaira, Hirzebruch and so on. It was a very, very stimulating period altogether, and I think quite a remarkable period in the development of mathematics in the post-war era. There was the big development in France, in Paris, with the Cartan [...], but Princeton was where much of it was transported to and added to by the people coming from other directions.

My collaboration with Hirzebruch – he organised the Arbeitstagungs – and I went every year for 30 years, and spent 10 days, and there were all these meetings and I was one of the early visitors there and so we got to know each other very well. And our mathematical interests were very close, but slightly complementary, so we were always, you know, in touch with what the other person was doing. And at these conferences everybody else doing interesting things would be there, and so inevitable that at various stages our paths would cross so closely we would actually collaborate. And that developed later.
With Bott I didn't see him quite so often… the early stages. Subsequently I spent visiting terms in Harvard with him, and he came and spent… he spent a year visiting in Oxford as well. Bott came from a slight… his direction was Lie groups and Morse theory, which is actually a little further from me than Hirzebruch who had worked in algebraic geometry, and so I suppose it took a little longer to establish the natural links with him. It's very difficult to tell actually.
Collaboration with another mathematician is a combination of personality and mathematical interest and expertise, and you know, you become friends with people and you collaborate with them, and one thing leads to another and they reinforce each other. It's very hard to remember what exactly what started it off, but no doubt spending a year or two in the same place when you're young people, getting to know each other well, you know, it provides a framework on which other things can follow. And you have a common… you learn… in each case I found that these are people with mathematical backgrounds different from mine – sometimes quite substantially different – but merging in a common area. And when you come to collaborate, the other person brings the other expertise in and you learn from him and he learns from you; and after many years you sort of, you know, you more or less know the same stuff, because you taught it to each other.
So that happened over a long period with all of these really – different degrees – and it's very hard in retrospect to find out exactly what triggered what. But it started off by our common stay at the institute for a long period of time, and then visits to Bonn, the Arbeitstagung, was a major annual event, and many of the other people like Bott would be regular visitors to Bonn as well. And then every… I took a sabbatical every… as soon as, whenever I could, you know, every two years I would take a term off, and I would go to Princeton or Harvard or wherever it was, and so you kept in touch by fairly extended periods, and I think that enabled you to keep these collaborations going. And sometimes you would just work in parallel, you would both be interested in the same thing and you’d find out what they were doing… they were doing but not necessarily collaborating; and then every now and again things would get sufficiently close that you actually sort of got together and made a team.

[Q] Working on the basics of what came to be topological K-theory, how did this arise? 
Well that really arose, I think primarily it came from my attendance at the meetings in Bonn, the annual meetings, because the way their meetings were organised were very, very good. There were no fixed programme. Hirzebruch would just invite the people he liked, or the people he knew in the areas that he was interested in, mainly young active people. And he was very successful at doing this organisation, so lots turned up, became a very popular event and every year, more or less, you would discuss whatever was the most interesting topics going around. And more or less by general agreement you would have lots of talks on this or that, and so by attending these I was exposed to constantly, you know, changing developments and new things came along, I would get interested in them.
And so, in those early years in Bonn when I went, I suppose the late ‘50s, I was hearing of all these developments. On the one hand there was the topologists were doing Morse theory, there was Smale's work and others, classification of manifolds, Milnor's work on different aspects of topology. I mean, there was topology. I learnt a lot of topology… it was all around, topology was going through a big period. I had some topology originally, I learnt more topology in Princeton. I learnt more topology in Bonn. I didn't regard myself as a topologist but I picked it up, it was all around. And there were a lot of things happening. And Milnor was a regular attender also at Princeton. Then there were all the manifold classification, differential geometry, and all the theorems that Hirzebruch himself had proved about… which emerged from algebraic geometry, but, the theorems that various combinations of characteristic classes were integral. Which was a kind of very striking, formal consequence of the algebraic geometry, but applied through Thom's cobordism theory and others into differential manifolds. So I think it was Hirzebruch himself who really shifted the applications of these ideas involving topology in characteristic classes from the algebraic geometry side into the differential manifold side.
And so for many years that was a main theme in Princeton, I would say, so inevitably I got drawn into that and realised that manifolds and characteristic classes and topology were things you should know about and be interested in, and when the opportunity came if something happened I, sort of, got involved. And so my work in… early work in K-theory started off that way because there were these, all these ideas of characteristic numbers and divisibility theorems, my friends the algebraic topologists were all playing around with trying to prove results. Ioan James at Oxford told me about some problems that he had, and Grothendieck was giving all his lectures on his generalised Riemann-Roch theorem, and at some stage I put some of these things together and discovered that you could get some nice results by interplaying one against the other. And then the Bott periodicity theory hit the headlines about the same time, so around about a period of a year or two there was a whole range of new contributions from different people.
By just being around in the right place at the right time, and talking to and being interested in, you were inevitably sucked along certain directions. I didn't actually make any conscious move to say I was going to move from algebraic geometry into topology; it is just the subject naturally had evolved and the centre of activity was mixing these things up. And so before I knew where I was, I was having to think of myself more as a topologist. So when I started doing K-theory, I suddenly became, you know, a kind of topologist for a while. Topology is a branch of K-theory and K-theory is a branch of topology and I had to learn some more topology and K-theory became a tool for topologists to use. And so I… Henry Whitehead was at Oxford, he invited me over to give talks and was clearly impressed with what I was doing, and so for a while I sort of drifted very close to being a topologist; not really a bona fide card-carrying topologist, but sort of, you know, pseudo.

My own evolution, my mathematical development had never actually moved by consciously saying I'm going to stop doing this and do that. Some people have done that in the past. I think Hilbert you know, said, you know, his life was divided into compartments. He was doing number theory here, then he was doing geometry here and I think he sort of switched off and for five years he would do… I couldn't do anything as, sort of, clean cut as that. I just simply talk with people and things evolve and I suddenly found my interests had moved a bit and there were new problems and you'd have to learn a bit. And usually the learning was done by, sort of, osmosis. You talked to people, you went to the seminars, occasionally you'd have to brush up by looking at some textbook to get the details. Before you knew where you were you'd drifted quite a long way down line. So it was a, sort of… and that happened more or less continuously, you know, ending up with theoretical physics. But it was never a conscious process to actually make the move, you know, just in some sense swimming with the tide or trying to keep your head afloat really.
And actually there’s a nice story. I remember Henry Whitehead telling me at one stage that – about this business of shifting your fields – that he said he'd been a topologist all his life, he had all his friends were topologists, he so much enjoyed having so many friends, he said it would be terrible if one of these days I suddenly decided I discovered something new in functional analysis and I had to be function analyst, I would, you know, lose all my friends. He really got very… and oddly enough, eventually I actually moved into a bit of functional analysis myself in some direction, but because I didn't switch off from one to the other, but just kept these things together, I kept all my friends, so I didn't lose them. But I always remember him saying this, he said it in a kind of way that was, you know… I mean it was a kind of cri de coeur… he said, ‘Wouldn't it be terrible if I had this sort of fundamental choice, you know, I had to shift my field of interest and cut loose from all my old collaborators and friends?’ He would be… cut him to the heart, although he never had to make the choice. But it was… I was very fortunate, although I shifted fields very often, by being gradual and continuous, I never actually felt that I've cut off my, you know, people I knew before, just increased them, the band so to speak.

I'd gone to Bonn, and Grothendieck was giving his proofs of the Riemann-Roch theorem, and he said his K-groups were the sort of… had been introduced for that purpose in algebraic geometry. What happened was I saw that if you combined his ideas with some more topological aspects, you could deduce some interesting topological formulae and also Bott's work on topology of the unitary groups had provided a kind of topological side to the story. And I saw that by mixing all these things together you ended up with some interesting topological consequences, and because of that, we then thought it would be useful to introduce the topological K-group as a formal apparatus in which to carry this out.
Before that we were, so… I always felt I was forced to introduce the machinery, in fact not only the K-groups themselves, but the odd versions, the counterparts, the even groups and the odd groups, we had to introduce those which didn't exist in algebraic geometry. For topological reasons it was necessary to have a complete theory, and, well, I remember when I introduced these I thought, ‘Well, this is a bit sort of [...] you know, general’… but in some sense I was encouraged by Grothendieck's own general approach. He was extremely general in algebraic geometry and very successful by going to the general – making it as general as possible. And I felt somehow I was copying him in a minor way by making a general topological theory. But I felt it was justified by the consequences which already could be seen to be emerging… I didn't want to do it for its own sake, but it seemed if you introduced it you got a good machinery and you could see already the results.
So the results were already coming out in bits and pieces and so it seemed necessary… useful to have a big theory. And so it was very much modelled on, on the one hand, Grothendieck's formal work, plus all the other bits of topology that were around at the time, but it was always motivated by the actual applications that one could see which could be coming out of it. It wasn't, say, here's a theory let's see what we can do with it; it was a case of, look, there are some results that seem to be emerging in this area, let's develop a theory which actually incorporates that, it might be useful. And that's how it grew up really.
[Q] But you could see in advance that this was going to give you results which cohomology couldn't give you in some sense? 
Yes, yes, yes. Because some of these early problems that had to do with the topology of particular spaces which I'd learnt from James, were very concrete questions which… and standard methods of topology had failed to really get very far,. And I saw that putting all these other bits and pieces together you got much more powerful results, very easily, using this combined formalism of Hirzebruch, Grothendieck, Bott and so on. So it was quite clear that there was a very strong punch line and so that justified the apparatus which formalised it all and made a sort of smooth machinery to get it. The results were already coming out and I started from those and then only built up the rest of it subsequently.

Well there was an interesting technical barrier at one stage when I was playing around with these things, putting them together. I somehow… everything seemed to work so beautifully, so smoothly, I sort of charged along and it wasn't until Bott wrote to me at one stage, or I think maybe it was Hirzebruch, he was giving a seminar at Paris to explain our results, and he wrote and I'd more or less… we'd got the whole thing worked out. He wrote to me, ‘How do you… why is this true?’ And I said it back to myself, and said, ‘God, I didn't really know’. It just seems it had to be true, it's so beautiful, you know, I'd assumed it had to be because that's the way everything fitted together, and I suddenly realised, gosh, I had no idea how to prove this. And then I sat down and actually I managed to get a quite elegant proof.
But it would have been embarrassing because he was giving the seminar in Paris, you know, in a few weeks time and the results were being announced. And this great machine, it all had to do with the compatibility of the periodicity theorem and tensor products. And partly because of the origin, the relation, the way it arose, in algebraic geometry with Grothendieck's work… Grothendieck's work and the Bott's periodicity theorems, and when… if you put the two together it seemed obvious they had to match up. And I suppose I somehow assumed that happened, and when presented with the question I realised that I'd never actually consciously even realised that there was a problem.
So then I quickly had to produce a proof and fortunately got one quite quickly and then I wrote to Bott afterwards, and he actually then produced better proofs and in fact subsequently we had to do the corresponding theory for the real vector bundles which is much subtler. And he, we got… but it was a case where I'd been carried away if you like by the whole beauty and simplicity and elegance of the theory, I assumed it had to be true, and I was right, but it could have been embarrassing, you know, if it had been wrong: the whole thing would have collapsed like a pack of cards. But, I remember that one, but it didn't last long fortunately. We quickly came out.

[Q] Were you already thinking about indices? 
No, this is before that. The real theory in the context of vector bundles and periodicity theorem, because in the complex case everything can be done, there's no torsion, so everything can be done by using cohomology calculation, rational cohomology, which gives you a machinery. In the real case there are all these… mod 2 problems, which means that… to do with signs and so on… which you cannot do by cohomology calculations, so you had to do those by going back to basic homotopy theory. And in some senses, in the real case, Bott's theorems about homotopy are that more refined and there's no alternative way except going back to the fundamental principles.
And so I had to learn that.  But for example, Hirzebruch and I had made an application of the real theory to the questions about vector fields on spheres, and parallelisable spheres, so there are some nice applications you can make quite early on with the real theory, which are purely topological. They've got nothing to do with the index, that's a much later story. And at the beginning we did everything with the complex case, but the real case was one you brought along when you could, and got refinements and improvements of various kinds.

My position in Cambridge was I was lecturer – a university lecturer – and I had a research fellowship… I had a teaching fellowship at Pembroke. I'd done that for three years. What happened was that Henry Whitehead suddenly died, you know, at the comparatively young age – early, mid 50s – and so there was a chair was vacant in Oxford, and, well, I suppose being a brash young man I applied for the chair. Those days there weren't… we didn't have this profusion of positions that we have nowadays and so chairs at universities like that were rather rare events, and I could see that there wasn't going to be an opening in Cambridge or promotion prospects for a while, so I applied for the chair in Oxford. I didn't get it, because Graham Higman who was a good deal senior to me, who was the reader there, he got it. So when I failed to get the chair and his readership then became available, so in that sense I thought well, that's second best; I applied for that and so I got that.
And I think it was a significant shift from my point of view because it meant that I could go and take a job which didn't have to do any more college teaching. I could have done, there was an option, but I chose not to. And so I had a job where I just had to do a few university lectures, and research was my main… so, at a fairly crucial stage, you know, when your opportunities to develop are at a maximum, you know, I was able to devote more of my time to research. If I'd stayed here, I could have done so, but the teaching load's quite significant, if you're a college teaching fellow, that would give six hours college teaching, or eight hours lecturing and so you… quite demanding, and so the advantages of moving were that I was able to get on with my research more.
I think the salary was a bit better, but I mean that wasn't… I think it was just a matter of, at a certain stage, when you're at […] career, you expect to look for a bit of promotion and that was going. I think Hodge was a bit sorry that I went, and I probably wouldn't have gone if it hadn't been that there was this chair going in the first place, which having sort of got close to… well having gone in for the chair and sort of half prepared to move, not having it, then finding this second alternative, you know, it was somehow rather natural to think about it. And so we went. I think it worked out really well. As it happened it worked out very well for me.

[Q] Did you find Oxford very different from Cambridge? 
Yes, yes I did actually. Oxford was different in lots of ways. Well, on the one hand, the general level, the college system was much... much stronger in Oxford than it was in Cambridge, in that the college appointments were the primary appointments most of the time and so on, and that you had to get adjusted to. Mathematics wasn't nearly as large or as strong in Oxford as it was in Cambridge or as it is now. I mean, a few colleges had a few mathematical fellows and that was about it, then there were a couple of professors… so it was really quite small. It did have the advantage of having a mathematical institute, first the old building and then subsequently the new building which gave a focal point and had a few people who were quite active, like Henry Whitehead and Charles Coulson.
And of course generally in the whole university there was a… the scientific composition was less, there were less scientists around, less mathematicians… a lot more philosophers, the place was crawling with philosophers. So the atmosphere was different, you had to get adjusted to it. But I ended up by going to St Catherine's which was a new college, which was intended to be heavily scientific. Well actually rather different from the rest of the Oxford system, and it was quite a nice atmosphere for me to be in, because there was a younger generation of people there, it wasn't a long established college, there were… there were more scientists there, so it was easier… that made the transition easier. If I'd gone straight to a traditional Oxford college it would have been probably harder, but going to St Catherine's was… made the transition a little bit simpler.

Henry Whitehead had died, of course, but his school was still there. There was still the regular topology seminar that was held. Ioan James was the Reader in Topology and so I saw a fair amount of him. And there were other younger people and there were research students. Graham Higman was the Professor of Algebra – I got on quite well with him. I don't think there was anybody else who… it wasn’t… there was nobody else really worked very specially in my area, I would say. The topologists were the nearest, there was nobody doing algebraic geometry. I got… made some contact with some of the analysts and the pure physics, but I think my own mathematical contacts were outside Oxford rather than inside Oxford. I mean, in the world at large I had many more contacts than I had in Oxford, except as time developed we had our seminar, we had our research students… I got research students and younger people came along, but originally I was on my own.
So actually looking back in retrospect, you know, you move around, you'd think you'd want to go to a place where the subject is well represented, it might have seemed to be a rash move. But there weren't so many posts in those days and you know, the idea of being too choosy about whether you went because who was working there, you know, wasn't really relevant I think.

Singer came more or less on his own bat. He had a sabbatical and he just wrote to me saying he was coming. At that stage I didn't know Singer as well as I did some of the other people, like Bott, and nor did I have the kind of resources to invite people anyway, you know. I remember when I went to Oxford the resources to invite people were extremely limited. I remember I got Serre to come over and give a seminar and I think I... I had great difficulty in extracting £5 out of the university or something, you know. It was extremely difficult. So there was no way I would have had money to invite Singer from America, but he came... he came on his own here, he had a sabbatical and he liked to come and stay in Oxford, and so, I got to know him really after… well after he came, but that was the contact.
Subsequently things improved and eventually I got Bott to come, as a Visiting Fellow to St Catherine's, and that was a great success. But in the early days it wasn't easy to invite visitors, but Americans frequently came on their own, had their resources and moved around. And that's why I spent time going elsewhere, and by going to sabbaticals elsewhere, to America every couple of years, going to conferences, going to Bonn.  That's where I made my contacts. The number who came to Oxford would have been in those days… early days, much more limited, yes.

Because of Hirzebruch's work coming from algebraic geometry and topology, there were all these integrality theorems which he proved.  Various combinations of characteristic numbers are divisible by various quantities because in algebraic geometry, this quantity which you want to put as integer has the interpretation as the dimension of a space of holomorphic functions. And then Hirzebruch was so skilful with all these manipulations, he was able to transfer these formulas from algebraic geometry to other contexts, where you've got things which were integers but there was nothing, nothing for them to describe. There was no... no space of which these things were the dimension. Well that was a slight irritation. You'd like to be able to find a substitute for what we did in algebraic geometry in things which weren't algebraic, that weren't complex.
But even more irritating was the one to do with the… the A-hat genus, A-roof genus, which is… you add things which are integers and sometimes divisible by powers of two, and there, again there was no… there were even an… not only did you not know how to interpret the integer, but sometimes you couldn't even prove that it was an integer. It was unsolved problems. So these problems had been around for a while with Hirzebruch's work, and he was interested in them, trying to prove them and they would turn up at the Arbeitstagung, they would play a role. So it was the kind of thing you focused on, and when we got interested in K-theory one of the initial consequences of the K-theory was to get some progress on these integrality theorems.
And then because of Grothendieck's work in algebraic geometry, the K-theory of formalism, these linked up with the algebraic geometry again, so all of this was pointing towards some… hoped to interpret things like A-roof genus as some dimension of some space somewhere. And that's about… that’s what I... I was looking for that, I was trying to find that. And well, when Singer came we sort of… that's where we sort of rediscovered for ourselves the Dirac operator. I'm not sure quite how far I'd got before he came, but obviously I had the problem trying to interpret.
I knew the formula, Hirzebruch's work, I knew what the answer was; what I had to guess was the problem. We had to find out what was this object. We knew from algebraic geometry, what it should look like in algebraic cases. We knew that it had to do with spinors because of Hirzebruch's formula. So the question was, there should be some differential equation which would play the role of the Cauchy-Riemann equations in the spinor case which ought to fit the left-hand side of the equation. And so, when Singer came, he was better than me at differential geometry, covariant derivatives and… and I suppose he knew a bit more, perhaps, of the theoretical physics. So we stumbled on rediscovering the Dirac operator and we were able to formulate the index theorem.
Simultaneous to that was the… how we started, and then at about the same time Stephen Smale came passing through Oxford and he told us he'd been talking to the Russians and Gelfond and people, and the Russian school had formulated the general question of index problem for elliptic operators, in general abstract terms, and whether there was a formula you could calculate for it, and so on. We realised that what we were doing was a special case. So somehow we had solved, we had started from the opposite extreme from the Russians. We had... we had the answer; we didn't know what the problem was. We invented the problem, and then we realised this was a special problem of a more general problem, the index problem which the Russians were concerned about. But they had no idea what the answer was. So they had a problem, you know, here there is this index which ought to have a topological formula because it's topologically invariant, but they had no machinery.  They didn't have any sort of… we had the example of coming from Hirzebruch of a formula… which had the formula all built in, and a guess from algebraic geometry what it should be. All we had to do was to plug in the little bit coming from the theoretical physics, the Dirac equation, and that made the click. And then having got the formula, then of course we had to work for quite a long time to get the proofs, but that was a different story. But that's how it started. I was working on it, coming from the Hirzebruch end. Singer came along at the right moment and was able to produce the Dirac operator, rediscover it, although I'd been to Dirac's lectures, but that didn't… and actually we didn't think that it really had much to do with Dirac's work because this was a Riemannian case and he was in with the Lorentz case, so we thought it pretty formal.
And then also, the other thing was I had to… Singer brought in, the other bit he brought in was… he first brought in more skill with differential geometry and covariant derivatives… I wasn't that good on that. Secondly he brought in the functional analysis, he knew all about Hilbert spaces and bounded operators – and that was his training – so he was able to set me right on that and Fourier transforms. So he was able to explain to me the generalities that the Russians were doing. I learnt a bit of analysis going off with him, so I learnt the analysis and I suppose he learnt the topology and the algebraic geometry from my side.
So it was an interesting development and just a bit of good fortune I suppose that he happened to be around the right time, and I happened to be talking to Steve Smale at the right time. But it arose out of all this background of things coming from Bonn. It was the answer looking for the problem. And the physics was a, well, a long way down the road yet, but… I suppose, well I don't know how much I knew, but how much even Singer knew, but we got the formulas and obviously we must have known […] the physics, we called it the Dirac operator, but we didn't really know much more than that… the name.

[Q] I had heard that one of the Russian formulas had a missing n-factorial or something because… is that right? 
Well the Russians, you see, were only… they tended to consider the simple cases. They weren't concerned with the general cases. You just started off with low dimensional examples and they didn't worry with non-trivial tangent bundles, so they just had a formula involving the degree; which is the top formula that's showing character formula, and that wouldn't… the factorial, they would miss it. I mean it wouldn't be there in the first instant, but you don't put it in until you know the… but they might have thought there was some constant and wouldn't know what it was. They would know that the topological information would be contained in this degree, because in the simpler case they considered, that was the only topological information there was. And then they would guess that this was the answer, or there might be a factor, but they wouldn't have known the formula to expect, certainly, not in general, and they started off in dimensions two or three where the factorials aren't that big.
So the Russians formulated the problem, they hadn’t got… and they'd started working on the analysis of pseudo-differential operators, deforming differential operators through pseudo-differential operators so that you then begin to apply the continuity argument to say it had to depend on some symbol… so they got the general framework. But what they were totally missing was the machinery of the general algebraic topology side, which you had to plug into it. Now we had the… we came from the other end completely, in some sense we had to learn our analysis, but it was easier for us to learn the analysis than for them to learn all the elaborate machinery which I suppose was what Hirzebruch had contributed. So it was having the right friends at the right time that did it.

I tried to improve my analysis at various stages. I mean I did at one stage go away and plough my way through Dunford and Schwartz, you know, learn all about operator theory and so on, but I picked up a lot of it by just talking to Singer and he would explain things and I would understand them. So most of it was by osmosis like that, but I did make attempts to read one or two books. I read, needless to say that I read Gelfond and Naimark book on normed rings because – C*-algebras – and that was… Singer was very good at it, so I did actually make attempts to sort of read a few serious books.
They were about the first books I'd actually tried to read since I was a student, you know. After you've ceased being a student you don't usually read textbooks; you learn what you need to on the hoof. But since my analysis hadn't been particularly good, I thought I did need to go back to square one and I did actually make a serious attempt to learn a bit. Then subsequently I read Hörmander and other things, and pseudo-differential operators. Yes, so I did try to supplement what I'd picked up from Singer by filling in on the analysis. But all generally with the aim of things related to the analysis I needed on elliptical equations, although subsequently I got interested in hyperbolic equations, so I, you know, branched out here and there in different directions. But it was a mixture of talking... talking to him and then backing it up with some additional reading, yes.

I went to Oxford in ‘61, I think he came there shortly afterwards for that visit, and I just… I was just reading the talk I gave at the Stockholm Congress. Stockholm Congress must have… you can work out, Nigel, better than I do… ‘54, ‘58, ‘62. So in the talk I gave at the Stockholm Congress, I... I ended up by saying here was the problem about the index and we had some conjectured formulas, and a little footnote saying it’s now been proved. So, you know, the Congress was ‘62, by the time that it appears it must have been ‘63. So probably, only a year and a half or something like. In retrospect it was probably… it seemed longer but I think… but of course, there were various versions of the proofs. That was, you know, the first proof probably was… I went to spend a term in Harvard, two terms, I went once in ‘62 and once in ‘64 and each time we had seminars, Bott and Singer, on that. And the proof was certainly worked out around that time, talking to them and talking also to Nirenberg who, you know, he helped us on… he was more expert on differential equations. He was a friend of Singer’s so we brought him in. We brought in all the experts we needed, you know, as we went along.
So the first proof probably took… it evolved over a year and a half, something like that, and I remember when Singer was here we used to walk round and round the park in Oxford, in the university parks, struggling to find different approaches, you know. We didn’t have… we had various different versions and eventually we got down to trying to sort of reduce it to a boundary value problem, and then what exactly… which boundary value problem and… so it took a while, but then eventually of course there were, subsequently, you know, any number of different proofs; some of which I worked on, some of which other people worked on. So it went on being improved and modified over many years, but the first stage was round about… it must have been about first ‘63, I suppose, yes.

Well, what was wrong with the first proof, besides being, sort of, conceptually a bit unattractive, because, you know, you verify things, I mean, was that it didn't include some generalisations that we had in mind. Later on I got involved in more generalisations which involved equivariant index theorem, how symmetries act, groups. And that… well, you can, now in subsequent retrospect probably build up a cobordism proof of that as well by doing equivariant cobordism theory, but that gets very messy because all the fixed point sets have to be taken into account. So whereas the good proof should go through like that, and so that was one of the consequences of that one.
And another version is, you know, the theorem for families of operators. Again if you had a cobordism thing you'd have to do… you'd have the cobordism for families and that would generate a lot more […]. And finally, well these subtleties to do with the real case, where you get mod 2 things, and that you couldn't possibly do by cohomological calculations of the type which the original proof was. So there were any number of generalisations which wouldn’t work, which wouldn't have worked with the original proof, and at the back of my mind was also the fact that the original proof was the analogue of Hirzebruch's proof of his Riemann-Roch theorem, it was modelled on that with the cobordism argument. Whereas the Grothendieck proof which was (a) more general, and (b) more direct, was much nicer, subsequently. And so we were aiming for something which was a bit more like the Grothendieck proof, and in some sense eventually we got there, the various different stages.
So we knew that cobordism was sort of the quick way – first proof to check it's right – but it was quite clear that for lots of reasons it wasn't going to be the best solution. So as soon as we got other ideas we… and of course the proof which we published in the Annals [sic], it was based on the analogue of Grothendieck's approach of combining things with embeddings and projections, and so once you've got an embedding then you have to sort of understand how to extend things in the normal bundle direction. And although it's not so self-contained as the algebraic geometry approach… algebraic geometry… the difference between algebraic geometry and the index theory… the algebraic, the topology and the analysis are combined, they're the same thing, yes. I mean the vector bundles on the one hand, everything algebraic, vector bundles and you make constructions with sheaves and you stay within the same category, whereas in the index theorem the two sides are a bit different, further apart, the topological side on the one hand and the analysis is quite a long way apart. You have to try to bring them together, and in some sense we… one succeeds after a while, but in algebraic geometry you start off more or less next door to each other.
So when we took Grothendieck's proof we had to, sort of, somehow extract out the part of it that we could understand at the time which was embeddings and extensions. But the extensions are messier, you don't have the elegance of sheaf theory to just do like that, you have to build it up and you have to worry about different kinds of analysis, and Hörmander helped us with all that. And so it was… it was quite hard work, doing that, but once you'd got the embeddings the structure is elegant and then you can extend it to symmetries without any additional effort. So certainly that was the right thing to do and, I mean, that was the version we published, whereas the other version we gave in seminars and Palais published it, and they had that seminar on the index theorem in institute where they worked it out in that way. But it was… obviously right from the beginning we wanted something better to get the generalisations.

I got interested in equivariant K-theory [sic]. You see when I was doing K-theory I got interested in equivariant K-theory before we did the index theorem, I think, through talking with Serre, and he'd, sort of, somehow dealt with groups and equivariant… and he, sort of, suggested to me this would be a good thing to do. So we developed equivariant K-theory quite early on. In fact when Graeme Segal was my student, one of the first things I got him to work on was really the equivariant K-theory, because that was around. I may be a bit, I may be confused now as to the exact order of these things, but certainly equivariant K-theory was a seemingly natural thing to do from the topological point of view and had various natural consequences that you can get nice results out of it, and so it was worth us doing by itself. And certainly we therefore knew that if you had equivariant index theorem there were some natural applications, and I remember particularly an application with, you know, in relation to the signature… it was quite clearly an interesting bit of topology.
So we knew there were applications of having these more general theorems which would be interesting, and so it wasn't just for its own sake. On the other hand it also seemed somehow totally natural to do, you know… forced by inner logic that it should be so… and very undesirable to have a proof that didn't work. And also, as things further developed there was a kind of feed backwards and forwards because it turned out that, to… these are further refinements in the index theorem, to prove the equivariant… deal with equivariant K-theory in the best way, you really had to have a good proof of the index theorem to go along with it. There was a kind of zigzag pattern backwards and forwards where different versions of the proof of the index theorem and bits of K-theory helped each other along; until the end they were so mixed up I didn't know whether I was going from left to right or right to left. But it's certainly true that various proofs of the index theorem later on… various proofs of the periodicity theorem for equivariant K-theory, for general non-compact groups, non-abelian groups, required partial use of the analysis, index theorems; not necessarily the full theorem but at least the notion of the index and the construction of indices, families of operators and so on.
So they all help each other along, and I think the process of going from the very first proof of the index theorem to, sort of, the latest, was a 10… 15 year process; various stages of refinement, improvement. But they were all motivated by, it seemed to me, a combination of two factors. First the inherent logic of the situation that you felt it had to go in its more general case, and it ought to do the same way; and secondly that it was pretty clear that in most cases there were interesting examples of things that you could actually compute with these new generalisations, if you wanted to do. And so it was a combination of both factors at different stages really.

The thing I did with Bott on fixed point formulas, at one time we called… we had seminars… we even called it the Woods Hole fixed point theorem because we had this conference in Woods Hole, which is this place off, you know, Cape Cod where they have conferences and summer meetings – it's rather an attractive place. And there was this conference which Bott and I were included at, although it mainly, if I remember correctly, most of the people there were algebraic geometers. I think it was probably officially called ‘A Conference in Algebraic Geometry’ [sic]. Certainly Cassels was there and Tate was there and people like that and Shimura was there, so it was that sort of branch of algebraic geometry, number theory. And I think we were tagged on because we were friends of the people who organised it, and they thought it useful to have these chaps around.
So, and then during that meeting Shimura told us he had this conjectured formula for… on algebraic curves, for automorphisms with, sort of… so effectively what he had was a particular case of the fixed point theorem for automorphisms of curves, acting on differentials, holomorphic differentials, something like that. And he conjectured – he had this conjectured formula which I think he'd worked out in some special, some special cases or something like that – and he conjectured this formula. So then we got interested in that, and sort of, and that led us to, sort of our general fixed point formula during the course of that meeting, it was already… it worked out, and there were various interesting stages in that proof.
First of all, when we… when we started the formula, the general formula which would fit in, without knowing how to prove it, we thought we'd better check it out with some examples. So we took the simplest example we could think of, which actually was an elliptic curve with complex multiplication. And so we gave the experts, Tate and people like that, we said, ‘This formula should be true’, and so they went away and came back and calculated, they said, ‘No, it's wrong’. So you know, if we'd believed them we would have given up. But anyhow we didn't believe them, we thought this formula was too good to be, you know, to be wrong.  And so, you know, we insisted and I think, I don't know whether then or later they did it again and got the right answer, but certainly originally they told us it didn't work.
And then the other thing was, the Hermann Weyl formula for characters of representations, as in terms of the fixed point formula. Bott being expert on Lie groups and things, it was quite natural to think of that formula as a special case. We knew the work of Borel and all that, that you should study flag manifolds and things. But at first, when we looked at that, again it didn't seem… it didn’t seem to quite work, something… and I remember going, this was the case I remember going for a walk with Bott round this dusty track in Woods Hole, quite a long walk, and it was in the course of that walk that it somehow all clicked into place, and I remember explaining to Bott, you know, how it worked, I mean, and convincing him that it really did hang together as we’d sort of hoped. You know, we knew that it was a special case, it ought to work out, ought to reproduce the formula, but at the beginning we didn't understand it sufficiently well, it didn't seem to click.
So by the time we'd finished the Woods Hole meeting we, we knew that was a special case, we knew how… and then Bott wrote a paper subsequently where he kind of proved that special case by using group representation theory which you can do, so to speak. So we knew that was… so we had the conjecture coming just… just that conference, only for a matter of a few weeks. So from Shimura's initial starting point to our formulation of it, checking it out in examples, we had the conjecture by the end of that, and then it was a question of finding the proof again.
And we ran a seminar, when I visited Harvard, I think the second time probably, which was going through that, giving proof. Well what Bott and I had to work out, this approach to do with transversal intersections and the bit of analysis that goes with that. It was bit, sort of… I think we probably made a bit of heavy weather with it and subsequently people, you know, better at it, more skilled in analysis, got it a bit more cleanly. But it was, we were exploring, sort of, new territory as far as we were concerned, it wasn't pure topology, it was a bit… and, so we had to get a bit more into the analysis and operator theory and so on. So we had to learn... we had to learn a bit more analysis to do it properly and then work it out, but I don't think it took that long by the time we… from the time we started in the summer to when we’d worked it out.
But it was an interesting experience and of course subsequently… that was... that was the case of isolated fixed points, and then with maps which are not necessarily part of a compact group action.  Then subsequently with Graeme Segal we worked out the case of the compact group actions and arbitrary fixed point sets by more standard algebraic topological methods with the equivariant K-theory side. So those two... those were two extremes and I suppose we must have got the fixed point theorem with Bott first, that came first, then that suggested the general formulas, that there should be one. So probably the equivariant K-theory motivation was probably spurred by the fact that we needed to have that in order to get… to generalise the fixed point formula we'd got before. I think that must have been that order.

Among the interesting examples of using group actions are involutions, just groups of order 2, and amongst the natural operators which he uses is the Dirac operator. But because spin itself is a slightly subtle concept, you get a factor 2 turning up in there. And so studying involutions on spin manifolds is quite tricky. You've got to think rather hard not to make mistakes and get the right… and you get elements of order 4 instead of elements of order 2. So I mean, I wrote this paper which applied the involutions to spin manifolds and we got a lot of quite nice results out of it, but there was some particular point I remember, you're... you’re right, where on the one hand… we missed one factor through somewhere, and then later on by further improvement you put it back in somewhere else. There were several places where these factors of two are very delicate.
I quite enjoyed working on that paper and that thing because precisely this delicacy of powers, factors of two, and the notion of spin and the different kind of involutions on spin manifolds, the dimension of the fixed point sets are… their dimensions vary, congruence modular IV vary as you can have different cases. And it all got rather, very neat and then sort of refined. And then when you take it down in examples, it all comes out very nicely. And that was a case where I think the results weren't at all known, you know, by anybody, and it came out of this machinery and doing it very carefully you got these very precise results out.
So it was very satisfying in a way, sort of very clean as a consequence. But that was… you really needed, yes, you really needed to know the equivariant theory, but also for the subtleties you needed to know the real theory as well. So everything, you know… it was subtle in lots of different ways, and so there's plenty of scope for a few odd, odd slip-ups here and there.

The mod 2 index, it could have gone unnoticed because I think with the emphasis originally on real cohomology and characteristic classes, and so on, you know, you wouldn't see it and you'd have to look very hard for it. And also the original methods of proof wouldn't have allowed for it. And even subsequently if we move further on to the time when there was all this emphasis on the Riemannian geometry approach and the heat equation approach, that's also using real numbers and going even further away from this. So the mod 2 thing was a little bit on its own, could easily have been missed out at the first step, and would certainly have been, you know, trodden underfoot in the stampede later on.
So I've always had a kind of soft spot for it, you know. It was a little bit of a gem that came out. If you do things very carefully, very nicely, you have this little elegant story and it certainly wasn't something that you were going to get easily achieved by any other method. And it remains, you know, one of the sort of trickiest things to get by these... by these methods. And I tell you, you know, you had a soft spot for these kind of theorems that are on their own and are rather refined.
Obviously, many theorems you end up by… they can be attacked in half a dozen different ways, and that's very interesting. And in fact you… Gauss was said to have had 10 different proofs of the reciprocity theory; and the index theorem probably has something like getting on the same way now, and that's very, you know, significant. It means it's on the crossroads of many different routes, and that adds to its interest. But there's other ones that you can only get to by one route, the long end of a long twisting journey up the mountainside, and they have an attraction of their own too, a charm which I rather like.

The connection between K-theory and Fredholm operators at the beginning… that was a thing which went back some time. It was the work of Jänich on the one hand, and I'd got a bit involved with the other, and with Kuiper's theorem about the contractibility of the unitary group in Hilbert space, realising that the… that K-theory was somehow the universal object for Fredholm operators, or the space for Fredholm operators was the classifying space of K-theory. That wasn't at all clear at the beginning. You know, when we first started, nothing like that was clear, and I remember partly talking to Palais on the one hand, and others, and this picture had emerged; and at the end of the day it was extremely simple and very elegant, and I included that in my K-theory notes.
So the Fredholm operators ending up as the classifying space for K-theory was a very good thing because, you know, if you're talking to analysts and they wanted to know what K-theory was, you would just explain that if you studied families of Fredholm operatives it was the only topological information all encoded in the K-theory. So for an analyst, immediately… I remember when I gave Harvard lectures once, Gleason was in the audience and came to these things, and you know, he immediately, sort of, really… he'd been working on Hilbert spaces and operators and he found this very, you know, appealing. So it was a very important link to the... to the analyst because if you tried to explain what K-theory is from the point of view to traditional topology – vector bundles and classifying spaces and such – you know, they get no idea, they're lost and think that it's a lot of abstract complicated stuff. But starting off from the index, abstract index of operators, it's an extremely obvious thing for an analyst, a functional analyst, and later on that became part of general K-theory.
So that was a kind of a route, a narrow route between the algebraic topology on the one side and the functional analysis on the other, and going through that route you got a good bridge. Well that was just general relationship between Fredholm operators and K-theory; then of course when you got into the real theory, then you got a much more subtle story because there were all these different other bits you wanted to bring in. And also there was… even in the complex case there was the relationship between Fredholm operators and self-adjoint Fredholm operators, which was the model for sort of the odd K-groups, which is very nice when you see it and that gives you a nice interpretation with things like the spectral flow and things on the circle, which are also nice from the point of view of analysis. So the… the use of Fredholm operators and self-adjoint Fredholm operators in relation to families and K-theory, was a nice thing which… and I learnt a lot of operator theory from Singer and so we worked a lot [on] this together.
And then the last stage of that really was this thing you referred to, when we did the real case, and then you have eight different cases and it gets quite delicate. And then you bring in the Clifford algebras as a systematic way of treating all… all the different classes of Fredholm operators in the different dimensions. And then you actually… well then, we did in that paper, produce another proof of the Bott periodicity theorem by a totally different route from anything else done before, which was a kind of big surprise to us because we weren't planning to do that, we were just studying it for the purpose of our applications. We suddenly realised at the end of the day, ‘Oh gosh, somehow we've got the Bott theorem and didn't use it. Where did it come from?’ And so we suddenly realised we had a proof, and so we... so we produced this other proof of the Bott periodicity theorem which incorporates all these different eight cases and things, which is, in a way, quite natural from the analytical point of view. And I think Dan Quillen has subsequently... subsequently used that for other purposes. It’s a different… really is a different approach to the theorem and has its own merits in going off in certain directions.
So that… but I think that it was that whole work on that collection of topics was a combination where Singer's background in… in operator theory especially was obviously, you know, very helpful. I was able to… I learnt enough, when you get to learn it, you didn't need that… wasn't that difficult. But you had to worry about the continuous spectrum and the singular spectrum and… and things like that. But it worked out very elegantly and I quite enjoyed that paper too, because again it's one of these things where quite tricky and quite subtle and slightly unexpected results come out.

After the earlier work, including all these refinements and extensions, you know, all directions… and that might have been somehow a natural end. Then of course all the new stuff came in with the... with the Gilkey-Patodi work showing that you had these precise local formulas in the context of Riemannian geometry. So then... then that inaugurated an entirely new era which Bott and I worked on. We had… Patodi came over and worked with us at Princeton and we... we spent a long time trying to understand Patodi's proof which was very difficult to understand, the computation. We also tried to understand Gilkey's proof which was a bit messy computationally. So we ended up by producing this invariant theory approach to Gilkey's proof which we... we understood and was, we thought reasonably elegant, and that was... that was one... one story.
And then of course that led on, later on, to the work with Patodi on the… on the manifolds with boundary and that was really yet another stage. So these really are quite… I suppose the thing evolved through natural problems. The first lot of problems which are sort of, people discussed before; and then... then there's the index, the local version of index theorem understanding the Patodi-Gilkey stuff, and that being used as a kind of stepping stone to the question about manifolds with boundary and the eta invariant was yet a third stage. And each of these really required quite a bit of extensive development and... and can be refined in lots of ways.
And then, of course, after that we ran into theoretical physicists and that's the beginning of another story, and the physicists, they came in with their own improved methods and so on. And so at that stage I dropped out of the further… there were other proofs of index theory coming in using supersymmetry and so on, and that's where I certainly wasn't... wasn’t following the version; but I think there were a lot of interesting things happening. But that, as I say, I certainly was moving on to something else, but for a long time… I moved on not just because they were trying to improve the theorem, but because there were sort of different generalisations of the theorem which needed to be addressed and, you know, clearly important, so that kept me. But I think that must have taken… well, I… I remember now, when I came back from Princeton to this country which was in the beginning of ‘73, that was when I was working on the... the work on the manifold of the boundary with Patodi and Bott, and Singer rather. And I remember that in fact there was rather a critical stage because, when you… I left the institute, you know, I had a cushy job there and why should I leave the institute and come back to Oxford?
And, you know, psychology… it so happened when I got back. I spent a couple of weeks working on this problem which we'd got to a stage where it, you know, we were pretty close, but we hadn't actually got… and I spent a couple of weeks cracking the last bits that we needed to actually do the proof, you know. And I remember feeling very, very chuffed writing off to Patodi and Singer saying here… here it is now. And that was very important for my psychology, I mean, I’d come back to Oxford and do this work and things still go well. So that... that was, so anyway that was ‘73, so I... I was… so that's more than 10 years since index theorem first started and that was when we were doing manifolds with boundary and it... it carried on a bit further beyond that. So I think it must have been a good 15 years from beginning to end when it was sort of evolving in one stage or the other.

By the time I went to… I went to the institute in… in ‘69 permanently, so from then onwards I had the research job there. When I came back to Oxford I had a research… Royal Society Research Chair there. So I didn't have any teaching except for, you know, seminars and research students. And that applied to the rest of my time. So by ‘66 I already had a research professorship. I didn’t, I... I wasn't complaining about my job. I don't really know if it had much impact really. Fortunately the Fields Medal isn't like the Nobel Prize. Nobel Prize gets so much publicity, you know, and immediately you have to go and open bazaars and you know, see prime ministers and things, and I think for... for some people getting the Nobel Prize is the end of their research career because they can't cope with all the extra publicity, and also the expectations. Once you've got the Nobel Prize you're immediately raised up so high. So I think they have… that can have a… can... can be rather difficult.
The Fields Medal is a much lower key and outside the mathematical community it doesn't mean, you know, it's not really so significant. So… although it does affect some people. I know that some people got the Fields Medal have felt, you know, they'd done this, they eventually get the Fields Medal, they now must do an equally important big thing on something else and they move fields. And for example, Paul Cohen who got the Fields Medal with me, he got it for his book on the continuum hypothesis, big... big theorem in logic, although he was really the analyst, he'd moved into logic, done this big theorem, got this reputation, so he... he felt that he had to make another move and go into something else. And I think he... he then moved into theoretical physics in order to do something. But I don't think it ever... it ever quite panned out. I think that subsequently he may… he moved into computing. So if you, if... if people use it, feel that they have to make some… prove some big theorem in something, they've done it one field, you just go into another field and do the same; that can actually probably be quite negative. I mean it's very rare that it succeeds that way.
So I didn't actually... didn’t actually do that. I... I drifted. I never moved by sort of… I didn't say I'm going to… when I got the Fields Medal I didn't say I'm now going to, you know, learn theoretical physics. I got into theoretical physics by the back door, and I didn't plan on any major change. So I don't think it really had a… obviously it gives you a, you know, gives you a psychological boost… but at that stage I wasn't going to resign my chair and give up mathematics anyway.  I was going to do the best I could. Yes, I don't... I don’t think it… obviously you know, it has an indirect effect, people know you better and they invite you round and it... it sort of has some beneficial spin-offs in that way. But I think otherwise, no I don't think it was a...

It's always difficult to know what you, what... what actually makes you decide to go anywhere, and the reasons you give... give for yourself are not necessarily the reasons that actually work. I think the… on the one hand I'd been to Princeton a lot, in the past, you know, I went there first, when I first… after my PhD; I'd been on two subsequent visits for a term, and you know, there's no question Princeton was for all a 'Mecca' of mathematicians. All the big shots were there, it was… so in some ways it was the natural thing to go.
I'd spent a year visiting before, that was in ‘67 which was actually when they, sort of invited me to take the job. I said, ‘I'm not going to make up my mind while I'm here, I'm going to go back and, wait till I get back to England and decide’. And I think the other... the other factor was… some aspects of things in Oxford, sort of, you know, I didn't like very much. Well there were two things. One was that the, the general university set up and… there was a lot of resistance to change and getting things done and bureaucracy and… and conservatism. And there was the… there was the Franks Commission which was on when I first went there and it had expectations of big reforms, but most of those reforms were rather, you know, modified in practice and didn't actually… so I was a bit disillusioned that Oxford wasn't going to change in the way I thought it ought to change. And secondly, I got to the point where until that stage I'd been a, sort of, young chap and there were always, you know, you had… you had older people around from who you... you learnt things and you know, worked in an environment.
I got to the point where I was at Oxford, there was nobody else, nobody from whom I could learn anything, you know, I'd got to the end… end of the road as far as that was concerned. And I said, well, you know so, if I went to Princeton there would be other people from whom I could actually benefit from… who knew more than me, and therefore I was going to the place where I thought I would continue to be a kind of student in that sense. At least that was… those were the kinds of reasons that I gave to myself, but I suppose just the attraction, you think it's a sort of a step up in the world, going to the institute at Princeton. And of course, you know, it was a research job, I didn't have to do teaching. In Oxford as a professor you don't have to do much teaching, but you had to give courses and involve yourself. So that a kind of factor… and of course the institute has a very relaxed timetable; every April you could come away, end of the year I could come back and I did spend the rest of the year in Oxford. So you know, it wasn't total… you didn't separate yourself totally. I was back for the term and part of the summer.
And of course the institute at Princeton had the attraction that there was a lot of money, you could invite lots of people, you know – you came and worked with me at the institute, I could provide assistance. So it gave you a lot of possibilities for operating on a bigger scale and all the visitors there were obviously a benefit. So there were lots of reasons which, you know… other people have gone to Princeton presumably for those sort of reasons, but they don't always stay.
[Q] No, neither did you.
Some people go there for a while and come back. I arrived, for example, just as Hörmander was leaving. He, he'd been... he’d been from Sweden after getting his Fields Medal. He'd gone to the institute. I think he spent about three years and just as I was going there he was just deciding to go back to Sweden. So, it's a sort of… not an unusual path to follow.

Well we heard about Patodi because he'd produced this proof of the conjecture of Singer and McKean on the local formula for the relation with the Gauss-Bonnet theorem, and then later on with his work on the Kähler manifolds, and... and so we heard he got these fantastic algebraic cancellations. So he was obviously a very bright young Indian, and, but it was difficult to understand his work and so on, so, you know we… he was invited to come to the institute. I think, well I was responsible for inviting him, I suppose, at that stage, to come and spend a couple of years with us. So he did. And it was a very productive time. He was a very interesting young man of course, Patodi, he was slightly eccentric in some ways. He was… he came from… he was a Jain… a very strict sect, vegetarians who had to live in a certain way, and he also unfortunately disregarded his health and eventually that led to complications of which he died very young, tragically. But he had his own style, so he was a very unusual contribution. He worked his own way, he had insights of his own, and he produced these formulas.
I remember when I first worked on this problem with the manifolds with boundary, what happened was that the origin of that whole problem was again a mixed combination. On the one hand there was the input coming again from Hirzebruch's work. Hirzebruch had done this work on the cusp singularities of algebraic surfaces, and the formulas which correct the signature formula for singularities of certain types. Well the signature corrections for orbifold points, points of finite order, that we understood already from the index theorem with finite group actions. But then he had fixed-point corrections arising out of the singularities of like the cusps of Hilbert modular surface, there were a different kind of singularity. And he had corrections there which involved beautiful things like the Dedekind eta function which have nice analytical formula. And so we naturally… we'd like to understand that formula and prove it.
And so we were led to formulate the question of what happens with signature theorem for a manifold with boundary, what is the boundary contribution, and when you play around with it a bit you see what are the kind of possible constraints it might have and where it might come from. And then gradually it led us to formulate some version using heat equation methods, and we formulated a problem for Patodi to calculate. And first of all did it in the special case of the signature, and then Patodi, he went away and he calculated, and he came back and he checked it, and said, ‘It works out right, you know, the formula’.  But we couldn't understand his kind of way of doing it, Singer and I, so we tried to redo it in our own way, in particular it involved doing it for the Dirac operator and therefore for all Dirac type operators.
And so we tried to cast it in a different way, away from differential forms and in the form of a general operator. And you know, eventually we succeeded, but it took quite a long time; particularly finding this notion of these global boundary conditions formulated in that way. It didn't at all come naturally. We chased ourselves round and round [our] tail, we were also on the wrong track until we hit the right way of looking at it. So at the end of the day it all looks very simple, and that looks so obvious that's the right way to see it. But when we were working on it, by no means, that was the way it came around, and it was a very tortuous way we got there.

So that took quite a long time to get that up, and I say, the... the last stages in that, buttoning down the exact contribution of the boundary, and some fine points, that was the last thing I did when I came back to Oxford after we'd, sort of, formulated the problem. We'd got the index of the Dirac operator with the boundary contribution, but proving the exact contribution to the boundaries, particularly the zero eigenvalues on the boundary; that was... that was the bit that had to be finished off.
But, it was, again an interesting collaboration between Patodi with his... his flair for doing explicit computations, coming up with the answer, but not telling you, you know – not in a way that other people can understand. And then Singer and I trying to extend our index formula approach to this thing and also with the… our background; we had this example of Hirzebruch which was part of the motivating procedure, motivating background, why we wanted the formula at all.
So all those fit together, and then eventually, we also had to work out the special case – which came from Hirzebruch's work – where the... the boundaries, a sort of torus bundle over a torus, initially that's just a sort of a torus... two torus bundles over the circle, more generally higher dimensional tori bundles over higher dimensional tori. And then in those... in those cases working out that the boundary contribution, as worked out, as deduced from our general theorem, could be effectively computed and related to the analytical formula coming from the Dedekind eta function, that Hirzebruch had got in the first place. And that was a very beautiful, sort of, story all by itself which took us quite a long time and which we pulled in… Donnelly also came in. Well, we first had the one dimensional case where you have the torus bundle over the circle, and that involves things like real quadratic fields; and then there's the generalisation of that.
And that was a very interesting story where I had to get involved quite lot in the number theory. I remember reading Siegel's Tata lectures on... on this in great detail, and really quite enjoying it. Something I'd never really got into that degree of detail and, you know, real quadratic fields and class numbers and… things that Hirzebruch himself was very good at, and he went on to use it in many other contexts. But I... I was, sort of, trying to connect it up with my work with Singer, and we... we succeeded, and some of it wasn't as elegant as I would have liked. I think that nowadays there may be improvements along that line.
But again it was a story that had several bits to it. The origins were a bit mixed. It wasn't completely obvious how to go about it, or even how to formulate it. By pressing… I think the secret of success here was to... to, not to be satisfied at the first stage, you know, not… we could have said when Patodi had produced this proof of the signature theorem, that's the signature theorem, here it is, here's the proof, write it up; it's a bit messy, but never mind. But we weren't satisfied, we said well this isn't really quite right, it should be more general, it should be more elegant. And we pressed and probed and eventually when we got it, the reward was there; it was a much better theorem, cleaner proof, and with more longer term implications as we've seen with subsequent work with the physics. So it was a case of not being satisfied with having the first proof that comes out and insisting on the kind of proof that you think that ought to be, that's consistent with the elegance and beauty of the problem. And I... I think that's, sort of, in some sense the style I've been trying... I’ve been trying to pursue, and you know, it... it paid off. But sometimes you... you struggle a long time to get things into the shape that you want them. They don't... they don’t come easily the first time round.

The L2 index theorem, the version I reported on at the… I think it was the meeting in Paris – it was the Schwarz birthday conference or something like that – that was a version which got me involved with von Neumann algebras. Well, I'd been… because Singer knew about functional… I learnt about von Neumann algebras from him, and there was a time when we were all quite interested in... in doing K-theory for type II von Neumann algebras. And there was this chap called Breuer who was from Germany who was specialised, and we... we talked with him, and you can do a lot of things for type II von Neumann algebras, the real numbers replacing the integers, and you can do index theory, and... and it's... it’s quite amusing.
But the question is: What's the pay-off? Are there any particularly interesting applications? And so, this example with... with infinite coverings of manifolds, discrete groups, seemed to me... me a sort of natural application where the discrete group gave von Neumann algebra and the general theory suggested that... that you should have a theorem. So I focused from this lecture presenting it on...on just that problem by itself. I didn't use von Neumann algebras in a very heavy way, but I had to use the basic analysis of Hilbert spaces, operators commuting with the group actions. And I remember at that stage reading... reading Dixmier's book, understanding in some detail about von Neumann algebras, so I could really get to grips with this and combine the... the sort of elliptic differential operator theory of parametrices and so on with the von Neumann algebras; bridging that gap. So I did spend a bit of time teaching myself a bit about... about von Neumann algebras for that purpose, but I got rid of most of it in the actual written version. So that was… I quite liked that because it was, sort of, a nice concrete application, as opposed to churning out the general theorems which you could do, but it wasn't quite clear what... what the point of them was.
So that was one thing, and... and the… that’s L2 index theorem and then... then of course, got interested quite a few other people… and people followed it up in various contexts, also Dodziuk got interested in the combinatorial version, and then I think subsequently Gromov and people, they worked with L2 putting numbers in combinatorial contexts. But the stuff on... on the discrete groups, that was partly motivated, or had applications for the work I did with Schmidt. The point was the L2 index theorem with this… in this infinite covering space showed that you could deduce non-trivial theories about the existence of things like harmonic forms, or L2 square-integrable cohomology by passing down to a quotient which was compact, and then using the topological formulas, and then if the index was positive that meant some space, it wasn't zero and upstairs it wasn't zero. So we... we could use it to prove existence theorems of the kind that you needed to prove that certain representation space that you constructed for non-compact semi-simple groups was not trivial, because there was something there. And so the purpose of that application was to push it in the direction of that.
And then I got involved working with Schmidt on… following that up, although actually that turned out to be rather a, sort of, odd story. I... I had this idea, I wrote to Schmidt, I said, ‘Well I think’… I knew... I knew him… ‘maybe we can try to re-prove Harish-Chandra's theorems more elegantly’. I mean, Harish-Chandra, you know, my colleague at the institute, and he wrote these enormous papers which were chopped off at 30 pages at a time, you know, he... he was a kind of factory, produced the most… when he got to the end of 30 pages, turn it up, published, and you kept... kept going. And you kept the same notation all the way through, so it was impenetrable… except for the real experts. And yet the results were very, you know, interesting; beautiful in some ways. So I was very keen to understand enough to see whether we could prove some of this stuff, you know, in a way that… it clearly related to index theorems in general, and so that... that was my attempt.
And so I talked with Schmidt who was knowledgeable about the Harish-Chandra theory and he... he agreed that something like this could be done. So we agreed we would write a joint paper to... to… which would actually set up the… re-do the main Harish-Chandra theorems, starting with this index theory as a base. But before we could start on that, we had to do something else – I’ve forgotten what it was – we had to write another paper which was meant to be the foundational paper. Yes, well we'll polish this one off quickly and then we'll get back and do the other thing. Well, we spent about a year and a half writing the first paper, and the other paper, second paper never… never appeared. But I learnt quite a bit about representation theory groups with him, and the version that… well no, maybe I've forgotten which way round it was. The other bit had to do with… the other part of the Harish-Chandra theory had to do with the… showing that the characters of irreducible representations are locally squared… locally integrable functions, and that... that gets into difficulties when you have very singular orbits, conjugacy classes, and... and you have to treat that by... by some rather direct analysis and differential equations. And... and Schmidt worked out how it should be done, but we never actually put all that together in proper papers, but I gave these lectures in Oxford which George Wilson wrote up which incorporate some of that.
So sometimes collaborations never... never finish in the sense that you... you aim to do something, you plan a big scheme, chapter I, chapter II, chapter III, and you... and you… chapter I grows and grows, and you never get on to chapter II. That... that was an example where we never achieved our full ambitions, and then by that time you… you're tired and you've moved on to something else and you're working with somebody, a different person and… so our collaboration never... never totally achieved what it did. But it was... it was quite interesting as far as it went and it got me involved a bit more into... into the Harish-Chandra sort of theory.

Oxford had… I... I was back in a place with... with graduate students, as opposed to Princeton which had only post-doctoral fellows and... and so on. And so life in Oxford from then onwards, was...was, there was substantial involvement with the... with the research students that I had, of… you know, many of whom with... with great success. I had a lot of good students at various… although, ups and downs. I mean there were fallow... fallow periods and fruitful periods, but so the involvement with the research students there played a bigger role in… And I think later on, you know, when I look back on it, I realise that, you know, that was… that would never have happened had I been in Princeton. I would never have had research students… well not quite.
Well, that's not quite true. I mean, George Lusztig was a kind of research student of mine in Princeton. You know, he... he came over, you know, as a young Romanian without a degree and, so he came to Princeton. He was… not really, maybe my assistant formally at some stage, and he... he was doing a degree, technically at Princeton University, under Bill Browder, because the institute didn't give degrees. So you know… but effectively he was working with me and he did his thesis with me at the institute, but the university nominally gave him his PhD.
But that was rather exceptional. So except for that, there weren't really PhD students, and my being in Oxford over a long period of time I acquired, you know, a substantial number of... of students and probably did, through... through that, influencing students and... and what they did, you know, had more success than I would have done if I'd stayed on in the institute for another, you know, 10 or 15 years. So I think that it worked out well, and... and I… although I hadn't probably thought it all through that way when I came... came back.

When I was at Princeton I remember talking with Freeman Dyson, who was a colleague there at one stage, and I think I'd been consulted or I knew that there was a possibility of getting Roger Penrose back to Oxford, so… and I was going back. So I talked to Freeman Dyson about him. And I remember him saying, yes, he'd been... he’d been very impressed with some of the stuff that Roger Penrose had done about black holes and all that. But he said, ‘All this twistor stuff that he does. I don't... don’t really understand what it's about. Perhaps... perhaps you’ll... perhaps you'll understand it’. You see? I mean I didn't know anything about that either at the time, but of course that's what happened.
When I went back to Oxford, Roger Penrose turned up and we… since we'd been former students together, we knew each other and although I hadn't seen anything much of him over the last intervening 15, 20 years, I knew roughly what he'd been doing. But he'd moved off into physics and relativity, but... but, still he had the same common background – geometry. So when I came back we got, you know, it was rather natural for us to talk and for me to try to find out what all twistor theory was about, and... and you know, he talked to me about the geometry. And so that was actually a very fruitful interaction, because I remember when I first... when he first started to explain to me what he was doing. He'd come in and say that he was doing these complicated contour integrals with… and there were singularities and... and he... he had formulas which would work, but he didn't quite know the right way to... to treat them. And at some stage when he explained it to me I realised that what he was… really needed was... was sheaf cohomology, as a way, and that… once one realised that then lots of what he was doing immediately acquired a sort of a much more natural interpretation […] machinery. And so it was really quite interesting, because within a short period of time, once I'd realised this and explained it to him, and also his students, they immediately became total converts, you know, and, you know, within a few weeks they were all... all beavering away producing complicated spectral sequences and everything and... and going off, you know.
From then onwards it never stopped. So it was a, sort of, piece of good fortune in a way that we were able to converse, because the gap between mathematicians and theoretical physicists, even to those like Roger Penrose, was quite big. But because he'd had, we'd had the same background, and of course his twistor theory had… arose out of the common background of projective geometry which we'd been studying. So you know, we start out with a kind of common foundational dictionary. We knew what it was about. I had to understand what he was doing with all these complicated Feynman integrals, and then I had to explain to him about sheaf cohomology, but in a way it was, you know, it was inevitable I suppose, that... that if... if we were in the same place and we talked to each other, that... that would happen sooner or later. And... and it... it did and it was very, very productive, well both for him and for me and for a lot of other people. And so… but it was... it was a good... good, yes, good piece of good fortune and I think… I've forgotten the exact order, but certainly he was, he must have been appointed just as I was coming back… in fact I've forgotten which of us actually ended up coming back first; and it was a very, very productive relationship.

Lars Gårding who was the sort of, you know, Swedish differential... differential equations man, and... and Hörmander's, sort of, mentor in a way. He somehow or other was visiting Oxford… I can't quite remember exactly how, you know, was passing through or he wrote to us… anyway, and Bott was... was in Oxford. And he... he came to us and said, 'I've got a problem, you chaps, you know, you should be able to help me with, and it involves some topology'. And so then he presented us with this problem which was to understand this work of Petrovsky on... on the solutions of hyperbolic differential equations governed by wave... wave equations. And... and basically the question was if you have the ordinary wave equation in space, you have the... have the light cone and you have the, sort of, regions inside the light cone, and outside the light cone where... where there's darkness so to speak; and the lacuna, the gap, the place where the solution is zero, and the question is for more general hyperbolic equations governing more complicated cones, identifying all the lacunas.
Well, Petrovsky had written this paper quite a long way back which was a very, sort of, pioneering paper, and he made a very substantial contribution to... to the problem in terms which related to the topology of algebraic surfaces, algebraic varieties which are the bases of these cones, to the lacuna problem. Because it involves… the lacuna problem involves computing the fundamental solution by some integral over certain regions and understanding which regions gave you zero for the integral. Anyway, Gårding, who, you know, made his life out of hyperbolic equations, was obviously interested in this problem of Petrovsky and wanting to redo Petrovsky's work in a modern language, because that was 20 years before. So he reckoned he needed some help on the topology side and... and the algebraic geometry that went with it.
So he... he really posed to Bott and me like a contract, you know: 'Will you, you know, here's a job, I want a... I want assistance'. So we... we… he was, I think, visiting for a short while and... and, yes, it was actually when I was at St Cat's… St Catherine's and... and I don't know whether I'd invited him or he'd come for some other scope. I can't remember quite how he came… but anyway, we worked together on this for... for a while, and, sufficiently that we could understand what the problem was about, because my knowledge of hyperbolic equations was essentially zero. You know, I knew about elliptic equations, but hyperbolic equations was a totally different game. I don't think Bott knew much more either, and Gårding didn't know very much algebraic geometry of a serious kind or just the rudiments of topology. So when we started, there was a big gap, but by sort of, you know, being together for a couple of weeks and conversing hard and exchanging, we... we got to grips with what the problem was about.
So then the collaboration began and it took quite… it evolved over quite a long number of years, partly because we weren't always in the same place, and he went back to Sweden and Bott went back to America. And there were some quite technical difficult problems. And also once we got started, Gårding wasn't satisfied with only proving – re-proving – Petrovsky's theory, he wanted to go further. And we did, we went much further. We... we generalised and proved and... and so it kept going. And it was… it turned out to be an extremely interesting, you know, application of modern algebraic geometry topology to hyperbolic equations. And for the purpose of that I had to learn some hyperbolic equations. So then I went away and read Gelfond's book, you know, the... the five volumes… I mean I didn't read all five volumes, but the... the one volume which is relevant, where he did a lot of distribution theory and constructing fundamental solutions, it's all Hedglop's [sic] formulas and so on, of hyperbolic equations. It's nice, it's a nice account, and so I... I enjoyed learning that account in Gelfond. So it helped me pick up a bit about hyperbolic equations.

I kept my interest in hyperbolic equations for a while because, as I say, this programme took several years to keep going, and we wrote two big papers and... and then Gårding really wrote the third one more or less on his own, subsequently. And so when I was back in... in America I used to go to NYU quite a lot, because that was the kind of home of analysis – differential equations – there was Peter Lax and Louis Nirenberg and all these people, whom I got to know through Singer; they were friends. And so there… it was very useful to have all these analysts and I'd be invited up, usually when I was there to give a talk at NYU, and I used to make this joke that alternately I would talk about elliptic equations one year and hyperbolic equations the next year. So it... it gave me another link up with the differential equations community; which was quite useful.
But it was a bit on… it was a... it was a little team on its own, Bott and Gårding and me, we worked on this thing and I... I don't… I mean, I don't know, it wasn't part of a general major programme, we didn't have lots of other people coming in and joining us or anything. We... we cleaned up the problem to some extent. It's nice… it’s a nice account and it combines a good application of modern topology, algebraic geometry to differential equation theory. But it closes a chapter in some sense; although not entirely. Again, Hörmander suggested a generalisation of the notion of lacunas to Gårding, which Gårding used up, which was not to worry too much about things exactly being zero, but what happened as you approached… and so in particular Hörmander was emphasising the importance of doing things which worked also for differential equation with variable coefficients.
You see, these things which originally were differential equations with constant coefficients, where they're fully transformed, turned into good old-fashioned algebraic geometry and, you know, nice and clean. And most of the important equations are like that, the fundamental equations of physics are constant coefficients in some sense. But he wanted to do… he wanted to study more hyperbolic equations in a more realistic physical situation, and then they quite likely would have lower order terms and might have variable coefficients; and so you'd still want to know to what extent these lacuna questions would work. So Hörmander suggested that one should formulate the problem in that way; and so we did. And Gårding did pursue that a bit, so it did... did lead on a little... little bit further. But I don't know whether, you know, anybody else has picked that up.
So it was really a little digression of a kind, but again great fun. It involved this nice collaboration and I got… we got to know each other very well, and I've been to Sweden several times since, and they even gave me an honorary degree in Sweden…

I'd heard from Roger Penrose that he'd been to some meeting and there were these things called instantons, but that was fine. And then Singer came, I think he even wrote to me before he came, saying, ‘I'm sure you'll be interested in these, work with the physicists and they have these equations called the Yang–Mills equations, and there are the first order equations, there are second order equations which I think, you know, you will find interesting’. And then he came and... and told us about them and we picked them up and... and learnt it. So I... I think certainly he'd... he’d talked with the physicists. He was very well connected through... through Chern on the one hand, and Chern talked a bit with Yang and... and… so he'd... he’d picked up quite a lot from there. And so certainly he was the one who brought... brought it to Oxford and... and so then we started working on understanding the... the geometrical meaning of the self-duality equations and... and the Yang–Mills equations. And of course at the same time Roger Penrose's group and Richard Ward were... were looking at it from their point of view with the twistor... twistor interpretation, you know, alongside.
So I'm not sure, you know, whether they… to what extent Richard [sic] Ward was influenced by Singer coming in. He probably was. I mean, but... but for the physicists, the Yang–Mills equations were... were in the air and Roger Penrose, as I say, his group would have known about these because they knew about corresponding things in... in gravitational theory, and so I think it may have been somewhat... somewhat independent but converging in the Oxford context. So that's how it started and of course that led on to a sort of long-term involvement of collaboration with lots of people. And Roger Penrose's group and yourself and Singer and many other people over many, many, many years in a way. So it… it was again, I think a fruitful combination of Penrose being there, we'd already established the dialogue with the  twistor theory and the sheaf cohomology which gave a kind of natural launching pad. When... when this problem arose we were all ready in some sense, the technique was all there and we just had to understand what the equations were.
But... but I remember when... when Richard Ward explained his... his approach to the self-dual equations, because that was the case where I… there was this famous seminar he gave which I... I sort of, I half thought about going to it and half thought of not bothering, and at the last minute I decided I'd go. You know, you go to a lot of seminars and I suppose 90% of the time you get something out of them and sometimes it's a bit boring, but every now and again something really interesting happens. And that was the case with this seminar of Richard Ward's, and I went along not expecting anything much, didn't quite know what he was going to talk about, and clearly by the end of the seminar I... I was really sort of terribly excited by what I had heard. And I wanted to understand it in my own language. And then I went away and spent a hard weekend trying to explain… follow it through the implications and convert it back. And then I saw that… how one could use it for getting global solutions in the four-sphere and things, and then I went back and told Roger Penrose's group and so on. But it was, you know, if I hadn't gone to that seminar, that particular… well, something might have happened later on, but not... not that way, and... and it was again a question of the opportunity.

My original, you know, first work was on bundles on... on algebraic curves, and that's what I did… part of my thesis was about, right at the beginning when I began. And then after that my first, one of my early students, Rolph Schwarzenberger, I got him… gave him the work as a job, looking at bundles over […] space. He made some useful contributions. So, I... I knew a bit about bundles on... on projective spaces. I mean, there wasn't a great deal known, I mean the general theory; but it was, you know, it was a familiar problem. I knew what... I knew what these things sort of were, and of course more work had been done independently by algebraic geometers of which I was aware, and I knew that people like Horrocks and others that had been working on these things recently. So as soon as it was realised that this was a translation, I knew there was a body of... of work available, and techniques which one could try to... to bring to bear on it, which… otherwise, of course, it wouldn't have been much progress.
But it was clear that... that the classical problem of a kind that... that one should be able to tackle by various... various methods. And of course that's what... that’s what happened. When we pursued it further these... these techniques for constructing… well, originally the... the first thing that emerged was this… which I did with that paper of Richard Ward where there were these… this conception of Serre's which associates curves to rank two bundles as the zeros of cross-sections. And so we knew that you can construct bundles by curves of various kinds, and the first curves are the straight lines and that was what the physicists had already done.
Actually it was rather… slightly irritating, because I remember when we did this, my very first observation is, ‘Aha, we can... we can suddenly construct more instantons this way’. And I was… but then the next day some pre-print arrived from some physicists where they'd done that, and I… it was a bit... bit frustrating. And one or two... one or two other things that we did, the first easy ones, we found the physicists by their own methods had got there the same time. But then, pushing over much more complicated things it was clear one had a systematic approach, even if not very computational.
So it was clear that... that this was actually linked in with interesting questions in algebraic geometry, as soon as one realised what the problem was. And then later on using more sophisticated techniques with Horrocks' work, we ended up with the explicit construction in parallel with Drinfeld and Manin. So it... it was a sort of evolving story, but it was a part of the sort of long term collaboration which we'd already established with Roger in the first place.

It was really one of these sort of rather dramatic instances, wasn't it, because we'd... we’d spent the morning working on this thing. And I... I suppose we'd been working at it before, getting… using Horrock’s construction. We'd finally got the solution; we saw how it all fitted together, and as usual what happens when... when you found… discover you've solved a problem; you... you stop for lunch. You know, on the grounds that it might turn out to be wrong and you... you enjoy your lunch while thinking you've solved the problem.
I've done this very often. Sometimes you come back and its right; sometimes you come back it's wrong. Anyway, we stopped for lunch, and then we came back after lunch and there was this letter from Manin saying he'd solved the problem too, and spelling out exactly what he was doing. I mean it was, in a way, a bit... bit off-putting to find that. On the other hand, his... his approach… although they... they… I suppose at that stage they were a little ahead of us… because he'd got as far as sending me the details which he'd written in the proof, and we'd discovered it that morning. So I suppose in strict chronological order, they'd... they’d done it first.
On the other hand, it wasn't totally independent because after my paper with Richard Ward, when we started on this problem, he'd heard about this one and got interested, and he'd written to me. And I'd... I’d told him about the Horrock’s constructions as an interesting possibility to, you know… a way of going forward. So obviously he'd taken it up with Drinfeld. They'd come back, got it, and so the message was coming back. So it was a sort of… in some sense a indirect kind of collaboration at a distance. But it was rather a dramatic… if we'd… one, one day later we'd... we’d have been beaten to it completely.

I remember Roger Penrose coming to me one day and saying – it was probably with one or two other of his students – saying they'd... they’d realised that in the positive definite case, things were a bit different and that you had lines through every point in the space and... and so on. And you know, could I... could I understand this? Could I help them to check it out? And was it... was it true, and so on. So that's when I went away and thought about that and I realised that it was... was this nice quaternionic fibration and it was all very classical and you could understand it very well. So I explained it to them, you know, and that was... that was fine. So I... I think… yeah, I've forgotten exactly the order, but I think that was separate, because really it was independent, it was to do with the geometry of the space, not to do with the bundles on the space. And I remember that they'd... they’d realised this themselves and they'd asked me.
And then... and then we had… on top of that we had to put the Richard Ward story together. But it was... it was an interesting case because they... they kept coming in from their end, they... they knew things in terms of their own way of calculating the computation, but somehow they – not being trained to think of it in terms of global pictures and homogeneous spaces and fibrations – they didn't have kind of the facility with... with these global techniques that people like us, trained in the other direction, had.
So it was a very fruitful dialogue. They would come along with… they'd done the work, they knew… they had the good ideas coming from the physics background and... and, I mean I think, that interesting fibration is one I think would never have occurred probably to an algebraic geometer. It's a real fibration and it seems a bit bizarre. A topologist might have used it for purely topological purposes – they do – but I don't think algebraic geometers would have really thought of it, and so it was... it was somehow being suggested from their... from their particular point of view. But once you saw it, then it was all… it all hung together very, very straightforwardly. So this was an example where Dyson's… eventually I would understand what twistors are all about. Took... took, you know, years, but it was really correct.

Well I'd been interested in physics for quite a long time, sort of. For example when I first went to Oxford I... I did run a bit of a seminar about spinors and the... the Dirac equation. Having started on the Dirac equation I thought I should get interested in finding out what spinors were. It was all very preliminary, so, and I... I did talk at various times to other mathematicians like George Mackey who was very interested in quantum mechanics and its relation with group theory. And so I sort of picked up a bit of general background and I was interested in it, but I didn’t really… I wasn't seriously involved in the, sort of, you know, current latest ideas, quantum field theory and so on; that was a totally blank sheet as far as I was concerned really, yes.
[Q] How did you react to this newly opened up interplay between geometry and physics? 
Well it was really quite a sharp shock at first. I remember being told by somebody, I think it was through Yang that quantum theory had to do with families of index, of Dirac operators, and you know, I thought this was a big joke, you know, and I really couldn't understand how on earth this could come about. So the... the main sort of time I got to grips with that was when I went over to MIT and spent a day or two talking with the people there, with Jackiw  and... and this young guy Ed Witten who joined the group. And we… I was explaining to them about the index theorem, the Dirac equation, how we proved it; and they were... they were explaining how they... how they interpreted it in terms of anomalies and I was beginning, you know, that… it was a serious dialogue. But it happened there was this young chap, Ed Witten, who impressed me, a bright fellow who understood things much better than most of the older people there, and that was a beginning of a long... long association.
But it was a very interesting experience and it was quite clearly the first time that the, sort of, barriers had been broken down because MIT, they told me, that the mathematicians were in one corridor and the physicists were in another and they hadn't really met. And they were working on more or less similar things for quite a long time. So it was… it was really quite a, sort of, a… quite a shock and quite a transition to discover… it was before instantons, this was about the... the Dirac equation, index theorem and its relation to anomalies. And so that... that was prior to the instantons, about a few years back. So by the time instantons came along we were plugged into the physics circuit through the index theorem and through anomalies. That's right, yes.

[Q] Singer once told me that he regretted that he'd not spent a dedicated period of time learning quantum field theory, and that he was then too old. And he told me that I was still young enough to do it, but I have to say I didn't follow his advice. Do you in any way regret not having been through this process that the physicists all have been through? 
I don't think so really, because if you go... go back and see what physicists were doing, my contemporaries for example had been doing this, they had lots of false starts and going off in different directions. There were different times when different things were thought to be the great solution: current algebras and S-matrix theory. All of which eventually perhaps had their little place in the background, but they spent an awful lot of time chasing, sort of, unnecessary, you know, hares. And by the time we got to be… hear about it, they'd homed in on gauge theory as being the right thing for them to do; in turn gauge theory was very easy to understand for geometers, we were... we were saved an awful lot of messing around with unnecessary theories.
Of course we didn't have the background of the quantum field theory machinery, we had to pick that up, but I think, you know, we picked it up by talking to the physicists like Ed Witten and others on a very regular basis over a period of many years. At a stage when we were in a position to appreciate it, because having sort of got the, sort of, lock with the index theorem on the one had and... and gauge theories and the full Dirac operators, we were sort of, we were all, sort of well prepared, well adjusted to understand the significance of various bits and pieces. So then by that time when... when the, sort of, extra layers of all the quantum theory and path integrals were thrown at us, we... we were quite receptive and sort of could see how they fitted together.
If you had to learn them yourself from the beginning, without the kind of motivation of the end point, it's much harder. I'm sure it would have taken, you know… had to spend an awful lot of time, and it would have been probably not sufficiently interesting to keep one’s attention. So, I think, Singer, sort of, in theory might have been right, but in practice I don't think it would necessarily have worked like that. I think it worked out quite well as it was.

All the work on anomalies was the perturbation expansion of field theories. The... the theory about invariance of three manifolds. Of course that was a big... big breakthrough and I remember very clearly being at the... at the meeting in Swansea when... when we went out to a restaurant and – Annie's Restaurant it was called – and... and we had dinner. And during the course of the dinner, Graeme Segel and Ed Witten and I… actually the whole thing, you know, emerged and we spent several hours while everybody else had gone away. And Ed Witten was writing on all the napkins and by the end of the evening the whole theory was sort of buttoned up. And the next morning he gave a new talk, cancelled his other talk, and the whole thing was finished. It was, sort of, dramatic.
So it was... it was quite a surprise, but we'd been trying to understand the role of some of those invariants for a while, dimly seeing bits and pieces of how it emerged, so it wasn't... it wasn’t, sort of, a totally new… we knew there was all this quantum field theory, we knew there were these things people were trying to do. It was a quite a, sort of, spectacular when it sort of locked into play like that, so you know, very satisfying. But these things are never as clean cut as they seem, you know, you're gradually learning bits and pieces and trying to pick up the language, and… but obviously that stuff about knot invariants was a very clean example of it all.
But I mean I'd been previously… let's see, I'm trying to remember the order now. There was... there was that work on the Jones polynomial, but before that there'd been the work on the Donaldson theory and I'd already… when I'd talked to the conference about Hermann Weyl, sort of, symposium they held in America… that was before the... the work on three manifolds. And at that stage I was trying to interest the physicists in the three manifold… in the Jones invariants, and trying to speculate they had something to do with gauge theories. And at that time the… and the Donaldson work also, and what Witten… as a result of my, sort of, constantly pestering him when I was at the institute for one term, towards the end of the term he suddenly discovered how to express the Donaldson theory in terms of quantum field theory and how these twisted Yang–Mills theories gave the right answer. And he was very, very excited by that and he thought it was, you know, it was really… it was a big breakthrough.
So there was that one on the one hand, and then the search for the Jones invariants on the other hand, so I was... I was sort of, you know, I was pushing for it behind the scenes. I wasn't actually, sort of, doing the work, Witten was doing the work, but I was actually prodding him saying, ‘There ought to be something like this around’. And so I was very, you know, gratified when it all worked out. So I could see there were these nice tantalising things in mathematics which ought to have [an] explanation in terms of quantum field theory. And you know, it was just the right moment when it actually all... all fell into place.

Well that dinner in Annie's, I always think at that stage I was... I was really more a back… listening in. Graeme Segel had made a lot of earlier ideas on... on conformal theory, but it was really Witten who took charge that evening and, sort of, put it all together and showed how to go about it. But earlier on my... my role, I think, had been to interest Witten in the Jones invariants and say, ‘Look at these invariants; they look jolly interesting and they should have something to do with gauge theory. Here are a few ideas’. My ideas weren't quite right, but it was all pushed in the direction.
And I'd learnt from Graeme Segel about his axiomatic approach to conformal field theory, and I was trying to formulate similar approaches to Donaldson theory, and that pushed Witten in the direction. So I was... I was acting in the background, providing a bit of, sort of, stimulus and encouragement, and Ed Witten was doing all the work and Graeme on the other hand was, sort of, suggesting other ideas. It was a, sort of, interesting mixture, and the dinner, of course, was the nice culmination of it, but it had been going on for a while at different levels.

When Donaldson had his… produced his invariants from the Yang–Mills equations, the physicists who thought about these things, in particular Witten, I think were very mystified as to… here was he taking these equations which they were using for quantum field theory, he was doing some marvellous things with them mathematically, and what the hell was it… was going on? And it really was very... very unclear for them, and Witten struggled a long time with that objective, trying to understand what Donaldson theory was with all the results in front of him.
And even so, you know, it took him a long, long time to realise and the... the obstacles were… there were a couple of obstacles. One was that when he finally put the thing together that the... the spin-statistics theorem broke down in the Donaldson theory. I mean, things had the wrong… the fermions and bosons had the wrong statistics. So he had to break the psychological barrier that you... you… that physicists had always been brought up to do, that you have to associate the right kind of spin with the right kind of particles… and he had to twist it round.
And so once he, you know, was prepared to break that kind of psychological barrier, then he twisted the theories so that they interchanged the spins. Then he realised that Donaldson theory was a quantum field theory in this sense. It didn't matter for this purpose that he'd twisted the theory because it was a different purpose and so on. So there was a... there was a significant barrier he had to overcome against all, you know, the training of physicists to make that. And... and then, having done that, to observe that the theory was a topological theory and everything worked well.
So I think, given the fact that he had all the data and yet it took him a big effort to actually… even staring at it, to… I... I think there's... there’s no chance that the physicists would have actually produced that if... if Donaldson’s theory hadn't been there in front of them. It wouldn't have occurred to them and it was, as I say, upside down. And, no I... I think it was definitely a question of looking hard at the mathematics and trying to see how it fitted in, and then forcing it to fit in against all the preconceptions. And I say, he spent… I spent a visiting term at the institute then, and it was more or less the last day I was there, having talked with Witten most of the term. You know, he... he… I think at a dinner party he told me, you know, he'd just discovered how to see this and he was terribly excited, and I was just going away and, you know, it was a big breakthrough; but it took him a long time.

Well at... at that stage I was interested with my other... other researcher, Frances Kirwan and others, arising out of my work with Bott. I was interested in the symplectic quotients which arise in algebraic geometry and... and their infinite dimensional generalisation to gauge theories and… which we did for Riemann surfaces. And so that was a... a rather nice framework, a cross between algebraic geometry and gauge theories and infinite dimensional pictures, a little bit of formalism. So that was what... what Frances Kirwan was working on, and she went on very successfully in that direction.
But it was clear from the way… the problems that you'd given Simon to work on that it was closely related to this, so when he came in it was, sort of, logical that we should, sort of, discuss things together. But I mean I... I didn't… he was then working, as you know, on a... on a particular problem to which he finished, he solved, but in the meantime he'd... he’d branched out and produced this idea of how to use the self-dual equations on general manifolds. But that was entirely his idea and when he first produced it I was a bit… well, I asked him all sorts of questions and in his first version of it, it wasn't that clear that it was going to be spectacular; it depended on some assumptions about the… the metric had to be… had to have some positivity conditions otherwise you... you didn't get clean results.
And then he worked... he worked harder and got rid of that by perturbation, showed that it didn't matter, then it was clear that it was going to produce some potentially spectacular results. But I wasn't sufficiently involved in the topology of those things to know exactly how that fitted into current theory. And it just so happened I was visiting the IHES in Paris – Easter I think – and I met there Michael Freedman who'd been doing the work... work on the topological theory, and I asked him. I said, ‘Would... would this sort of result be, you know, of interest? How would this fit into...?’ ‘Oh’, he said, ‘that would be spectacular, you know, totally unbelievable’. So then I went back and told Simon, you know, this would be great guns, you know, and so it was.
But I mean, I didn't know, and I don't think he knew exactly. I mean he knew that this had been an old problem which… Milnor's… which he was… special case which he was disposing of by these methods, but you needed to sort of know what was happening in the world at large to realise, you know, how this fitted into everything else. And it just so happened that because Freedman had been… finished off the problem on the topological side, he expected that with a little bit more work he would finish off the smooth case. And to be told that exactly the opposite was true was really, you know, a bit of shock to him. And so I went back and told Simon this and so then... from then onwards it was clear this was a big breakthrough and it... it all took off. So it was a… but… it all happened very fast, of course, within a matter of six months or so.

Symplectic geometry in some sort of loose sense, you know, you hear it quite a lot and it floats around.  I'd been to Berkeley a lot where Weinstein talked about symplectic geometry and Kostant, MIT, talked about symplectic geometry. But it was all… most... most of that was at a fairly, sort of, formal elementary level, and nothing… I don't anything serious was going on.
So I think it probably was true that it was when I worked with Bott, that we... we got involved in it in a bit more serious way. And then I heard about… Mumford told me that what we were doing… how it fitted in with algebraic geometry, quotients and geometric invariant theory. And so it then began to become more seriously related with the topology and Frances Kirwan's work pushed it further. So I think it is true, that's the... that’s the first stage that I got involved with it. And of course the physicists… but then, when you talk to physicists, symplectic geometry is… well, I knew that it was… got of part of classical mechanics and is a kind of basis for quantum theory, but I'd never sort of played around with it in any serious way before myself; no, I think not.

[Q] In the last 20 years we've seen this enormous interplay between geometry and physics. Where do you see it going in the next 20 years? 
Well that's an interesting question. I mean when it first happened I remember people like Jackiw, who I met at MIT, saying, ‘Well now, we don't... don’t know whether this is just a, sort of, a.. a brief interlude where the paths cross and then you go off in different directions; or whether it's going to be a long term association’. And I think the physicists on the whole, most of them thought probably it would have been a passing phase. But as we've seen over the last 20 years, it's been anything... anything but that. Every... every year going forwards and something new happens and the thing gets even more thoroughly intertwined. So now having developed these strands together over 20 years it's a pretty tough rope. I mean, I don't see it, sort of, you know, coming apart and there's... there’s no evidence that it's breaking up.
So I think it's going to keep going and in some ways its impact on mathematics has been quite spectacular. More and more areas of mathematics have been brought in, been shown to be affected by ideas from physics and quantum physics; we have quantum groups, we have symplectic geometry, algebraic geometry, topology… a whole range of things which… number theory, modular forms, you almost say there's a kind of quantum mathematics evolving. In fact there's a nice phrase I saw somebody refer to – high energy mathematics. It's not quite clear what it is, except that it all emerges and is related to things from high energy physics one way or the other… all the mathematics you need.
In some ways, I... I… my picture of it is something you might say like this; I mean, there's a... there’s the kind of classical mathematics which goes across the board, and now we are being forced to develop in various ways a whole extra layer of... of quantum mathematics which sort of rests above... above this. And you first build a bit of a tower here and it starts and then you find that you can do it here, and... and it's gradually spreading further and further. And so in some sense we – in the next century or as we enter the next century – we're going to start off with this whole additional super-layer of mathematics at the quantum level. It's... it’s difficult to define what it means, it's difficult to predict in advance what you want or what you need. It's just pragmatic and you discover that there are marvellous things taking place at this level which justify the development of the mathematical ideas.
If you sat back and said, ‘Well, I want to combine mathematics here and quantum theory there and produce’… you’d produce rubbish. It had to emerge sort of naturally.  But as we see it now it's a, sort of, very rich wide-spread structure and I would forecast that, you know, in the 20th [21st] century this will become more and more firmly embedded and the words quantum mathematics or whatever, will become, you know, part of the standard jargon. And you might say that, you know, if you start off at the beginning, logically, you might say that mathematics starts off with discrete things – algebra and combinatorics and counting and – then you get into calculus and you get into the infinities and... and you tame the infinities by doing differential calculus and integration. And then you do the whole of geometry and all... all at a finite dimensional level; and then the next step up is to go to infinite dimensional spaces, infinite dimensional – double infinities – infinities of infinities, and how you do that and... and what the right way is, is of course far, far from clear. And physics... physics shows what you need to do […] how to develop it. And so you could see it... see it as a natural evolution from discrete, continuous, to sort of doubly continuous, and in that sense, you know, it, sort of, it may seem perfectly logical to our successors, they might say, ‘Well, what were you mathematicians all, you know, fussed about? It was inevitable, you know, how we're going to get there’.
So I'd... I’d forecast fairly firmly that that's the kind of view that will gradually emerge, you know, in the next... next 20 years and it'll seem that we have a whole new way of treating these more sophisticated higher dimensional, infinite dimensional things, which will cover all sorts of ranges which will have different aspects – algebra, geometry, statistics, physics – and will gradually make a better and better picture.

[Q] Was it the Isaac Newton Institute or Trinity College which lured you back to Cambridge?
Well it was… a combination of the two. Primarily Trinity College I think; and if it hadn't been for the... the Mastership of Trinity I might or might not have made the move to go. I was involved in supporting the development of the Isaac Newton Institute, you know, in the previous negotiations; I thought it was a good thing to have a national institute and all that. And I might have considered, sort of, moving and taking charge of it, and if I had done, of course, that would have been a pretty full-time job and I would have spent most of my time doing it.
Then the Trinity thing came up and totally transformed the scene in a way, so that naturally they came together. And then of course there was the Royal Society… came in shortly after that, and that made life even more complicated, because whereas before I could see myself, sort of, being in Trinity and doing the Isaac Newton Institute as a kind of part, half-time job; with the Royal Society as well it was clear that my involvement in the Newton Institute would have to be very, sort of, small. Somebody else would have to do most of the work, all I could do would be to help to oversee it; and so that shifted me away. So they all happened together. It was a very... very, sort of, sudden change and so as you say, high energy mathematics had to rather take a back seat.

Well my only invention, my only contribution was the... was the name. No, the... the move to have this institute came from the people in Cambridge, you know, it was a combination of factors, they thought they could get some money from the... the richer colleges. And they’d... they’d… for a long time there'd been talk about whether there should be a national institute. At various times people have thought about it, but people in Cambridge thought the time was ripe to try again and get some support and launch it. And so they got people from outside, like myself, to come in and give it... give it backing. So I wasn't a prime mover. As I say, my main contribution was… they were going to call it just the Cambridge Institute for Mathematics, or something. I thought, well, ‘Crazy; you've got a name like Newton around the place, not to use that’. And so I suggested that, and I think that was right. It had two purposes. It wasn't just the trivial purpose that everybody would immediately identify, know that it's the, you know, the Cambridge Institute; it's that Newton's name, and the kind of work Newton did being a mathematician and a physicist and having this great... great width, would... would suggest that the institute should have a very broad interpretation of what mathematics was, in particular all the kinds of applications from physics and elsewhere should be central to its role.
So I think giving the name Newton Institute helped to determine its scope, and that… when I came as director my main job really was to try to establish it as having a very broad scope; perhaps even broader than many other people would have thought of. And so that… I pushed rather hard because once you establish a thing on a certain line then that... that determines its future in a way. So it was important to do that, and the… part of the role… the reason for that was, of course, the… Cambridge has a divided mathematics department; a pure department and an applied department. When I was here as a student they were one department, then it split for various reasons and I regarded that as slightly unfortunate particularly given the subsequent history in which the interaction between pure mathematics and theoretical physics became so close.
When I came over from Oxford to visit Cambridge, I usually talked in the Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, rather than the pure department; so I felt it was rather unfortunate they'd been separated. And the Newton Institute, being a sort of new venture on a new site and supported by both the departments, was an opportunity to bring the departments back together again and help to, sort of, help to cement their relationship. So I was rather keen on that aspect of it and making the institute have a broad coverage served that local role as well as a kind of national role.
[Q] Were you actively involved in fund-raising for the venture? 
Not actively I would say. I mean I, when we... we had the… fund-raising partly was persuading Trinity College to give a substantial money… amount of money to get it started. I wasn't at Trinity at that stage, I was an outsider. I came in and I remember being interviewed by the... the committee that would... would give the money, and so I gave it my support. By the time I came the money had been already allocated, and I appeared before the committee of the Science Research Council, which was the other main benefactor, to help to argue the case. So I was one of the people who was, you know, arguing the case but I… at the two main sources of funds, but I wasn't really involved in, sort of, fund-raising in the... in the normal sense; I wasn't going round cap in hand knocking on doors, you know, putting my hand out.

There always is opposition, these kinds… from... from people who are worried about that it'll affect their present position, or rivalry of some kind. That's at both levels, both nationally with other... other institutes like the institute at Warwick and... and Edinburgh and others, were worried that might sort of decrease their opportunity to play a national role. And within Cambridge itself there were... were people who were opposed to a new… an institute which might, sort of, take people away from the university and... and give them preferential treatment. I mean, as you probably know, in a place like the institute at Princeton, when that was established, the Princeton Institute took… started off by the first professors being… going from the university to the institute and... and the institute at Princeton had some permanent staff. And I think there was some feeling that there was preferential treatment given to these staff who had no teaching to do and they had nice research jobs and it would undermine the university. So to avoid that, when the institute here was started, one made clear there were going to be no permanent staff of that kind like in Princeton. We weren't going to take people away from the department, give them nice research jobs so they didn't teach, and to differentiate between first-class and second-class citizens. The only permanent staff was the administrative staff really, and all the other people were visitors.
So that… we... we solved the problem… some... some extent, met the opposition internally by... by – but so you had to. When you establish a new institute like that, you have to worry about the justifiable, you know, concerns of other people who will be affected both locally and nationally and.. and try to… and similarly with the national scene. We tried to, sort of, arrange things that we didn't do exactly the same as other institutes do; partly because we have this broader compass of things, we were going off in different directions. Yes, but... but in the... in the past these obstacles… opposition had always stopped things getting going, people would complain and if enough people were opposing it and there's difficulty raising money, the two things are enough to stop it. So this time it... it just managed to get off.

The whole world is always on an exponential growth. You know, when I was starting off the... the number of universities was... was small, there were very few jobs, you know, the number of students would be smaller; so the number of people active in the mathematical thing would have been much less, both here and internationally. So... so obviously now there's much more activity, many more people, many more universities. Probably in terms of the number of really top level people, you know, doing frontier work and really pushing the thing forward, that may not be so much different. I mean I suspect it's not, but each of the people in that position probably have larger groups working with them, and so the total body of work is greater. And again there's... there’s the… the scenes shift, you know, the… or the current activities at any given moment, where the action is, change and it's... it’s moved, you know, areas from what it was probably when I was… although Cambridge, and to some extent… strength was traditionally in number theory. On the one hand with Hardy and Littlewood and others, and Mordell and so on; and in classical algebraic geometry with the Baker school and then with Hodge, and so in some sense those two strands are still... still there.
I think there's a kind of continuity in, you know, what you might call national cultural strengths which are very long-lived, you know, because you train people in your... your own image or your own field, they go on to do… perpetuate the system and there's a tremendous built-in reservoir of expertise. And so there's a natural tendency for countries to remain strong in their fields for probably hundreds of years. It's very difficult to change, unless you're in a place like the United States where everybody's always on the move and you can create departments out of nothing. But in... in Europe I think you'll find that traditions in this country and in France and in Germany… in Germany, of course, had the terrible upheaval of the Second World War, but despite that the traditional strengths of Germany are to some extent still present and they're... they’re deeply embedded in... in the culture. So that is really quite surprising.
So I think we're still strong in the things we were strong, even though the subjects have moved on, and they no longer solve the same problems, but there're still major areas and lots of activity going on. So I think the… I would say that the strength of British mathematics… of course when I was starting it was just shortly after the war and, you know, people were picking up the pieces, so it was still the reputation of the pre-war generation that was there, so one had to get restarted again. But it's... it’s probably as good as it was in... in international comparative terms as it used to be; hard to say whether it's any better. Standards have risen, I mean there's more... more countries to compete with, but I think it's kept its... it’s kept its place, I would say, in... in the areas where it, you know, always was strong and doing... doing good work.

Group theory really had… they had Burnside way back, then they had Philip Hall and, of course, we imported John Thompson, partly because of the strength here. Although group theory has a natural… so much more attraction because it's a subject which is easy to... to, sort of, start off with and concentrate on; it has a natural attraction bringing in students. I think it's very difficult to alter. I mean, and people say whether one should develop strengths in analysis and differential equations, and one does try and do that and bring people in, but it's extremely hard to do that successfully I think, and... and somewhat a bit artificial if you... you… you may put a lot of money in and attract a lot of people, all you end up is rather some second-rate stuff.
So I don't think you can swim entirely against the... the tide, it has to grow naturally out of what you've got. Obviously, you know, if you can attract leading people, you know, we got… Thompson came to Cambridge and Quillen went to Oxford and there are people... Of course there's the reverse brain drain; people go abroad. And if you... if you can succeed in bringing people to... to strength and build up, that's fine. But it's very hard to bring somebody in and say, ‘We're weak in this field, let's import one or two top chaps from France or America and give them lots of money and tell them to build up a big school’. I don't think it works. I don't think it works like that at all. It's a much slower process, you've got to develop in the direction of the strengths you've got, build on that. Obviously attract people when you can, bring in long-term professors or visitors, stimulate… but people I think are a bit too naive sometimes of what you can do just by administrative, you know, procedures. It has to grow organically I think.

It always seemed to me a miracle that as mathematics develops and becomes more complicated, each generation says, ‘Gosh, look we've worked all our life, we've mastered this stuff, we've learnt all these things – how can the next generation possibly pick up the pieces and run?’ You know, and it's the... the miracle that it keeps happening. I mean, I think, if you look back through history you'll find people constantly think that it's got to the end of the road, it's got much too difficult for anybody to come in now. But it's one of the strengths of mathematics is that it... it goes by leaps and bounds. All that came before gets beautifully synthesised, encapsulated, simplified, so that the next generation can be taught it in the one graduate course, you know.
What took mathematicians hundreds of years and thousands of pages to, sort of, get to grips with, it's stripped of its inessentials, it gets presented in a way that, you know, people can learn it… under proper guidance and so on. And so you start at a higher level. Each... each… you know, it's like climbing a big mountain and the next generation are already sort of flown in by helicopter and they land half way up the mountain. So it... it keeps happening, and if it didn't happen, you know, mathematics and most other science would have stopped long ago.
You keep wondering how long it can go on happening. And in certain areas such as the area we've been discussing where a whole lot of things have come together, and it's the interaction between quantum theory and mathematics topology and algebraic geometry, it makes all the interest. But then it is... it is… I think, it becomes more of a problem to attract graduate students into the area. There's a danger that either they come in and are too ambitious and spread themselves so thinly that they can't possibly get off the ground; or they pick up some very, very small problem and sort of beaver away in a little corner and then... then finish a rather technical point which is not of great interest. And how you... how you balance that between the two is a... is a very tricky exercise in... in guiding graduate students.
In other areas such as, I think, group theory or other parts of mathematics more narrowly defined, the graduate students have... have an easier time. There's no question about that. On the other hand I've... I’ve quite often met… told graduate students who are starting that there is this problem, they have to beware; but on the other hand, if this is where the excitement is you've got to give the intellectual challenge to the students to, you know, test their muscle against this thing. And every now and again you'll get a Donaldson who comes in and, you know, makes a big breakthrough against all the odds.
So I think you have to keep playing it, but obviously graduates have to be given good advice and, depending on their abilities, have to be started off with some modest ambition. Sort of test their... their technique, acquire a bit of general background before they can go ahead. And so it may be that there'll... there’ll be a few more years before they can really make major... major advances. But when I look and see what all the young theoretical physicists are doing, they've all mastered large amounts of physics and large amounts of complicated mathematics, and they jump around and so in a way it's... it’s still very impressive. But it may be that the age is drifting up, I'm... I’m not sure. I mean, people who seem young to me are probably not as young as they were; they're perhaps in their 30s rather than in their 20s.
So there is a problem, it's a kind of general problem that the development of science has in every field. You have new techniques, new ideas, and each generation somehow has to start off there and yet, quickly enough they can make... make a breakthrough. And it's... it’s really one of the most interesting aspects; if you look back at the history of development of, you know,  intellectual thought, how this process can keep going, and particularly since these things seem to be growing at exponential rates. And you know, what will mathematics be like in a 100 year’s time? What will it be like in a 1000 year’s time? Can... can we even begin to… the mind boggles, when you look back how much has changed in a 100 years and you look and see how many more people have come into the scene. You know, can we even think of mathematics continuing as an intellectual exercise a 1000 years down the road? It is really… I wish I was here in a 1000 year’s time to find out the answer.

[Q] Does the classical geometry with which you began, twisted cubics and things like that, still hold an attraction for you? 
Oh, yes, yes, very much so. Well, of course, much of it sort of recurs in various special forms – particular examples higher up. Whenever I... I have some particular problem I always try it out on... on my familiar friends, you know, the problems I […] around with. So they're always there in the background and... and they always still have an attraction for me. Every now... now and again I get in some little problem and I find actually something I was interested in 40 years ago, you know, really comes back, and it gives me a great satisfaction. I think it's… I'm still... still… you know, early loves are still, sort of, still with you. I... I still enjoy it and... and I felt I think that sometimes people feel when they start off with something like that which they really enjoy, then they go off on something else. You feel like you've deserted the cause and, you know, there are people who've stayed with classical geometry and you feel you're a kind of deserter. But I don't feel that way because I think the things that I moved into incorporate the other stuff in a... in a good form, and it still appears and I still go back and, sort of, check… show my credentials by using a bit of nice algebraic geometry and… just to show that I really haven't lost touch with its roots. So no, it's still part of my, sort of, background culture very much.
[Q] When did you last have cause to use an argument from classical geometry? 
Well, actually about… last summer, or the summer before. I was working on a problem and it turned out that… I was doing some calculation checking it out and it turned out what I needed was something I actually wrote in my very first paper, the paper I wrote when I was even an undergraduate, as far back as that. So that was really… closed the circle as it was.

Well I think there... there were two separate stages. There were the first… there was the work on the instantons which were an earlier stage. And then when the physicists came along with these things called magnetic monopoles and started to produce solutions, it... it seemed clear that... that one should try to look at them in a similar sort of way. And I... and I tried, and you... you made a better shot at it, and which various contributed; understanding how to construct these monopoles. But then the next question was… came in when we were studying the dynamics of these things, how they... how they actually interact, not just static ones. And that was actually sparked by Nick Manton, whom I talked to when I went to a conference in Trieste, and he was explaining that one should look at the slow dynamics of these things and you could use a kind of geodesic approximation to get good information about the dynamics. And he was... he was… he had some preliminary results, he knew a bit what would happen at long distances and things.  And so he was obviously suggesting this was a good problem for mathematicians who knew something about the monopole spaces, to see if they could actually… so that was going at the back of my mind. And then, I've forgotten exactly when it was, but shortly after that the... the fact that super-symmetry came into the story, suggested that there were hyper-Kähler metrics around; and so then I came and talked with you and we... we… it seemed that the direct... the direct assault, trying to guess what the metric was in the early days failed. I mean I think I tried and various other people tried, you looked for a nice metric which has good symmetry properties and hoped for good formula; that's too naive. And. but it was then when we looked at it from the point of view of the full story, using the strength of the super-symmetry in the hyper-Kähler way, then that gave much more control and that made it a tractable mathematical problem which, you know, ended up by giving a solution.
And that was a very, sort of, interesting story in which the physics motivated the problem; what it should be. It also partly motivated the solution because the super-symmetry came from the physics and suggested there should be these hyper-Kähler metrics. And then we had the whole machinery of twistor theory which also came from the physics, Roger Penrose, was part of the, kind of, clue on how to tackle them. So really, all the ingredients, you might say, which made the solution, actually came from our contact with the physicists. It's just that putting them together in a nice geometrical package was probably a little more congenial to the mathematicians, it was clearly to have been rather more naturally to our particular combination of skills and experience. So we were able to actually carry it through and come out with the answer.
Then of course there was this very interesting little conundrum in the... in the middle of it where we came to a formula which seemed to contradict what the other physicists […] Gibbons and people… claimed there was no metric with these properties. And yet our calculations showed there was, and then it was very interesting to find out exactly where their... their mistake was. And it turned out to be a rather subtle one that they'd assumed something was positive because it obviously ought to be positive, but a sign could sneak in which they hadn't appreciated. And that made all the difference and turned… allowed for this rather interesting class of solutions which they'd excluded. So in a way it was… I remember coming to… talking to the physicists here and explaining this and having these arguments, and we... we clarified where the... where the… they’d, sort of, oversimplified the story. So it was an interesting... interesting development between the... the problem coming out… coming from the physics and much of the ideas coming from the physics, yet being put together in a nice elegant mathematical form. It was a nice, story I... I very much enjoyed being involved with.

It's true that they've now, they’re… when we studied them, there were… had a kind of interest from the point of view of giving low energy approximation to colliding monopoles, which is of... of interest in some aspects. And we get a nice mathematical story, and then that's sort of finished off and now they've reappeared in more sophisticated form in connection with these new ideas about duality, in theory. And... and, well I think that the… these monopole spaces form mathematically a nice class of manifolds, a nice class of metrics which obviously has lots of nice features. It fits into all sorts of stories, and I think they probably, you know, will have a kind of permanent home as something on the shelves that... that you can pull down and use in different contexts.
But whether you think of them as mathematical objects or as physical objects, I think this kind of slightly artificial distinction, you know, doesn't make much sense after a while. So one shouldn't be surprised if they recur. They have a, kind of, a rather natural fundamental role in the physics and they have, once you've understood them well, a rather natural mathematical interpretation as a class of manifolds of a certain type, which has interest of its own kind. So I think they're... they’re now well established animals, or books, whatever you like to call them – mixing my metaphors – which are of permanent value, yes.

At various stages I've been asked to do this and do that, and you know, you feel it's your duty to contribute to the, sort of, broader cause of education and science. And so you can't very well say no, and once you take it on you feel you've got to do the job… best job you can, you get interested in the problems and they are important. So you develop an interest in... in them. I don't think I ever sort of sought these jobs, but having got them you feel that you... you have to do your best.
So you build up… but it's a bit like how you become an expert. And when I came on the Cockcroft Committee… I was invited on this Cockcroft Committee which reviewed mathematical education; because I think I knew Bill Cockcroft from way back and he wanted an academic on it, so I agreed to go on. I didn't realise when I went on how big a job it was… it lasted for two and a half years at least. But subsequent to that, of course, then I started to get invited to become President of the Mathematical Association, educational… so… and it builds up. And after a while you... you become an expert because you've been thought an expert by somebody else… even if you aren't. So after a while I felt I had to put stop to that side of it, you know, to becoming… but I haven’t... I’ve, you know, enjoyed in some sense getting involved in these things. They are important, I feel I... I have a duty to assess the problems and to talk about them, persuade people about them at different levels.
So I think it has been quite satisfying, being involved, but then of course they've changed. because I've moved from education in mathematics to... to sort of science and education broadly in the college and universities and policies. And although I'm quite glad at some stages to... to leave them behind – you know, I've finished with the presidency of the Royal Society – I was very glad to hand over to my successor… I still am involved. I keep… but I don't want to, you know, spend all my time doing that all the time, ever onwards. But… and I’m… interests have shifted… I've got interested in certain other aspects of the general scene. I've got a bit involved recently with the sort of questions of ethics and science and, you know, the questions of nuclear weapons and things of that kind. And... and so you... you move in certain directions. Your interests within this broader area of the social interaction between science and society, you know you can get off in many different directions and… and it changes as you shift your responsibilities.

[Q] Your retiring address as President of the Royal Society was widely reported, both in the daily papers and in learned journals, where you criticise decades of government spending in defence. Is this an issue on which you feel very strongly and were saving up for this occasion? 
Well in some sense, I suppose, I feel fairly strongly on that and related issues. When I was… all the time I was president I would make comments somewhat along those lines, but in more muted form. But I discovered after a while that if you make comments in muted form, people don't pay any attention to them. You don't get the headlines if you, sort of, carefully circumscribe your statements in a good academic sense. So my last year, I thought I should actually be a bit more forthright and so I said things which I've thought of before, but… in order to perhaps to attract a bit of more public attention. And so in that sense it succeeded, it did... it did actually. And of course once you break through the barrier of getting reported somewhere, it tends to, you know, it tends to sort of build up. And so in fact, I’ve got… subsequent to that I've got more involved... more involved with those issues. People ask me to do… give talks here.  I’m giving a talk at Imperial College, you know, in a couple of weeks time. I've got a bit more involved with the Pugwash movement, which I went to their meetings in Finland last year, I'm going to their meeting Norway this year.
And so you... you… if you come out openly with things of that kind, then of course you... you get… attract the attention of people who want your help to carry that sort of line forward. So I've... I’ve… well I asked for it if you like by saying those things, I have to sort of keep following them up. So I’m... I’m… and I think I… one thing I've learnt all through my life I suppose is that... is that, I start... I start off being fairly sort of cautious as an academic, you know, most academics tend to be. You know that life's complicated, you don't think… you know it's not simple, and so I tend to take a… be a little bit cautious about what I say and not being extreme. And also you tend to be not so self-confident that you're right. You know, a scientist knows that there are two sides to things and you don't know all the… so I tend not to be overconfident about my own understanding of things. But the more I've gone on I've realised that other people actually go around making statements based on even less experience. So I've acquired the kind of necessary confidence to... to override that.
I think I now probably know as much as many other people and – on certain issues – and I... I feel that therefore it's incumbent on me to say so, not leave the field open to those who actually go round with less information claiming to be experts. So I think that's the kind of thing you… in general within the universities and outside… I've become more confident in my own assessments of things, whether it be mathematics or science or other things. Initially I was always rather tentative, I would defer to other people's views with the more experience; I now realise that was perhaps a mistake. And so I now try to actually follow that up and... and speak my mind and write my views more… with more confidence than I did, you know, 20, 30 years ago.

Well, mathematics is very ill understood in the society for lots of obvious reasons. Most people are afraid of mathematics. The standard result… response to when you say you're a mathematician, they say, ‘Well I... I gave it up at school at the age of 13 or whatever it was, and I can't add two and two’. So there's natural reaction of the people that... that they're put off, they're afraid of mathematics, they don't know what it's about. I don't think there's hostility towards mathematics because they don't know enough to be hostile. Lack of understanding… so I think there's quite a big effort required to... to persuade the public at large of the value of mathematics, what it does and... and why it's useful and... and what it... what its repercussions are.
And that's the kind of thing which I think in the Newton Institute I was interested in propagating; the sort of… the role of mathematics in a wide range of... of disciplines. And we tried to attract public attention to that, that's a way of showing that mathematics is... is not entirely self-contained but has links to the outside world. So I think that's the line that I felt rather… very important for mathematicians to follow. Many… some pure mathematicians are so enamoured of their subject and distrustful of the outside world, they like to sort of put themselves in a closed box and say, ‘Leave us alone, we'll get on with our work’. And then on the other hand they also put out their hands and say, ‘Please pay us salaries’. So it's slightly inconsistent, and so I felt that... that mathematicians have to seek… justify themselves to the outside world, you know, in an... in an intelligent way by showing that mathematics links up with all sorts of other things. It has an impact on things through education of people and through the relationship with science, and... and that way you can justify what you're doing; even if you then go back into your box and carry on with your private work. And so I felt it's important that… and also mathematics, there's no question about it, as we see with this physics and also many other things that take place in the Newton Institute.
Many of the interesting ideas and problems that mathematicians have faced over centuries are… emerge from the outside world, and that's a source of stimulus which mathematicians need. So mathematicians need contact with the outside world, both as a source of problems and ideas to work on, and because without the support of the outside world they would be left high and dry. And in these days of competition and so on, you need friends in all circles. So for both for self-interest and because the subject really requires some intellectual input from outside, it's very important mathematicians are seen as part of the, sort of, whole scientific scene. And so when I was a director of the Newton Institute and also through the Royal Society I just felt it was my job to try to press that home. That view I think is now more widely accepted by the mathematics community than it was 10 years ago, because of the pressure of times, but... but there's still a big problem educating the public.
But I think my view is that the link between mathematicians and the public is through the science.  You know we… other scientists can appreciate the role of mathematics, the physicists know and economists can learn and so on; and so you... you get your message out via these people who really understand the significance of mathematics. Through them you can reach out to the media, to the popular, outside. To go directly from the hard mathematics to the popular press, sort of, is a pretty hopeless task, except very occasionally you like to sort of make a splash with Fermat's last theorem, but it's a very, very tough role. But if you work through the people that surround mathematics, and they really understand the value of mathematics because they use it, and through them I think you can... you can influence the public outside. They will understand, you know, that the kind of problems that these people work on, whether it's in biology or economic or physics. And if they're told by the practitioners of these subjects that the mathematics is an important part; well then they will respect mathematics. I think that's... that’s the way it has to be done.

But I think this idea of, you know, what a great mathematician of the past would... would make of what we currently do, is a very good kind of a intellectual exercise to conduct oneself. You know, there's this vast amount of mathematics we do and you want to say, ‘Well, what... what is the real value?’ And it's hard within the system to... to assess the importance of various things; their relative magnitudes and scale, and... and so historical perspective is a... is a good measure. And if you take a great man from the past and bring… imagine him being brought forward, you can imagine that it would only take him a short while to master any technical details of… you know, which were related to something significant. And so you feel that with a short crash course you ought to be able to explain the really important things to the great man of the past. And that would… and then if you look and see what it is you've got to do, and work out how much you've got to do and... and you strip it away... strip it all away, what would be left? Sometimes you might find there wasn't very much there, you know. If it's all kind of self-contained and there's nothing connecting with a strand of mathematics that goes back into the past, which... which you could bring forward, then you begin to wonder, ‘Well, is it really of value?’ So I think it's a... it’s a good exercise, it's quite amusing to do, and so I've played with that idea quite often in the past. I think I... I like it.
[Q] Who are your heroes of the past? 
Well, of course, it depends on how far back you go. I mean, having come to Trinity College and being in the Royal Society, I have to say Isaac Newton, you know, and bow down and all that sort of thing. And you know, when I came here I read a lot about Newton, I thought I had to. And then he... he, from being a kind of just a abstract figure, he became somebody more real to me and he's, just in mathematical terms, or mathematical and physical terms, an enormous figure. Much bigger I think than any... any other single person, be it Einstein or anybody else.
But coming down to, sort of, more recent times, Hermann Weyl was the person I most clearly identified with in mathematical terms. I mean, almost everything I ever did, you know, was... was… you could trace back to things that Hermann Weyl did, I mean very closely related the things… he would be interested in most of them. He did... he did other things that I didn't get into. He was… he covered a very wide range of things from theoretical physics and mathematical logic, number theory and certain group theory, and... and I've sort of moved in many of those, similar things. And a kind of rather a direct, sort of, follow on to many of his ideas of work, so I... I felt his spirit, you know, behind me all the time practically. And I got to a new area, I'd flick through, and gosh, Hermann Weyl's name would appear as somebody who contributed a key idea. So he I think is certainly one of my heroes.
I never… I didn't actually… I met… saw him once. He talked to the International Congress in Amsterdam in 1954 where he gave out the Fields Medals to Serre and Kodaira, and I was a, sort of graduate… second year graduate student attending my first international conference; I... I saw the great man but he died the following year. When I went… he was in Zurich but he had been in Princeton, and so I never actually got to... to meet him, but I knew a lot of people who had met him, Bott and people who that... that worked with him. He was an interesting man. He was... he was apparently nicknamed by the friends who knew him, he was called Heiliger Hermann, sort of, Holy Hermann; he was, because he was a little bit pompous and sort of self-important, but I think it was a kind of friendly nickname that they gave him. So he was certainly… and of course, well Gauss was a, I suppose, an enormous figure too. But he was more of a number theorist in many ways, and the centre of gravity of interest were a bit different; although he did so many other things, and he's a bit further away. It's hard to… I find it hard to… also as person I think Gauss was a bit hard and harsh. His treatment of Lobachevsky and people like that was a bit ruthless, so I didn't warm to him as a person. I think Newton also was a bit tough. But Hermann Weyl I think was a... was a more rounded man, he also had very broad cultural interests and I think would have been a very nice man to know.

[Q] Do you regard mathematics as creation or discovery? For example, did you create or discover the index theory?
Well that's the kind of question that most mathematicians try to understand most of their working lives, and you oscillate between one and the other. I think that the… in a sense you might say all the mathematical things that you can ever prove are… have been waiting there to be... to be identified. They are true theorems, they are true results which were there before you came along and... and spotted them. On the other hand you can say the... the totality of all true results is so vast, it is in picking out some rather than others, finding your way through the infinite number of possibilities, that is what a mathematician does.  You know, he’s exploring territory, the territory is all in darkness, it’s a beautiful landscape, he comes along with a powerful search light, or whatever it is, and in his jeep and he goes through and he finds an interesting... interesting route. In that sense he discovers what was there originally. He didn't create it, but he created the route to get there amongst the totality of all possibilities.
Well I think in some sense that has to be true, that... that you don't… but the degree to which you select, in other words what distinguishes identifying a concept, making it worthwhile and studying it, is what you... you… your invention. For example the terminology you use, you might give a word, name to something. I've certainly invented that name, because somebody else could have a given it… you know, ‘A rose by any other name could not smell as sweet’. So the names you give to things are certainly your invention. And the name quite often, and the sequence of names you put together, is also an invention because they could have been put together in a different way. So the way you organise things, I think, is your own invention because they could have been organised by somebody else differently. The totality of things is there, but how you see them, the way you order them and the way you connect them up is certainly your own imprint.
So I think it's a combination of imposing your own viewpoint, and the viewpoint is an intellectual viewpoint and it has more than just, you know, instantaneous flash.  It's, sort of, a dynamic one where all mutual relationships... and how you… what you decide is important to give names to, and big names and small names, that is certainly your own imposition on the background, which is somehow fundamentally there waiting to be discovered. So there're the two layers; there's the background and then what comes on top of it, the illumination, and you illuminate what was there. Something like that, I mean, of course if the answer was just yes or no, it would be a very dull question. All philosophical questions have two answers, you know, there's the truth of what is a deep, you know, definition of what is a deep truth… a deep truth is a truth which is… something which is both true and false, I mean, truth… something that is true and its opposite's also true. So these... these things I think don't have a simple answer, but that would be, I think, my way of trying to combine the two and synthesise them together. Obviously other people will have different answers, and if you're of a religious frame of mind you may say God created everything and you just are led there by the hand of God and that sort of thing. And there'd be other people who'd take a much different view and say everything is in the mind you know, the outside world has no reality; everything is a… comes from inside and we just build the world in our own image.
So there are extremes which philosophers have argued. Not only about mathematics, but about the entire nature of reality. So mathematics is part of that, it's an especially interesting part because in some sense it's concerned with intellectual concepts, and not on the face of it with the outside world. Although I think that's again an oversimplification. There are people who say mathematics is just an intellectual creation, we set down the rules, we work out the consequences and it has nothing to do with reality outside, and that I think is a gross oversimplification. We wouldn't have developed geometry if we didn't look round the world and see three dimensional objects, even though in some sense Euclidean geometry is a set of axiomatic subjects, is independent of the outside world. It's only a poor approximation to the outside world, but there's no question that if we didn't have eyesight and didn't see things, didn't live and move in a three dimensional world, we would not have developed geometry.


There are those who argue, well for example, something like number theory, the theory about prime numbers, they say, ‘Ah! That's a mathematical invention, you know, prime numbers don't exist in the outside world. It's entirely a human creation. Even if geometry was borrowed, number theory is ours, we invented it’. I don't think that's right either and I have tried to argue in this review of this book by Connes and Changeux, they… we count.  Now counting, if you think about it very carefully, is actually an experience. We... we have objects in the outside world, I have a glass, another glass and I can… I... I distinguish them and I start to count and enumerate. And when eventually I've enumerated them, I've put them into orders, rectangles, I can decide a multiplication, I can work out prime number properties. But the mere fact that you have discrete objects that you count is a consequence of the kind of world we live in.
And the example I gave was that supposing that in fact humanity had been quite different. Suppose we weren't as we are, but we were gigantic bits of protoplasm that floated around in some big sea. In other words that all we saw was the continuum, we never saw discrete things, we moved in some kind of continuous way and we didn't have single people, all the notion of counting wouldn't... wouldn’t appear. You would have notions of measurement and of volume and of pressure, and those notions, they would be fundamental. But the notion of counting is an experience that derives from the fact that we see individual objects. And if the universe was different and we didn't have individual objects around us, we just had a sea, a mass of continuity, well geometry would have been natural or mechanics or pressure, but counting would not be natural.
So I think counting still arises from the external world.  It's... it’s the most primitive thing there is. It's hard to imagine a world without individual objects, but ultimately it... it comes from the outside world. Once we've got it we can study it and develop beautiful theorems about prime numbers, but I don't think even… I don't think I would let the number theorists get away with even that as being entirely the creation of the mind without the stimulus of the outside world. I think it's… you start with the outside world, you look at it from a particular point of view, you extract things you want to study further, and the human mind then takes it forward. Then you develop mathematics which you then feed back into the outside world, interlink the two; sometimes closely, sometimes not so closely. But I think it's the... it’s the human mind acting on the outside world.
But it is also the other side of the question as to whether the mathematics we develop, if we develop it, from a starting point in the outside world… you know, we might go off at a complete tangent, we might end up by doing things which have ultimately no bearing on the outside world even though they start from the outside world. And physicists have all been so mystified by the way in which mathematics turned out to be so powerful, as a way of understanding the most sophisticated bits of physics; quantum theory and all the sophistication, notion of relativity, use very... very abstract powerful mathematics.
And how is it that... that the mathematics that we develop in our mind seems to be so successful in solving the problems of physics? And again different people have different answers to that one. I suppose my own answer probably would be that mathematics is what the human mind creates, starting off with the raw material of the outside world. Now, it creates it of course using the logical processes that the mind has. Now those logical processes have been built up in evolutionary terms in order to allow human beings to survive and exist in the outside world, and it has to reflect therefore the... the laws of the outside world; the... the causality and the interactions. So our human mind evolved in order to fit it to the outside world. Its... its fundamental structure is… reflects some fundamental aspects of the outside world; therefore it's not totally surprising if the machinery… intellectual machinery we develop within us is consistent with the outside world. I mean, that takes you so far, you... you might argue that the outside world we only meet at... at the, kind of, level… macroscopic level. We don't see atoms and quarks and things, so how is it that the mind can... can somehow… which would be evolved at the level of macroscopic things, or things which are in the middle between the very large and the very small… can simultaneously develop a framework which enables it to tackle the very small atoms and the very large galaxies. That is a bit of a mystery.
All you can say is that we start with the... the framework we get from common garden experience, we build a logical framework which is well suited to that in order to survive, and then fortunately for us, the universe is reasonably consistent. The laws which we work out, the kind of thinking, the kind of structure which we'd… at that level of energy and scale, remarkably seems to persist at higher levels and at lower levels to a fantastic degree. Although it requires sometimes a great skill to… the quantum world is actually quite different from our present world and... and we have to build rather sophisticated mathematics on the basis of the initial mathematics to go down that level. It isn't that easy.
So we start off with ideas which are well suited to the immediate environment, as we dig further and further down we have to make it more and more elaborate. The fact that it succeeds is because, you know, God was kind to us, as Hermann Weyl said, you know, ‘God is not malicious’. And… it was Einstein said that, I think. And if he had been we would have been in the soup, you know, our... our ideas would have stopped at the sort of scale we live it, and of course we don't really know how successful we are. We... we, we’re not… we are reasonably successful, but we may soon… got a long way to go, we may still find surprises and things which we somehow are incapable of understanding. But anyway it's... it’s a fascinating story and everybody has their own interpretation of, you know, how the mind works, its relation to the outside world and the mathematics and the physics. And as you go through your life you sort of build up your own philosophical interpretation; I think everyone on his own.

In mathematics beauty is a very important ingredient. Beauty consists as in mathematics, as in... as in architecture and other things it's a difficult thing to define, but it's something you recognise when you see it. It certainly has to have elegance and simplicity and structure and form and... and all sorts of things which make up real beauty. And there're many different kinds of beauty. And the same is true with mathematical theorems. And they're important… beauty's important as a criterion in mathematics because basically mathematics… there's a lot of choice in what you can do in mathematics like there is in science, and what determines which... what you regard as important, what not… and, I think, the aim of the mathematician is to try to encapsulate as much as you possibly can in small packages; as much truth, high density of truth per units word, and beauty is a criterion.
If you've got a beautiful result really, it means that you've got an awful lot identified in a very small compass, and… as opposed to a rather large 'waffley-woolley' result which is rather dilute. So I think it's the measure of significance. Beauty is... is a… in the absence of experimental science where your results are tested by experiment, the mathematician has to be tested for significance by some other criterion, and one of the criterions is simplicity and beauty and elegance. That shows him somehow that he's... he’s got on the right track, that it's truthful and so on. It appeals to you and you like it, but it's more than just you like a pretty picture. Its... its beauty has significance over and above just the immediate attraction of an elegant result. At least there are different levels of beauty and... and some beauty is, you know, is more superficial than others, and clever little tricks which don't go very far… like... like a picture. There are some which are superficially attractive and others which are much deeper; and the same's true with mathematical theorems.
[Q] There are beautiful results and beautiful proofs. Can you always have both? 
Yes, you can have both… and of course with a... with a beautiful result, the result can be very simple to state, the proof may be very complicated like with Fermat's theorem. What usually happens is you try to then evolve variations in the proof. The first proof you get to may be not the best way to get there, and if it's a beautiful result like the top of a mountain, you got there by the very round about method, you see if it's a beautiful result there ought to be a better way. And you go back and you try and your successors try, and over a long period of time one actually finds… hopes to find the result which reflects the... the beauty of the end point by building up beautiful steps in between. You may end up with a whole theory, which is a beautiful road, you know, marvellous scenic views all the way up to the top. So… but of course that takes time, and the first shot at a beautiful result may be very ugly, and you're very happy to have it all. But whether you… I'm not sure you can have a beautiful proof of an ugly result. That's now inconsistent. You've got a beautiful road ending up with a, you know, a dump. I don't think that happens very often. You don't go down that road.

[Q] Your major results have all involved concepts like vector bundles, indices of differential operators, instantons and monopoles. Do you think you could explain to a layperson what these terms mean? 
Well it's quite a... quite a task, but let me try and start. I mean, most... most of these questions have to do with the… what happens when you go from the... the easy world of...of the flat plane, straight lines, where everything is predictable by just carrying on the same way. And what happens when you get to a more complicated world where things start to curve and twist and you come back to where you started and so on. It's that kind of interplay between the, sort of, the predictable straight line flat world, or flat phenomena, and the... the really complicated things which most things are where they have… they curve and they twist and they bend. And the... the… studying what happens in this way, on a larger scale, what happened if you go round and whether you come back like Christopher Columbus going round the world and coming… wasn't flat and coming back. Those are what topologists study and that's what the mathematicians concerned with these questions examine.
Now, the word vector bundle, the first example, lets explain what that means. If you're studying flat things then you study flat spaces, and then they're given straight lines and directions and... and so that's what the word vector has to do with, just studying directions in... in flat spaces. If you have a curved surface for example, then at every point you can approximately think of it as flat and you have little directions on it, and that's a little flat piece of world. But as you move round the curved surface, then you follow this… these tangent directions round, then you have a moving family of... of straight lines. At every given stage you can approximate it by straight lines, but the whole thing is curved. So one way to, kind of, get a grip of this big curved animal is study the continuously varying family of straight lines that form these directions. And that's really what a vector bundle is. Of course the… you can generalise it and they aren't always tangent directions; they might be directions into other... other space, they might be something more complicated. But fundamentally the vector bundle is the intermediate notion, how to get hold of a curved animal by studying very small flat regions of it, and then trying to piece them together. That's what you're doing when you study vector bundles.
And again then when you go beyond that, and you study the differential equations, the same sort of thing underlies that. You'll study a differential equation, it's like if you study ordinary algebra; you have algebraic equations which give you problems where you look for solutions. If the equations just involve something like 2x+3y and so on, is equations where… which are linear… where the answer's given by straight lines. If they have x2 in it and y2 they become quadratic, they become curved or higher degree. And so algebraic equations are straight linear equations which are easy, and then you have more complicated equations, non-linear, which are difficult. And the same thing when you go to the differential calculus. Differential calculus studies differentiation and you try to find solutions… curves which satisfy differential equations which try to predict what happens in the large from what happens in a very small region by following the solution of differential equations. And again the differential equations come in... in the simple form where things are, sort of, flat and straight so they just solve this equation then you get it, and equations which are non-linear.

The index theorem, which is what I spent much of my time working on in one form or another, is concerned with the linear differential equations. Many linear differential equations are… occur very often in mathematical physics… the equations of Maxwell for electromagnetism are linear equations; so linear equations aren't necessarily simple, they can be quite complicated. And in studying linear equations, but not just in a piece of flat space but perhaps on a curved space, then life gets complicated; not from the original nature of the equation, but from the space in which you’re studying it. And that… so very often you will want to study an equation not in a whole space but on some curved part, for example. And so these equations you may want to study, you may want to find their solutions. That's what... what people do; you have a problem, you want to solve it. If the questions are very complicated, then it becomes impracticable to necessarily find the exact solutions; it may be just much too difficult. And yet you want to know something about it.
So the first thing you may want to know is, how many solutions does this equation have? Has it got one solution or a large number and if so, how many? Well those kind of questions are sometimes… you can answer those questions sometimes without finding the solutions. You may be able to predict how many there are from considerations of the global picture of the whole story. And that's where the curved global aspect, the topology we study, can help you to predict how many solutions there are; without knowing them at all, individually. So it's a very powerful method and when you’re dealing with complicated problems involving many dimensions, many variables, very complicated stories… the real world, or anything approximating the real world tends to be complicated. These qualitative arguments which will predict how many solutions you may get to your equation, without finding the exact solutions, is a tremendously powerful weapon. And this occurs all over the place in parts of mathematics and physics, so that the index theorem is a use of topology, more or less, to predict how many solutions equations can have.
And it has therefore a wide range of applications because of the... the general nature of the problem and it brings together different parts of mathematics; the parts concerned with the differential calculus and differential equations, the parts concerned with the large scale behaviour of curved spaces and the topology and puts them all together in a... in a package. And the theorem itself has a rather simple… sometimes a simple form and sometimes a very complicated form, depending exactly how you look at it… but it has a very wide range of applicability. It applies in a whole range of problems and that's partly why it's so important, partly why it's interesting, partly why so many people work on it from different directions. So that's the position of the index theorem within this context.
Then the other thing you mentioned, things like monopoles and instantons; they... they arise again in contexts where... where these non-linear phenomena – these topological things which are not present in purely flat spaces – occur. There are situations in which you get complicated solutions to differential equations. For example, the... the… one of the best examples of a soliton was a thing which was observed in a canal in Scotland where a boat… barge was moving down the river and produced a big wave in the front, which then, sort of, moved off by itself and propagated down the canal as a kind of hump. And there was a very graphic description, and this was first observed by the man who saw it who galloped after it on horseback and he saw this lump of water floating down the river for a long time. That's an example of what's called a soliton. It's a, kind of… something which can occur for a certain kind of complicated differential equations where you get a lump of whatever it is – matter, electric charge, water – which is somehow confined in a particular region and moves as a sort of single entity. It behaves like some kind of particle, but actually it's not a particle because it's a bump of water within a sort of whole continuous background; and yet it behaves like a particle. And that... that soliton phenomenon is one of the most interesting discoveries to have emerged in mathematics… mathematical physics in the last 20 or 30 years, because it combines… these things only occur because of complicated non-linear effects which force things to stay together, and yet they propagate like particles. They're a mixture of particles and waves. And the magnetic monopole, that we’ve discussed before, was an example of that kind of phenomenon within the context of electromagnetic theory, in the modern... in the modern sense.

So all of these are really… have a kind of common background which is that the interrelationship between geometry and differential equations involving the calculus, in the context of non-linear things, things which are complicated because they're not determined by sort of simply the flat, straight prediction. And that complication is where the topology enters. And if you understand the topology, the large scale nature of the space, the way it twists and turns, then you can make predictions about the number of solutions of an equation, or the presence of these soliton bumps, the monopoles, and what happens to them. And the context of magnetic monopoles we discussed before, was studying not just what happened to your single bump, or single lump of charge, but when you have two of them, what happens when they bounce off each other. And then very interesting things happen, they... they bounce off each other something like billiard balls, but not quite. And so there's a whole range of interesting questions which on the one hand are geometrical, on the other hand are dynamic or physical, governed by equations. But right in the background underneath it all there's underpinning of topology which is the sort of global large scale study of curved spaces or curved phenomena or complicated equations in which remarkably you can make progress without doing all the hard work. Where you can actually predict certain facts from qualitative behaviour, understanding the way in which the large scale things affect the small scale things. That's... that’s how the fascination [is] for me, and why sometimes they're important, because these qualitative topological ideas underpin so many other things. Above this superstructure you can put many different actual detailed systems.
In some sense these… when you're studying geometry, you start off by studying triangles and squares and angles and straight lines; then you study, sort of, bits of curved surfaces on them. And then... then you start to study large scale pieces, not just small pieces; and at that stage these topological notions begin to become important, determine things. And a whole large parts of mathematics have been developed in order to provide one with the tools to understand this; how you... how you can use it, put it together. And most of the… I suppose the mathematics of the last century, has been building up this kind of machinery.
And mathematicians use machinery like... like physicists used apparatus. As physics has evolved you use more and more sophisticated microscopes, telescopes, you know, X-ray machines, which enable you to penetrate harder and harder into the smaller and smaller or the bigger and bigger; and mathematicians have developed similar intellectual machines. They are things that enable them to probe much more into what happens at large scales or small scales or the link between them, in many ways very... very parallel, except these machines are intellectual machines. They're... they’re bits built up out of the past, you put them together, they're designed for particular purposes and like any good machine they can be used on a whole range of problems.
The specimen you study in a microscope can become all sorts of different possibilities. The same is true with one of these intellectual machines. They can be applied to a whole range of problems which come from different backgrounds, but some have certain things in common. So I like to think that this is what mathematicians are... are doing, is to produce intellectual machines, and the topology is... is one of the sort of key ingredients in most… many of these machines. It's somehow the backbone, in some sense, if you like, the... the large scale structure of the machine. And we've been doing that… building up these machines for a long time, and we're now putting... putting them to use.
 
