oliver.sacks

Oliver Sacks (1933-2015) was born in England. Having obtained his medical degree at Oxford University, he moved to the USA.  There he worked as a consultant neurologist at Beth Abraham Hospital where in 1966, he encountered a group of survivors of the global sleepy sickness of 1916-1927.  Sacks treated these patients with the then-experimental drug L-Dopa producing astounding results which he described in his book Awakenings.    Further cases of neurological disorders were described by Sacks with exceptional sympathy in another major book entitled The Man Who Mistook His Wife For A Hat which became an instant best seller on its publication in 1985.  His other books drew on his rich experiences as a neurologist gleaned over almost five decades of professional practice.    Sacks's work was recognized by prestigious institutions which awarded him numerous honours and prizes.  These included the Lewis Thomas Prize given by Rockefeller University, which recognizes the scientist as poet. He was an honorary fellow of both the American Academy of Arts and Letters and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and held honorary degrees from many universities, including Oxford, the Karolinska Institute, Georgetown, Bard, Gallaudet, Tufts, and the Catholic University of Peru.

Many years ago, I took a manuscript of my first book to an editor at Faber & Faber. I said, 'Nice to meet you,' and she said, 'We’ve met before'. And I said, 'I don’t remember it'. And she said, 'No, you wouldn’t. It was like this’, she said, 'I was training to be a nurse, and your mother was one of our lecturers at the Royal Free Hospital, and she was giving a talk on breastfeeding. And after a while she said, ‘There’s nothing difficult or embarrassing about breastfeeding’ and she bent down, picked up a baby, which had been concealed, and fed it in front of the class'. She said, 'This was in September of 1933, and you were the baby'. I was amazed at the story, because my mother was a very shy woman, pathologically shy, but she could be quite a ham in performance, and it’s similar with me.

I was born in a large, rambling, untidy house in North West London at the junction of Mapesbury and Exeter Road. Like many Edwardian houses it had many rooms, though none of them were spacious. I loved the roof of the house and the eaves, which seemed to me to resemble some immense crystal. The house was made of a red brick which later, because I... I like geology, I decided must’ve been old Devonian sandstone. This, because there many Devonian names around me. There was Teignmouth Road and Chatsworth Road and Dartmouth Road and... and of course, Exeter.

In the earliest years of which I have any recollection, I was in the small room adjacent to my parents’ room, and so if I had a nightmare or whatever, they could hear me or I could... or I could go to them. The ceiling in the room had many strange excrescences and if I stood on the bed I could feel them, and they were very hard. And I gather that this was because my brother, Michael, had occupied this room before me. He was two when the family moved from the East End to North West London. And Michael was not fond of sago and he would take a spoon and he would flick spoonfuls of sago on the ceiling where they would adhere and dry and become as hard as concrete. And I believe that many houses of that era have sago concretions on the ceiling.

I could not have been much more than three or perhaps four when I moved into... I was moved into another bedroom which then became my bedroom, not only as long as I was in England, but as long as the family stayed in the house, which was until 1990 when my father died and the house was sold.

I couldn’t get to sleep unless my mother came up and asked me to say an evening prayer and then kissed me goodnight. When Proust talks about his longing for his mother’s kisses and the importance of that, I... I think, I was like that at that time. The Hebrew prayer expressed a hope that one would be alive in the morning.

I was born in an Orthodox Jewish household and all sorts of rituals were there, and I got to know them by heart. I think there was some sort of proto-religious or proto-mystical feeling, or perhaps it was just sentimental or fantasy. I think I was already prone to fantasy and perhaps confabulation by the age of five or six. But when I saw my mother light the Sabbath candles on Friday, and... and she would cup her eyes and her hands and say a prayer, but I somehow thought that with this, the peace of the Sabbath would not only descend on the house, but was descending on planets all over the universe.

I mention these... the deep affection for my mother and the slight proclivity, perhaps, to religious feeling, because both of these took a beating when I was just six. I was... I was six years old when the war broke out. We were in Bournemouth on a summer holiday at the time and that summer holiday got prolonged in a way which first seemed rather fun and then became very disconcerting. My parents went back to London. They were both involved in the war – various ways. My mother in particular, became an emergency surgeon and had to... worked in a hospital in St Albans. She came up a week or so after she’d left to check that all was okay, and then she said she would be back in another two weeks, but she didn’t come back and she couldn’t make it. And she didn’t reappear for six weeks, and when she did reappear, I... the first time she had come back, I leapt into her arms. I think she staggered a bit under my weight, but... but that was how I felt. But after that six-week wait, I was rather cold to her. I didn’t intend to be cold, but somehow coldness had developed. I think my mother was rather shocked at that.
 
A few months after this I was sent to a boarding school in Brafield [on-the-Green], which is a little village near Northampton. One of the things I did at Brafield... we all had little gardens of our own... was to make a test of God’s existence. I had planted two rows of radishes and I gave God a choice. He could curse one or bless one, but the two rows had to be different. Of course they were identical. And I would say I date my disbelief from that, but obviously it was disbelief which led to this... this satirical experiment, this ludicrous experiment. Anyhow, it wasn’t foolproof, because, you know, God was under no obligation to listen to me or to alter the course of nature for my benefit. But I think the beginning of the war, sort of... affected my relationship to my parents – perhaps my mother especially – and... and made it more difficult for me to take anything on trust, whether it was God or a promise of a visit in two weeks.

During my four years at boarding school, I saw rather little of my parents. I didn’t... and on school holidays I would usually go to an aunt who lived in Cheshire and who herself founded a school in Delamere Forest. It was... it was called the JFAS, the Jewish Fresh Air School for Delicate Children. ‘Delicate’ at that time could mean anything from... I don’t... from autism to asthma, although I think autism had not been characterised at the time. I often wished I could’ve been a pupil at my aunt’s school, but I think my parents were afraid of favouritism or perhaps it would’ve been too difficult generally.

I think the school [Brafield]was probably badly, and in a way perhaps rather cruelly, run. The headmaster had been a schoolmaster at my brother Michael's school in London, and... where he enjoyed the reputation of being a genial man and an excellent teacher. I think the position of being headmaster of this strange, improvised school in the country must’ve been hard on him and brought out another side. It seemed to me that I was always being beaten. The cane was very much in evidence. Whether this was pathology on his side or merely a fine old English tradition, you know, the Rugby tradition, I don’t know, but I think this left... left its mark on me.

I felt rather isolated at the school, although I did have a friend, a boy of my own age with red hair, called Lawrence Greenbaum. I wonder if he’s still alive... speaking of 70 years ago now. We constructed a... a tree house together. And so there were... there were pleasant things in the... in the village as well.

I had a piano teacher there. She was in the village, a Mrs Clayton, and it was a pleasure to get out of the school and go to her, and music was a joy to me then. It had been a joy before I went to Brafield [on-the-Green]. My father was very musical and my brothers were. They had a music teacher, Francesco Ticciati, who loved Bach and instilled, sometimes rather ruthlessly, his love of Bach to them. I would hear him shout, 'No, no, no!' when they missed a note or whatever and...  but Mrs Clayton continued and there was also horse riding, which I loved. But mostly I hated the school.

I think we were starved there, or perhaps everyone in England was starving. I certainly got very thin. I remember how my ribs stuck out. Maybe in reaction to this, I’ve been overweight for the last 65 years. And there were certain foods which I especially hated. These included the giant marrows which the headmaster grew and also mangelwurzels, which are, sort of, giant beetroots for cattle. A word has gone from me for... Swedes. Yes, and of course, swedes, which are, sort of, giant turnips for cattle. I have hated the smell of turnips ever since then.

I think I became, despite Lawrence Greenbaum, rather isolated at school. I don’t recollect any other friends. I do recollect becoming fascinated by numbers, by mental arithmetic and indulging in more and more complex, sort of, puzzles and exercises. I... I often felt that numbers had a real presence and some of them were very comfortable, indeed. I... I liked primes. One... you knew where you were with a prime. A prime was always prime. One couldn’t imagine a prime being not prime, and at a time of uncertainty and capriciousness and broken promises and beatings, prime stood out. You could trust a prime.

This business of seeking for invariance, something to be trusted, which is always there, which is not subject to any variation of vicissitude or vagary, I think, has persisted for me.

Some years ago, I heard a radio programme. I wish I could get a copy of it. There were three or four people of my generation who had all been at boarding schools in England. One man had been shifted, I think, from one school to another and had had a worse time and he... although he had had a superficially normal life and was, sort of, married and had a good job, he said he felt this had left its imprint on him and in particular, that he was defective in the three Bs. And the interviewer said, 'What are the three Bs?' And he said, 'Bonding, belonging and belief'. I don’t know whether I’ve made this story up or not. I... I think there was such an interview. Maybe the three Bs are my invention. Anyhow, whether they’re my invention or not, this is partly how I feel. I feel I’ve, on the whole, lived at a certain distance from people, so belonging has been difficult. It’s true that I belong to the New York Fern Society, but we only meet once a month and we only talk about ferns, so that’s a safe sort of belonging.
 

Bonding in general has been... difficult, although I am exceedingly grateful to have friends like Jonathan Miller and Eric Korn, who go right back to my earliest days. I’m not a quarreller. I think sometimes friendships have cooled, one has moved apart, but I... I don’t think I’ve ever turned against someone whom I liked.

At one time I was doing a series for the BBC and... yes, he was also Christopher, wasn’t he? Yes. And Chris kept... I don’t know whether it was doing this... he made some gesture which, I think, was supposed to say, 'Look at me', but I always thought it meant ‘wipe your mouth’.

And belief... well, I think, from the radishes on, but probably from before the radishes, I... I very much, like EM Forster's essay, saying I do not believe in ‘Belief’. If belief with a big B means faith, or belief without evidence, or belief only as an emotion, then, I think, this is not something which I have too strongly. You have sometimes told me that you think my if there is a God ‘module’ in the brain or a religious centre, mine has atrophied or perhaps failed... failed to develop.
 

But I do believe in science as a cautious method of trying to apprehend some aspects of reality which have to be grounded in... in evidence and experiment and in one’s ability to make hypotheses. I feel comfortable with science. I feel very uncomfortable with... with the notion of faith. More than uncomfortable, it makes me very irascible. I... however, I generally keep my mouth shut on the matter, although I’ve done so less over the years.

I’ve adopted a phrase which Jonathan Miller once used. Jonathan did a wonderful production, The Matthew Passion, at BAM [Brooklyn Academy of Music]. It was... you didn’t just have singers who sat in one place and bawled out the words, it was acted, it was theatre. And there were many people including probably deeply devout people, who were moved to tears or to raptures and Jonathan was tickled by this and he said, 'Not bad for an old Jewish atheist'. And I’ve... I've adopted that phrase. I feel I’m also an old Jewish atheist, although when I said that to one friend of mine at Cornell, he said, 'I’m an older Jewish atheist'.

Freeman Dyson... wrote an article about [John] Polkinghorne... I think Polkinghorne is a physicist at Cambridge who later took holy orders and... and has introduced demiurges and divinity into quantum mechanics... and I think Freeman is upset about this and... anyhow, he said of himself in that article, he said, 'I am a practising Christian, but not a believing one'. And I... I liked that very much. I miss the practice of Judaism quite a bit. I used to enjoy many of the rituals in the synagogue and at home. I especially love the rituals on the high festivals, the Seder table laden with... with everything and the open doors so two or three strangers always came in on a Seder night. I love the Sukkot, the house in the garden with the... the roof hung with fruit and flowers.

I loved a festival called Simchat Torah in which people danced in the synagogue, holding branches of palm and a... and a citrus fruit. I... I would like to have more religious practice in my life, but, in fact, I really don’t... don't have any. Certainly... I don’t know if my parents had any religious belief. It was never discussed. The house was kosher, the orthodoxies were observed, but I don’t know whether they were ever... ever believed in. In general, I think, Judaism does not enjoin nor enforce belief in the same way, say, as Catholicism. You don’t have to swallow a Trinity, you don’t have to swallow an afterlife, you may not even have to swallow a God. Basically, I think, it’s a rather ethical religion of, sort of, behave yourself down here, although there are certain cosmic things that if you... that a wrong deed will resonate throughout the universe, but so will a right deed.

There were four of us. There were three older... I had three older brothers. I was supposed to be a girl. My mother had decided to call me Elizabeth Ann, but she had to change her mind when she saw what she had produced. I mean... one did not have ultrasound then. The... my two older brothers were... Marcus and David were 10 years my senior. Michael, the third brother was... came in between. He was five years my senior, five years their junior.

The house was... was full of music. There were... there were two pianos there, an upright and a... and a grand piano. They were both Bechsteins.
My older brothers were to practice and play on the grand piano and I and Michael did a little tinkling on the upright piano. Marcus played the clarinet, David played the flute. We sometimes had chamber music concerts in which my father would play the piano and string players and others would come in. My mother was, in a way, rather unmusical or perhaps... no, I’m putting it the wrong way around. My father was intensely musical. He would come back from concerts and play everything by ear and play around with it. He’d play a popular song as if Bach had written it or as if Bartók had written it. He had a very, very good ear and he... he always had loose pockets containing miniature orchestral scores, and when he had a minute to spare, he would... he would look at these.

When I came back to London when I was 10, I would sometimes accompany my father on house calls and I loved that. I... I would always be invited into the house. My father might go upstairs to the patient or sometimes I might see him examining a patient. I loved to see him percuss the chest and listen to the heart. Sometimes he used a stethoscope, sometimes he just put his ear against the chest. I think he may have already then been grooming me a little bit to become a doctor myself and he laid great stress on using all the senses. When he was young he had a very good nose, a very acute sense of smell and he would... he would, sort of smell diabetic urine or urine with a trace of acetone in it a hundred yards away. He had an acute diagnostic nose, but he... he would always say to me, don’t depend on X-rays, even don’t depend on a stethoscope, you must... but... but sometimes if there was a delay or sometimes he might just sit in a car and look at a musical score.

We did have a gramophone and lots of records, but there were more musical scores than records, because my father really didn’t need a record. He would... he would hear it in his mind when he looked at the score and anyway he wanted. I think when I was about 12 or so, I found the ideal birthday present for him. It was called A Dictionary of Musical Themes and he would look at this at night and then one theme will start going and he would have a little night music, a... a sort of, a musical sedative and he would fall asleep to the music.
 

My mother was rather unmusical and always a semitone, or whatever, off. But she loved singing and she was very fond of Schubert and, in fact, I... when I hear Schubert properly sung, in tune, I feel nostalgic for my mother’s improper renderings which were slightly out of tune and also slightly cockney. Somehow I feel that Schubert should be slightly out of tune and cockney.

My father had surgery hours in the house, morning and evening, but my mother also saw private patients in the house, although most of her work was at various hospitals. My parents shared a surgery and this was a... for me, a mystical room which emitted strange lights and sometimes noises and smells. The smell, I think, was especially of iodoform which was used as an antiseptic, though my mother did have ether and chloroform in her obstetric bag. Although she had qualified as a general surgeon and went back to general surgery in the war, her favourite specialty was OBGYN – Obstetrics and Gynaecology.
If I saw a strange light coming under the door, it was because my father was a believer in ultraviolet light and the ultraviolet light emitted some violet as well. It also emitted a smell of ozone which I was very fond of, as I was very fond of the smell of iodoform.
Perhaps I should say... but now I’m going to leap ahead 65 years, 60 years, yes, 65 years... the house was sold in 1990. It was sold to the British Psychological Association. I’m going to return to this, but... and every room had been changed, but when I went into the room which had been my parents’ surgery, I smelt iodoform. I... I can’t voluntarily summon any smell, to mind. Whether this was just an involuntary association or hallucination, or whether a few molecules of iodoform had escaped the repainting and the renovation, I... I don’t know. It was similar when I went into what had been the dining room, which was now an office. When I went into the dining room I could smell red wine. The kosher red Israeli wine, I think, was called Alicante, which had been there in the sideboard for 60 years. I still smelt it. Again, I don’t know whether I imagined it or whether some... some micrograms, nanograms of wine were still surviving.

My parents’ surgery... there were... there were some uncomfortable-looking things and, occasionally by... by deliberate mistake I would open the door and say, 'Sorry', because I wanted to see what was going on. I think I then on one occasion saw a woman with her legs in stirrups, up in the lithotomy position. I was a little taken aback and I wondered what my mother was doing.
 

I have another memory of pulling out an instrument which she had in the instrument cupboard. It was like a powerful pair of callipers and I said, 'What’s this, what are these?' And she said, ‘That’s a cranioclast’. And I said, 'What’s a cranioclast?' And she said, that sometimes a woman would start giving birth, but the baby’s head would be too large to go through and would stick, and at that point one might have to use a cranioclast to crush the baby’s head. She said, 'But at least', she said, 'this may sound awful, but if you don’t use this, then you will lose mother as well as child'. I don’t know why the cranioclast stays in my mind. I think, but I may be wrong, I think, she told me that an orthodox Catholic would not use a cranioclast and would sacrifice mother and child, but... but perhaps I’m making that up.
[Q] I’ve also heard that, because it’s more important, in that notion, to birth the child and baptise it, even if it’s going to die. Yes.
Yes. Well, I mean, I don’t know how you’d get the child out.
 

I would sometimes go with my mother on her house calls, and her house calls were to deliver babies, and I would hear certain strange comments, like, 'She’s half-a-crown dilated'. I... I didn’t know what was dilated, although I knew what half-a-crown was. I was... I was very puzzled by these things. I... I did discover my mother’s obstetric bag at an early stage and I certainly tried both the ether and the chloroform before I was 12. The ether I didn’t like. The... the chloroform had a rather sweet, sickly smell and... really rather dangerous.
 

I was trying lots of chemicals at that stage when I got back from Brafield. I developed a passion for chemistry and for the elements in particular, and for many things. I was very fond of very heavy metals and heavy liquids and I had a whole big bottle of a very heavy liquid, which was bromoform. This is the bromine equivalent of chloroform and smelt just like chloroform, but with chloroform I would become hot and woozy and a bit dizzy and silly. It... a feeling which was both seductive and rather frightening, so I never went too far with it. Ether was rather dangerous because it was terrifyingly inflammable.

I liked my father’s dispensary more than the rather terrifying metallic instruments in my mother’s cabinet. My father had a little spirit lamp and, of course, he would test for sugar in urine. And there were many other tests and reagents, and there were lotions to be given to patients. I think some of this was the equivalent of snake oil, he would have... if something was a nice colour and tasted sweet, then – although it was only a placebo – then it would tend to work.

There was a third person who occupied that room almost constantly and this was my parents’ secretary, Miss Levy. Now, although I know her name was Mary Levy, she was always Miss Levy. And... and I think Miss Levy became fond of the curious little boy who came in. I... I particularly watched loving [sic] her type and the sound of the bell at the end. She was astoundingly faithful and she was with my father from 1930 when he moved into the house, till 1990 when he died. And, I think... I mean, they were both in their 90s then and, I think, she died soon after that.

Well, my mother was certainly unusual in being a woman surgeon, and she was one of the very first women in the Royal College of Surgeons, I think, maybe the third or fourth. A lot of her older sisters had become suffragettes. I mean, they were... they were tough, intelligent women and they wanted all the rights. My mother was not tough in a confrontational way, but she was extremely tough in her stubbornness and fidelity and tenacity, so she wanted to become a doctor. There was one point, I think, at which she had wanted to become a chemist. Many of her brothers were chemists and my mother was fond of chemistry, but when she had set her mind on becoming a doctor, nothing was going to stop her. And she had a, I suppose, in a way, a brilliant academic career in that she took all the prizes at school and at medical school, and... and she obtained staff positions and fellowship of the Royal College when she was... when she was very young. I do not know, however, that she was that comfortable in a male, or perhaps I should say, in masculine society, so the main hospital she worked in was the EGA, the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital.
Elizabeth Garrett Anderson had been the first woman physician in England. She had... Elizabeth Garrett Anderson had actually... had to go Paris to get her MD. The... but my mother stayed with the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital from her first appointment in probably 1920, maybe earlier, till she was 65 and retired.
She also used to go to the Marie Curie Hospital and told me how she had once seen Marie Curie. And she also told me... I’m being completely irrelevant here, but this is... she told me how some patients with cancers were given tiny gold needles containing radon, and I asked her if she would bring one of them back, or perhaps she just did, bring one of them back. I think the radon had evaporated by then. Radon only has a half-life of three days. But... and, of course, my mother was also at the Royal Free Hospital and that was, to go back to the start, that was when my editor had been a trainee nurse and had heard her talk in September of '33.

Table conversation was all about medicine, and by the time I came back from Brafield, my two older brothers were both medical students, so there were then four people to talk about medicine, both parents and my brothers. My mother, in particular, was a very good storyteller and loved telling medical stories, either impervious to the gruesome and to the shocked effect of listeners. Jonathan Miller, actually, does a very good imitation of my mother and how, for example, she would combine, synchronise the pus and the soup or... or whatever it was. Oddly, she’d do this both ways, because she also liked giving recipes to her residents and her assistants and she... she would talk about food when she was operating, and she would talk about surgery at mealtimes, and the two things were very close. The... I think I was both fascinated and horrified by many of these medical stories.

I think doctors are all prone to telling stories and telling stories is essential in a medical life. The patient tells you his story. You listen to his story. You try and get more details. You compare it with other stories you’ve heard. Unlike the scientific mind which thinks in terms of... of generalities, I think, the individual... the individual and the sense of biography, the sense of particular people, has to be central in medicine or most forms of medicine.
My father practiced until his dying day, almost. He died at 94 and he’d qualified at 20, so he had nearly three-quarters of a century of practice. He had seen thousands and thousands of patients, tens of thousands probably, but, I think, he remembered them all. This is... this is... and I have a little bit of this myself.

I was asked... Dannie Abse... Dannie Abse, a poet doctor, was asked to edit a book called My Medical School. There had been My Oxford and My Cambridge. I was asked to contribute to My Medical School, and I wrote back and told him that I was afraid I didn’t have any memories. I said other people are probably full of affectionate and grateful memories of teachers, but I wasn’t. What I failed to say is that I remembered every patient I’d seen in hospital and in medical school. Indeed, I am exhuming one of them from... from 1958 in my present book. I’m not very good at... at book learning. I... I’m a hands-on person as my father was and I need to learn from the individual, and when I read in [Ludwig] Wittgenstein...  Wittgenstein says somewhere, a book should exist of examples. I like that. My books are chock-full of examples. They may be thin on generalisation or theory, I don’t know. I... so far as I’m concerned, one can’t have too many examples. No two people are the same.
 
 

My mother’s storytelling... she was... she couldn’t contain herself, she was an incontinent storyteller and I would see her sometimes talking to the... the gardener or to the milkman. The milkman would come around and... in his cart and deliver milk, but he would be detained. My mother would capture him like the Ancient Mariner, and she’d bewitch him with stories, stories which would start with a surgical operation or... or cancer, a medical condition of some sort, but then spread out to a, sort of, biography. I think my own storytelling life has been very much influenced by my parents, especially by my mother’s storytelling.
When I was writing a lot of the case histories of Awakenings in 1972, I’d... I'd rented a little apartment near Hampstead Heath. I stayed the whole summer. My parents had their golden wedding that summer and... but in the evening I would come down with manuscripts and I would read to my mother, and she’d often shake her head and say, 'That’s not right', you know, or, 'You’ve got it there'. She heard many of the tales for Awakenings aurally. I find myself a bit choked up, because she died that year.

I don’t quite know what brought my mother to medicine, although I know she had a great admiration for women who had made it, especially scientific women, and Marie Curie had been a... a heroine of hers from her earliest years.
 

Christopher, you... you said that my talking sounded somewhat like my writing, or something of the sort, but I’m going to tell you a couple of stories in relation to that. I’ve mentioned that I was doing case histories of Awakenings in the summer of 1972. I wasn’t actually writing them – I’d had quite a bad neck injury and I was partly paralysed in both arms, and I really couldn’t hold a pen or type, and I had to wear a high, high collar. But I... I would get myself comfortable, I would look through my notes, and then I had a shorthand typist – probably... this is probably an extinct species now, I don’t know.
Now, I didn’t dictate. I told her stories – her reactions, her facial expressions were very important to me; it was sort of like Scheherazade in reverse – and she would listen and turning it into shorthand, and the next morning she would bring it up to me, typed up, and I would go over it. Now, no one has ever commented on any difference, but in fact the first nine case histories of Awakenings were written and the latter 11 case histories were spoken, and were never written.

I’ll tell you another story. In 1988, for some reason the image of a particular patient I’d seen as a medical student recurred to me.  It has also recurred to me very strongly when I was writing Awakenings, and seeing those patients; but... but in '88 it occurred... it recurred to me very strongly, and I wrote up this man’s story, which I called Cold Storage.  When I told Eric [Korn], my oldest friend, that I’d just written up this man’s story, he said, 'What do you mean, you’ve just written it up?'  He said, 'You wrote it up in '58 – I saw it'.  And I said, 'No, I didn’t’, I said, ‘I may have told you a story in '58, but I didn’t write it'. But I suspect that I may have told it, that what I may... I suspect that my telling it in '58 and my writing it in '88 may have been much the same, and may have used some of the same phrases.

Eric, I met before either of us had ever gone to school because we were both taken in our perambulators to Grange Park in Kilburn – Grange Park was about equidistant between my house in Cricklewood – our house in Cricklewood – and his house in Swiss Cottage. We... so we knew each other and were becoming verbal at three and four and five. We knew each other when the war started, and so it was possible for Eric to say... when I came back in 1943 and went to the Hall School in Hampstead, which he also went to, and he commented that I had changed. He thought I’d been rather aggressive as a five year old, and that I had become very timid.  And I think this... this was probably an accurate observation. I had in fact been intimidated at school. So Eric I’ve... I've always known... Eric goes back, as it were, before memory. There was never a time when I was introduced to Eric, you know, we were probably both... I’m six months his senior, we were probably both two months old and two years old, and have no record of this.

Jonathan Miller I clearly remember first seeing – I was in St Paul’s, and I was up in the library, the Walker Library, reading about Victorian science, and in particular about electric eggs, so-called, I was fascinated by static electricity. And Jonathan came up to me and introduced himself – very tall, the more so because I was crouching down sort of looking at this book.  And I saw this immensely tall red-headed man with a... with a wonderfully mobile face, and... and that was... that was Jonathan.

The three of us became very close at school, and the three of us founded a literary society.  I, although I was the least literate of the three of us, I think became president, Jonathan was the secretary, and Eric was the treasurer. And this literary society was inexcusably successful.  We attracted larger and larger numbers of people at our meetings, whereas the school’s existing Milton Society got emptier and emptier, and finally by an edict the high master... I’m blocked, now, I want... I’ve forgotten his initials... obviously he was not MR James... the high master, Dr James, brought me in, summoned me one day and said, 'Sacks, you don’t exist'.  He was referring to the literary society. And I said, 'What do you mean, we don’t exist?'  He said, 'You’re annulled', and I said, 'You can’t do that, sir'.  And he said, 'I can do what I want, Sacks'.  And so the literary society – and I can’t help thinking, although I’m not sensitive to notions of anti-Semitism, but we may have been a lot of noisy, clever Jewish boys as opposed to the discreet, virtually silent members of... of the Milton Society – anyhow, we were... we were annulled, but not before we had brought out a magazine called The Prickly Pear, which was cyclostyled, or however they did things, in purple ink.

Eric always seemed the cleverest of the three. He had a prodigious memory, he had a wonderful memory for poetry. I remember he used to... he used to recite the [The Love Song of J Alfred] Prufrock and the Four Quartets. I think he knew all... all Eliot by heart.

Jonathan was...was the most spontaneous and funny, and... and because there was some slight resemblance to Danny Kaye, and Danny – he was always imitating Danny Kaye.  And Danny Kaye got to hear of these imitations, and invited Jonathan over, and I think Danny Kaye probably had a... had a shock of identity when Jonathan did him.

Remembering Jonathan and Danny Kaye, and perhaps thinking of... of Danny Kaye being stunned by this more-than-Danny Kaye-like presentation or embodiment in Jonathan has made me think of a rare clinical condition in which one not only has a hallucination of a double facing one, but there is a bizarre uncertainty as to which is the real person, and sometimes one seems to look out through the double’s eyes at oneself.  But then one is no longer one’s self, the self is embodied in the double.  It’s... I don’t know whether I’ve ever had such a situation myself – I think it must occur perhaps occasionally with identical twins, I don’t know.

Jonathan, Eric and I all became very close. Neither of them shared my love of chemistry which... which had developed earlier and was very strong, but was probably fading by the time I met Jonathan.  But anyhow, we were all moving towards biology, and we all fell in love with a wonderful biology teacher, Sidney Pask, whom we had at school. I think it was Jonathan who proposed that to show our gratitude and affection we kiss Sidney. But Sidney always had a pipe, and we didn’t know how this pipe would get in the way of a kiss – whether one could kiss to one side of the pipe or whether the pipe would somehow be pushed down Sidney’s throat. So we... we never did kiss Sidney.

I... I’ve always tended to have sort of arbitrary or possibly reasonable preferences – I’ve mentioned that I used to have a preference for prime numbers. I then later developed a preference for certain elements, the so-called heavy transition metals, of which tungsten is an example, and I settled on a zoological group of the cephalopods, squids, cuttlefish, octopus, as mine.  Eric settled on a group of the sea cucumbers, or holothurians, and Jonathan settled on a group of segmented worms, or polychetes. And... and we really became extremely expert in our... in our different specialties. I think Eric and I especially – Eric had discovered a place in Pentonville where one could get pickled holothurians and... and other things. Before that I used to go to a chemical place and buy chemicals, often very dangerous chemicals which would never be sold now, which would be illegal to sell.

We were all drawn together on one occasion when Jonathan’s parents had rented a house one summer in Hythe. And when they were going to be away for a few days Jonathan invited Eric up, and he invited the two of us up, and the three of us then went on a fishing boat on a trip. The fishermen caught lots of cuttlefish which they started throwing overboard because people don’t eat sepia, cuttlefish, in... in England, but I love the cuttlefish, and I said, 'Keep them'.  And so they got two or three and they started to throw them overboard.  I said, 'No, I want them all', and we got a huge tub of cuttlefish, about a hundred of them. I thought it would be very nice if we could take them back to Sid. I... I knew how his eyes would glow, and he’d have the whole class dissecting cuttlefish.  But they had to be preserved, and I found some large jars and we put in... put them in water plus a little alcohol – I think this was probably brandy which had belonged to... to Jonathan’s father.
But anyhow, it wasn’t enough alcohol, and one day we heard explosions in the basement and we found that these jars... that the cuttlefish insufficiently pickled had fermented and the gases had burst the jars. There were bits of cuttlefish on the ceiling and all over the walls, and the place stank inconceivably. I mean, I think that putrefied cuttlefish is as bad as you get, and Jonathan’s parents were coming back that day. And we... Eric hastily bought a large bottle of lavender water which we... we tried to conceal things... and then his parents came, and they were... and they were very puzzled, because they would sniff and smile at the lavender water, they would sniff and grimace; there were strange alternating zones of lavender water and putrefied cuttlefish.
Anyhow, we were... we were in very bad odour, I especially, since it had been my greed in the first place and folly in getting so many cuttlefish, and I think there was actually difficulty renting the house after that. I’m sorry – that was a story I told of Uncle Tungsten - I’ve no right to tell it again, but having written Uncle Tungsten I can’t help repeating myself somewhat, and Uncle Tungsten was partly a written version of what I’m doing now.

My parents were sensitive to the notion of anti-Semitism in London, and I would hear stories of [Oswald] Mosley and marches. I don’t think I was, or am, particularly sensitive to anti-Semitism now, but at St Paul’s in my time we constituted about 10% of the boys, maybe the same at the girls’ school over the road, and... I hesitate to say this, but I suspect too, although it was not an exact match, that the, there was some overlap between the 10% who were Jewish and the 10% who got university scholarships, because when later Jews were rationed to 2% or 1%, then there were far fewer university scholarships. 

Later, Jews were cut down to an aliquot. What do I mean, an aliquot, or whatever? We were rationed to one or two percent, and there were fewer university scholarships.  Isaiah Berlin, who was an old Pauline, was outraged at this and sort of resigned from the Old Pauline Association, and later this... this stringent limit was relaxed. But one felt somewhat more Jewish because on the whole the Jewish boys did not come to chapel, or weren’t there for morning prayers. We were supposed to have our own Jewish prayers, but... but we just exchanged dirty jokes, or... or whatever; I hardly remember any Jewish prayers. There may have been a few unpopular Jews who... who prayed, and they were ignored by the rest of us.

My father was ambivalent, and this showed itself in regard to a younger brother of his, although this was not a story which I could put together until – in fact, until after my father’s death. My father, who was very powerfully built and very muscular as a young man, and a wonderful swimmer – well, he continued as a wonderful swimmer, really, until his dying day – but he became immensely obese later and would go every so often to a fat farm in Wales. And this never seemed to do much good; he would often come back rather heavier than... apparently fatter than when he went, and often with a deep suntan which seemed atypical for Wales.  But... I only got the story together after his death when I found that all of these supposed Welsh visits had in fact been visits to Portugal to see his younger brother.
This younger brother was never mentioned when I grew up. When he was 19 he had gone to Portugal, fallen in love with and married a shiksa, a gentile, and he was excommunicated by the rest of the family – his name was never mentioned.  But it then turned out that not merely my father, but my father’s two sisters all made secret visits to Lisbon to see their beloved brother who was categorically excommunicated, but still personally seen. I very much regret that I never met my uncle, nor... nor his daughter.

My father was ambivalent, and this showed itself in regard to a younger brother of his, although this was not a story which I could put together until – in fact, until after my father’s death. My father, who was very powerfully built and very muscular as a young man, and a wonderful swimmer – well, he continued as a wonderful swimmer, really, until his dying day – but he became immensely obese later and would go every so often to a fat farm in Wales. And this never seemed to do much good; he would often come back rather heavier than... apparently fatter than when he went, and often with a deep suntan which seemed atypical for Wales.  But... I only got the story together after his death when I found that all of these supposed Welsh visits had in fact been visits to Portugal to see his younger brother.
This younger brother was never mentioned when I grew up. When he was 19 he had gone to Portugal, fallen in love with and married a shiksa, a gentile, and he was excommunicated by the rest of the family – his name was never mentioned.  But it then turned out that not merely my father, but my father’s two sisters all made secret visits to Lisbon to see their beloved brother who was categorically excommunicated, but still personally seen. I very much regret that I never met my uncle, nor... nor his daughter.

Yes, we... we had a library which had... which had been designed as a library; there were a lot of books in the house, but neither of my parents were particularly bookish people although they had met at a medical students’ Ibsen Society, and they both loved Ibsen, and they would always go to the theatre together on Thursdays.  But I don’t think they were – my father was a Hebrew scholar, and there were many, many Hebrew books – and a lot of medical books, these also were in the cabinet in the surgery, and these also fascinated me and horrified me somewhat.
I particularly remember, I think I was just come back from London – I particularly remember I’d just come back to London, I was 10 or so, maybe 11 – I pulled out a book called French’s [Index of] Differential Diagnosis, and when I opened it I was struck by a picture of a tiny bald creature who was 10 years old, and it said: this is progeria, or premature ageing, and that in childhood or adolescence the hair will fall out, the... the nose will become beak-like, the muscles will fall away, and the person will look as if they’re 200 years old. And I was terrified by the notion that progeria was waiting for me. Now other people might get chicken pox, or even cancer, but I would get progeria. I’ve in fact sort of continued to be anxious about... about premature senility ever since.

Now I’m just worried about the prospects of being told that in their 80s, 50 per cent of people have Alzheimer’s; I hope that’s a wrong statistic, and if it’s right I hope I’m... I'm not one of them; and if I am, well, I’ll deal with it when I get there.  My friends will.

Yes, I’ve said I think I was perhaps the least literate of the three of us in the Society.  Jonathan’s mother of course was a novelist and a biographer, and Jonathan... I remember Jonathan asked me what I thought about Selma Lagerlöf, and I thought that might be a sort of beer, or it was some strange Swedish dish. His... his mother was Swedish or partly Swedish, and Jonathan’s father was a great... was a very scholarly psychoanalyst who had a huge interest in anthropology and many, many things. I remember I first encountered The Golden Bough in his father’s library.
I was rather afraid of Emmanuel Miller who seemed a formidable man. And although Jonathan may gainsay this, I recollect or seem to recollect Jonathan’s father reproaching Jonathan for his levity, for intellectual levity, and saying that intellectual weight would reside in a shelf of learned monographs, and I think that Jonathan was considerably inhibited, and still feels the shadow of a father sometimes there. My analyst, Shengold, has written a book called Haunted by Parents, and I think Jonathan is somewhat haunted, at least in this one respect, by his father. On the other hand I think with, you know, in terms of intellectual weight and range of interests he has very good genetics, very good genes on both sides.

I don’t think either of Eric’s parents were... were particularly bookish, but we all went to public libraries. I loved the public library in Willesden, a triangular building. There weren’t that many science books at home; I found science books in the public library, and I feel much of my own education was not at school but... but in the public library. Eric also haunted public libraries, and he was the most precocious of the three of us, and I think by the age of 14 by far the most widely read, and aided by this incredible memory. I don’t know whether I should say this, but this becomes painful to recollect now that Eric of all people, with that dazzling brain, himself has Alzheimer’s or something like this, maybe Lewy body disease.

Incidentally Jonathan was for many years haunted himself by Alzheimer’s disease because his mother developed Alzheimer’s disease at an unusually early age, and I remember how... how annihilated Jonathan was when he visited her once in hospital and she didn’t recognise him. He never went again. But Jonathan dealt with this concern very productively, and became honorary president of the Alzheimer’s Society in England.

I suspect of the three of us, I’ve been the one most haunted by fantasies of... of illness and degeneration. Long before I got my actual tumour, I used to imagine a tumour called a ‘guiltoma’ which would only occur to people with a bad conscience; and the slightest thing would cause absurd hypochondriasis – they were partly jocular. I’d have a nosebleed – you have a nosebleed – for me it was because I had angiosarcoma of the nasal mucosa, such a thing has never been recorded: I would be the first... I would be the first.
[Q] Do you think that’s because of reading all these gruesome medical textbooks?
I think the gruesome medical textbooks fed hypochondria, you know, as a... but I think it’s... I’m not even sure that hypochondria is the... is the right word; I’m not a sort of... there’s no chronic invalidism, but I expect something terrible to happen at any moment – I’ve been expecting this for... for the last 75 years. Occasionally something terrible does happen, although not that terrible. A few months ago I... I broke a hip here. I stumbled over a box of books and... but that wasn’t too terrible. What was terrible was breaking the leg, and worse, when I was alone on a mountain in Norway, and no one knew where I was.

I’ve been very destructive in my time – self-destructive – and that accident was the culmination of a series of mischievous accidents engineered by my superego, by the guilty part of myself.  And I’ve never really heard voices – with one exception – but I then felt a part of myself say very loudly, 'Oh, dear, we didn’t mean you to hurt yourself that much; let’s just hope that all of us get out of this alive'.

Incidentally, Freud heard voices on two occasions – he describes this in his book on aphasia; they were both occasions of... the word’s gone from me... they were both occasions which threatened immediate death, and in both cases he heard a voice, he said, like a voice shouted in his ear which said, 'This is the end!'  But I sometimes hear my superego speaking to me.

I’ve... I've said that I was interested in numbers, especially prime numbers, and the feeling of their solidity and invariance. I think this transferred itself to the elements, and because they also were, seemed to be, have an indestructible individuality of their own. And so 74 is always tungsten, 23 is always vanadium, so the number and the element go together. And my father, as I’ve mentioned, had a little dispensary as well as testing... testing urines and things and...  and my mother had been interested in the chemistry, and so my parents encouraged me to put together a little laboratory at the back of the house.
There was a glassed-in conservatory and then a room which was sometimes used for... for washing clothes in the old days, but I was given this room and everything next to it for a laboratory of my own, and I was greatly encouraged by an uncle of mine whom we called Uncle Tungsten jokingly. In fact he was Uncle Dave, but he manufactured, his firm, Tungstalite, manufactured lamps with tungsten filaments, and so he became Uncle Tungsten. And he enjoyed chemistry himself, and very much stimulated my interest. At that time there had never been a schoolteacher who had stimulated my interest.

Uncle Tungsten became a sort of mentor for me, not so much explicitly but just by being and by the ambience of his own enthusiasm. I’ve never reacted well to formal teaching, but I react, I... I am warmed by enthusiasm, and... and I become enthusiastic too.

I had quite an elaborate laboratory, and it was occasionally dangerous, occasionally things would catch fire and I would run out and throw them on the lawn which then developed strange burnt... burnt patches. There had been a burnt patch before when an incendiary bomb had landed, but... but I added many smaller ones, and so the lawn came to look like one of these strange diseases, like ringworm where you have circular patches, where you have circular... circles of dead hair - there were circles of dead grass.

On one occasion, I made a lot of hydrogen sulphide. Hydrogen sulphide has a very nasty smell of rotten eggs, and is actually very poisonous indeed, and I just... it’s so easy to make. Ferrous sulphide costs nothing, hydrochloric acid costs nothing – I was very generous, so I poured acid over half a pound of ferrous sulphate... ferrous sulphide, and the house had to be emptied. Maybe I did a similar thing in effect with the cuttlefish later.

I don’t remember The Hall too well.  I was inattentive in lessons; I think there was a little automatic part which... which retained sufficiently for me to answer questions and take exams, but really, between 10 and 14, and this overlapping with my first years at St Paul’s when I started on the classical side, my interest was all chemistry, and my education was public library. But that changed somewhat when Eric and Jonathan and Pask came on the scene.

I’ve had one interest... I’m reminded of this, which I’ve, I think, certainly had all my life, and which my brothers had all their lives, and this was because our father was a swimmer, and we were all thrown into the water when we were babies, when swimming is instinctive. So I have never known what it is like not to swim or not to be able to swim; one has to learn to toddle and walk, but swimming is instinctive.
One of my fond memories of my father was in '38, when I was five and we were at Felpham, and I ran into my parents’ bedroom one morning and pulled at the great whale-like bulk of my father and said, 'Come on, dad, let’s go for a swim.' And he looked at his watch and he said, 'What do you mean, waking an old man of 44 at six in the morning?' And now I’m 78, I don’t know whether to sort of laugh or cry at the memory. But my best times with my father were going on house calls with him, and swimming. And swimming has continued to be a central interest of mine. And when I walked in this morning I had my swim-bag with me, and I’m going to go for a swim now.

Swimming is the one physical activity – but it’s not just a physical activity – it’s the one activity which can absorb me completely.  I sometimes go for a swim when I’m in an irritable, distracted mood, but it... I get composed.  Sometimes I go into a sort of trance-like state in which I’m really not thinking of anything; but sometimes, as I say in the piece, something I’m writing is going through my mind.

I should tell you, yes, or did I say this in the piece, this is essentially how Kate and I met because I retained an apartment in a little hotel on a lake. And in the summer of '82 I was working on my intolerably obstructed book, A Leg to Stand On. That damn book took me 11 years to write, partly because I... it kept going wrong and I couldn’t bear thinking on the accident. But by '82, I think I’d got to convalescence, and I was writing about this... at the little hotel; I’d swim in Lake Jefferson and as I swam paragraphs would start to... to write themselves in my mind. And when I couldn’t hold any more in my mind I’d land and quickly write things down, obviously dripping all over the manuscript as I did so.
And when this manuscript was received by my publisher he said, first, no one had sent him a... a hand manuscript in 30 years, second, it looks as if this one had been dropped in the bath. And he said he didn’t know anyone who could do anything with it, except...  'Yes', he said, they’d had a remarkable young woman who’d been working at Summit, but now she was freelancing on the West Coast and that he would send it to her.
And... this is Kate Edgar. The manuscript came back, it was an amazing piece of, I don’t know what word I want... it was deciphered quite amazingly, I couldn’t have deciphered it myself.  And there were all sorts of intelligent and interesting and creative questions and suggestions. And I wrote back and I said, 'Dear Miss Edgar, you’re fabulous, if you ever come to the East Coast look me up', and there she is, 27... oh, nearly, I’m sorry, 29 years later. 29 years later.

I... I go every year to Curacao where there’s a swim or a triathlon group. I went there in '96, and I’ve gone every year since. And... I swam in Lake Titicaca, which I enjoyed; it was a little cool and so I wore a wet suit, unlike my friend Lynne Cox, whose photo is behind me, who is... who does a huge cold water swim. She swum the Antarctic, she doesn’t wear anything. When she swam the Antarctic a... a documentary was made about this, she was surrounded by incredulous penguins who... who wondered what this odd biped was doing among them. I would like to swim in Lake Baikal.
Swimming is one of the very few things I think one can do all one’s life... and my father, who adored swimming and always had a towel and swim trunks in the car, he had those as he had his little scores. He developed terrible arthritis of the knees and got almost chair-bound in his last years, but we could wheel him to the pool and tip him in as from a wheelbarrow and he’d take off like a porpoise. So I hope that when I am wheelchair-bound and... you’ll do the same.

There was swimming before the war, and this little anecdote I mentioned when I was five and when we were at Felpham. I don’t recollect any swimming at Brafield, although there was a pond, the Delamere Pond and, I think, I’d at least got in there in the summer; but it was a shallow pond with reeds in it. I very much enjoyed swimming, especially with my father; sometimes all of us would go... we’d go to the Finchley Pool, which was... I seem to recollect it being somewhere up... high up Edgware Road, towards Stanmore.
I would... I then, with adolescence developed this very unpleasant skin condition where I would have weeping eczematous patches on my... on the flexor aspects of my arms and legs. And... and I felt that I... they would exude a horrible sticky pus and spoil my clothing and I... I didn’t dare strip, and so, I think, the skin thing removed me from swimming and from a lot of other physical and social... activities. I mean, I felt I was... I felt I stank, and, indeed, I did stink. It’s some... Updike, I think, describes how he had been cut off from a lot of things by having psoriasis which occurs on the extensor side of the limbs.
But, somehow, this skin condition, which had been given all sorts of ornate Latin names, the... cleared up by... by itself when I went to Oxford and then I loved swimming there. I went to sometimes swim at Parson’s Pleasure, I don’t know if people still swim there; one could swim naked there, and... but I also swam in the... in the Cherwell and along a canal which.. which ran by the side of Christchurch. And swimming... back in London as a medical student I like the Gospel Oak Pool, a big open air pool on Hampstead Heath.  But also I love the ponds on Hampstead Heath. I don’t know if people still... still swim there. And I... but I’ve... there hasn’t been a month of my life, or even, I think, a week of my life... the only weeks of my life without swimming have been immediately following orthopaedic procedures when I... I have an open wound.
I’m a different person after a swim, I’m much nicer, I’m told, I’m relaxed and amiable. I get very furious if... if a swim is thwarted.

Big extended family, my mother was one of 13 children and there were five older children by a first wife. The... and... and all 18 of the children, of course adults now, were fairly close and had family weddings and funerals and bar mitzvahs; the family was there in great force. I... I think all... all parents and children have problems, but the... but the problems with me were much less when I was dealing with uncles and aunts and cousins. And, indeed, just before you started rolling I was expressing my sadness when I heard of the death of one of my cousins on Friday, actually a cousin by marriage, but they can become as close.

A lot of the uncles had been in chemistry or geology or mining and not just Uncle Tungsten, but other uncles, and I think this also pushed me towards chemistry and mineralogy.

[Q] You have some pretty extraordinary cousins on both sides?
Yeah. The... the cousin who died on Friday was the widow of Abba Eban, of Aubrey Eban; he was first cousin on my father’s side. And... actually I can give you a little thing I... I wrote about him because... which has to do with the subject of identity and twinning, because on one occasion... when he was in office in Israel I saw very little of him, but after he was dropped by, I think, an increasingly partisan government who couldn’t bear his broad-mindedness, he came to New York more.
And on one occasion we’d both been invited to lunch by a second cousin, and meeting him was very strange because we... we both have the same bulky, clumsy, impulsive form and movements, and somewhat similar styles of speech. And we found ourselves finishing each other’s sentences, and I was very puzzled at this. And I said to him, 'Aubrey, I think we’re closer constitutionally than I am to my three brothers!' And he said that he had a similar feeling with regard to his three siblings, and I said, 'How can this be?' And he said, 'Atavism', and I said, 'What do you mean atavism?' He said 'Atavis is a grandfather', he said his father, Aubrey’s father, had died when he was two years old and he was largely brought up by our grandfather. And he said people used to comment on the uncanny similarity between the old man and the child.
He said there was no one else in the grandparental generation like our grandfather, no one at all in the parental generation, and he had thought no one in his own generation until the door opened and I walked in, when he thought I was his grandfather come to life. I miss him a lot.

On the maternal side I have a cousin I greatly admire and adore really in... in Israel, Robert John Aumann, who is a mathematician and mathematical economist, and got a Nobel in, I think it was 2005... yes, it was. But he often comes to New York... he knows how to live; I just got postcards from Switzerland and Bulgaria, and he travels all over the world, still extremely active at 80 plus, always accompanied by... by up to 17 grandchildren and, since he’s very Orthodox, a Kosher cook. And this must have been a strange sight in the Himalayas a few years ago to see an old man wearing a... with a white beard wearing a yarmulke, followed by 16 youths and maidens and a man carrying pots and pans at the end, all at 20,000 feet. So that’s Robert John.

I’ve got a lot of cousins in Israel, and I... I must go there before... while some of them are there. I... I’ve got a bit of a feeling against Israel which is quite apart from the political feelings. My... my mother died in Israel and I haven’t wanted to go since.

I never had and do not have much... much intellectual self-confidence. I... I was frightened of... well, not frightened, I was in awe of... of Jonathan and Eric’s intelligence, and couldn’t think why they hung around with... with me, but we... we all got scholarships to the university. I then ran into some difficulties, at Oxford one had to take prelims for routine entry, it was considered a mere formality with me because I already had an... an open scholarship there. But I failed prelims... but am I using the right word, ‘prelims’? Yes, so... well, anyone can, you know – freak... took it a second time and I failed again. I took it a third time and I failed again, and then the college pulled me in and they said, 'You did wonderful scholarship papers, what’s going on, why are you failing this silly exam again and again?' I said, I didn’t know, and they said, 'Well, this is your last chance', anyhow I got it then.
Something which is sort of the corresponding opposite to that happened a couple of years later when there was an anatomy finals for the class. I should say that my mother was a professor of anatomy as well as of surgery, and I came 89th out of a class of 90, and I did not know what Mama would say. And I got the results; the results were posted about 10 in the morning... no, it was a bit later, and then I went to a pub, The White Horse, next to Blackwells.
I have a sweet tooth and cider was cheaper than beer, and I... I drank about a gallon of cider. And then in my drunkenness I conceived a mad idea. There was a university scholarship in anatomy being held that afternoon, and I rolled into it about 10 minutes late. One was supposed to answer seven questions, I answered one question and got the scholarship. And so people again said, what is it with this man, in some circumstances he will do extremely well, and in other circumstances he falls on his face.
I think the answer basically is that I... I need narrative, or an essay. I can expand in a story or an essay, but I... I can’t deal with multiple choice things, partly because I’d become obsessive then. But, in general, I dread exams. Thank God I haven’t had to do any in... in 50 years, or whatever.

I still regard myself as relatively slow and stupid compared to many, many people, but, I think, I have a certain amount of tenacity, and will stay with a subject. And, of course, as a physician one has the incomparable opportunity and responsibility of seeing patients and being given people’s lives and stories.

Although Sidney Pask was great fun, there was never another teacher who... who meant as much to me. Jonathan has often said that if he wrote an autobiography he would entitle it, Influences, and he’s been... I mean, there have been many influences in the book world, but there were no teachers in Oxford or medical school, or when I did a residency in neurology in California, who... who meant much to me. And, I think, I was seen as a sort of queer, isolated, cranky creature, best left to himself.

When I got out of residency, if you’re going to become a neurologist it takes years and years and years, or years of specialty training. I think I only... I think I was somewhat depressed in my Oxford years, my medical school years, and my first years here in the States, and that it was only in 1965 when I started seeing patients on my own that I started to... to come to. 

People have occasionally said to me, 'Your Uncle Tungsten stops at the age of 14 or 15, what about a Part Two?' And I answered that I would be happy to write a Part Three, but I’d prefer to skip Part Two because... but then those missing difficult years are very important.

You know, it was... it’s been a regret of mine that I don’t think because of depression and this and that, and also because I was a pre-med student and pre-med students are somewhat isolated from the rest, I don’t think I either enjoyed it, or made use of it as I should and could have done. 
[Q] I’m sorry, it is...?
It is Oxford.
[Q] Okay.

When I was a resident at UCLA I... I think I was considered as... as an embarrassment to the department, but also an ornament. I was an embarrassment because... because of various episodes, one of these was with a patient, a woman who had a particularly malignant form of multiple sclerosis, called neuromyelitis optica, and she was really paralysed from the neck down and blind, though completely intact intellectually and otherwise. And when she heard that I lived in Topanga Canyon and had a motorbike she said she’d love to come for a ride with me. And I thought on this, and one Sunday, along with three or four buddies from Muscle Beach Gym – I had a lot to do with them – we... we sort of abducted her and she was lashed onto me and I took her for a ride up Topanga Canyon and down. I thought I was going to be summarily expelled from... from my residency, but it was decided that... well, but they kept me.
I think one reason they kept me was they thought that I probably was a good person with good intentions, even if I was a bit crazy, and... and risked lives. I think the other reason was that whenever I’d done anything bad I wrote a paper, which was accepted for publication. And since I was the only resident who wrote papers I... I, in fact, partly... it was partly me which kept the department in the... in the neurological eye.

Yeah, there were some... some other things, I was very, very strong in those days, I was doing a lot of competitive weight lifting. In fact I even got a Californian record with a foolish lift called... called the squat. I did a squat with 600lbs. I think this has probably contributed to the... to the rupturing of both quadriceps tendons years later, I should have stuck to swimming.

There was one patient – I think this has become legendary – there, who had a... a very nasty fungus infection, there’s a fungus called Coccidioidomycosis in California, and he had Cocci meningitis. And one day he coned. ‘Coning’ is neurological slang for someone who suffers a... what’s really a catastrophic thing in which the brain and the... what are called the tonsils of the cerebellum, the lowest part of the brain, gets sucked through the foramen magnum into the spinal cord, and this... this leads to prompt death. But I was seeing this man along with a colleague, Lew Rossner, and he coned, and without thinking I... I held him upside down, and he deconed. So... but I think you may remember when we were at UCLA, [Chris] Hermann mentioned that, so... but, anyhow, I think probably UCLA and, perhaps, California was glad to see the last of me. I... although that was a... a bad time because this was also... I transferred in the middle of my... my drug time.

Well, when I first came to New York I... Eric, Jonathan and I of all the various times had fantasies of being a real scientist. It has gone wrong with... with all of us. I have a lovely letter from Jonathan somewhere in which he said that really this was only a literary notion, a romantic notion of a scientist, that none of us were really equipped to be a scientist, at least a bench scientist.

When I first came to New York, I had a year in neuropathology and neurochemistry which was disastrous. I screwed the oil immersion objective of the microscope through several priceless slides. I... I lost a sample which I’d spent 10 months preparing, a sample of myelin from nerve sheaths, and, finally, I got some food in the ultracentrifuge. I was... this is a very expensive thing, and it ruined it, and basically they threw me out. They said, 'Sacks, you are a menace. Why don’t you go and see patients – you’ll do less harm’.  And this was sort of the ignoble beginning of a clinical career.

In my first year at UCLA I saw a patient with a... with a thing called myoclonus, it’s sudden muscular spasms, which, in her case, were brought on by flickering lights, and had been in her family for five generations. But this incited me to write a book, a little book on myoclonus. Oh, this is a... oh, I don't know... well, a dull story. The... at that time in the States the expert on myoclonus was a neurologist called Luttrell, and he, in fact, came to UCLA as an invigilator, or examiner, in the boards of neurology. And I wasn’t doing the boards, but I went up to him shyly and said that I had liked his... I loved his papers on myoclonus and I’d... I'd written a little book on it myself, and... and I’d very much appreciate his advice.
And I gave him the manuscript, of which there was no copy, and I didn’t get an answer. And then when I enquired about six weeks later, I heard that Luttrell was dead and, in fact, that he had committed suicide, and, I think, I may have partly felt that perhaps my... my little book had driven him to suicide. But I also felt that I should perhaps write a letter of condolence, but not mention anything so vulgar as the returning of the manuscript, and so... so my 1962 book on myoclonus may still exist somewhere.

I've... I’ve written quite a lot of things which haven’t seen the light of publication including a... a book... a very candid book of travels in Europe and America, which I took to... I think his name was Donald Allen of the Evergreen Press. I sent him the manuscript and he said he quite liked it, but he thought my writing was too elaborate. He said, 'Why don’t you write like Hemingway?'  I took an instant aversion to Hemingway then.

[Q] Did Auden write a poem about you?
He... he wrote a poem which he dedicated to me, called Talking to Myself.
[Q] Right.

Yes, since... since you mention Auden, I... I had seen him when he was Professor of Poetry at Oxford, and then he would go to the Café Kardena, you know, for people to come and chat. He was very genial, but I... I was too shy to do that. But I met him in '67 at a cocktail party and... things were... perhaps because we were both English and older... I mean he was Mr Auden and I was Dr Sacks, I think for the first year or 18 months before we used first names.

In his book, Epistle to a Godson, there are four poems dedicated to doctors and I think he had a special relationship to doctors. His own father, George Auden, had been a very eminent physician in England and was also one of the first describers of the encephalitis lethargica, so his father would have been fascinated by seeing ‘his’ patients, as it were, in my hands 30 years later. Auden himself, Wystan, once came along to Beth Abraham [Hospital] and I... I’ve never been sure – he has a poem called Old People’s Home – and I’ve never been sure whether this was some other place or partly to do with... with Beth Abraham.

He... and he... he wrote a lovely review of Migraine and I felt, in a way, that this was the first time that a... someone of grand powers had taken notice of me. I was very excited by this; he was also critically important to the writing of Awakenings because he said to me, 'You’re going to have to go beyond the clinical.' And, you know, 'Be metaphorical, be mythical, be whatever you need.' And the last time I saw him I... he was then at Christchurch, I gave him the manuscript of Awakenings and he called it a masterpiece. And he didn’t use words lightly and I’d never... I’d never had anything like that said to me in my life. As I have said earlier, I’ve been rather lacking in intellectual self-confidence, though often feeling that I’m surrounded by clever people and can’t imagine why they tolerate me. But, in a way, Auden had something of a… was implicitly a, sort of, mentor for me, as was Luria, the great Soviet neuropsychologist who wrote me two letters in 1973, one in response to Awakenings and one in response to an article I had written. So, when Awakenings was published here I... I dedicated it to both men.

Auden’s father was a... was a physician. He was Medical Officer of Health in Birmingham at a time when there were many, many new cases, there was really an epidemic of encephalitis lethargica, the sleepy sickness. And George Auden was especially interested in its effect on children and how it might alter their character. I think that he talked about this and he talked about medicine generally when Wystan was growing up. Wystan loved medical talk, he had a soft spot for... for physicians.

I deeply regret that I didn’t visit Auden in that summer of '73. He’d written to me and said his heart had been acting up a bit and he hoped I could come to his house... the house he shared with Chester Kallman in... in Austria but I, I didn’t go for one reason and another. And he died in September.

[Q] When he was living in New York though, you used to see him regularly.
Oh, yes, yes. Well, not regularly but... but often and I would... I would go to tea and teatime was very good because by four o’ clock he had finished the day’s work, but had not started the evening’s drinking. He was a very heavy drinker although he was at pains to say that he was a drunk but not an alcoholic. I said, 'What’s the difference?'  He said, 'An alcoholic has a personality change after a drink or two, a drunk can drink as much as he wants and he doesn’t have a personality change. I’m a drunk'. He certainly drank a great deal and one of the… and sometimes at a dinner, either at his own place or someone else’s, he would leave the meal at 9.30 taking every bottle off the table. But, however much he drank he was up at six and at work the next morning.  The friend who introduced us, who had been his secretary at one time, called Auden ‘the least lazy man he had ever met’. Work ethic…
[Q] Did you meet any interesting people at tea, at Auden’s?
No, it was usually myself but I... but I met others in... in the evenings. I think I met Charles Rosen around that time, who must be getting on now but is absolutely un... undiminished by age.


After his death, Stephen Spender asked me if I would write something in his book of tributes to... to Wystan and I did. And I saw quite a lot of... of the Spenders after that. I never met the third member of the trio, Christopher Isherwood, although I think I quote him more than the others. In fact I quoted him when I was giving my talk on vision, of how he starts The Berlin Diaries [sic]: I am a camera, recording passively. So, this is a good start, so I can say, no, we are not cameras, we are never passive and vision is a huge matter of analysis and synthesis and selection and imagination and creation, not at all like... not at all like a camera, maybe like photography.

 

In this poem, Talking... Talking to Myself, he… there's one line about chastising his tantrums with a megrim, because he knew I liked the word ‘megrim’, the old word for migraine. It’s... it’s a poem looking at himself and particularly looking at age and deterioration and hoping that when the time comes there won’t be any real deterioration up here, but he will bugger off quickly. And I wish I had the poem here. I... I’m no good at reciting poems, except Pope – I know a lot of Pope by heart.

When a film was made about Auden in – I don’t know – '74, '75 they came along to me; I lived in City Island then. They said, 'You must have read all of Auden’s poetry', and I said, 'No, I don’t think I have but I’ve read all of his prose'. I... I have difficulty reading poetry which has got worse and worse with... with age. So, I’m afraid now I... I read almost no poetry and no novels and no plays, only history and biography and science – with a few exceptions, a few exceptions. I didn’t entirely like the Romeo and Juliet we saw together, but I instantly pulled out my Shakespeare and read it.
[Q] Well, I was going to say, you draw on a huge memory, a reservoir of all kinds of literature that you’ve been into throughout your life.
Odds and ends, odds and ends.

I had an ardent love of photography as a boy although it... it was sometimes rather specialised because I was interested in the processes of colour photography. And... and what it meant to have three negatives and to make positives from each of them and then superimpose these.
And the history of colour photography interested me, but also the history of stereo photography and also time-lapse photography. And I think this early interest in photography, for me, was partly a model of how the brain might deal with colour, whether instead of just getting it, it might be analysed as in colour photography. But also... I felt I did not have a good visual memory – I couldn’t hold images in my mind well. So, I wanted to make external images, which, of course, then one can share, share with other people.

The interest in photography re-blossomed when I was in Southern California at UCLA, partly because of the beauty and wonder of everything, whether it was natural scenery or... or the scene at the beach, the scene on Muscle Beach and Venice Beach, which was quite exotic in the early '60s. But also I had the use of a professional dark room. I got myself a larger camera, a 4x5 view camera, I love dealing with a large negative and... and the magic of seeing the image gradually appear as one printed it and tilted the tray of developer to and fro.
I travelled a lot in those days. I had a motorbike and I thought nothing of going to the Grand Canyon overnight. I would go after work on Friday. I would travel through the night; it was 900 miles. I... I loved my BMW bike and I would hold it at close to 100 miles an hour. Especially I loved it under a full moon and I’d get to the Grand Canyon by morning. I had a lot of geographic pictures of scenery, I had a macro lens for plant photography and I had the opposite of that, I had what is good for an impudent or shy or deceitful photographer of people. I had a 500mm lens, which meant I could do portraits of people when I was 300 yards away. And this way you could get intimate and reach out optically without being close. I... when I left UCLA I put all my photographic work, including the negatives, in a large trunk which was due to be sent to me in New York. The trunk never appeared and so all I have... I have a few odd things which were not in the trunk, but... but all that disappeared.
 

Photography recurred for me in relation to neurology. When I saw my Awakenings patients, my post-encephalitic patients I would, sort of, have a notebook in one hand and a camera – then it was a little Super 8 film camera – in the other. And later when I saw people with Tourette’s syndrome, the sort of sudden violent movements, I... I felt it important to video all this. And especially with one patient I saw with a sort of super Tourette’s, something I didn’t really perceive, couldn’t perceive with the naked eye, but it became evident as one examined a video. He might have a dozen trains of tics going on simultaneously, each tic lasting, perhaps, 80 or 100 milliseconds and, so that in five minutes you could have a thousand tics, and at that time I thought some of the tics might have meaning, that this represented as it were a very accelerated public dream. And I thought one might write a book based on... on five seconds of video.

I’m excited now by the power of digital photography, but I... I lament the old days when one was stained with thiosulphate and you spent hours in the ruby light of a darkroom and... and you could make a colour print layer by layer of cyan, the magenta, the yellow, get them all precisely superimposed. And photography on the one hand and, I think, migraine on the other hand, and... as a boy, I had severe migraine auras which I still have, in these there’s no headache or anything but you may lose half your field of vision, there may be brilliant, scintillating zigzags, you may lose colour or get exaggerated colour, or stereo. And I think the migraine experience, on the one hand, and the photographic on the other, partly steered me to neurology and especially an interest in... in the visual system, in seeing and image.
 
 

Kate, you said yesterday that you thought I was giving a rather negative spin on my Oxford days and my California days. And I think you’re right, I often tend to give a negative spin to things. If I have ten good reviews and one bad review I brood on the bad review. If everyone in an audience looks interested and excited, but one man is asleep or looks bored then… but in reality there was much that was delightful and interesting in California and in Oxford. In my California days, between ‘60 and ‘65, I travelled enormously. When I came to California I... as I mentioned yesterday, it was, sort of, rather impulsive.  I didn’t have a green card, I wasn’t allowed to work. I had to wait nine months for a green card and then I bought an old BMW motorcycle and zigzagged all round the country. I thought that was a wonderful way of… you’re open to the wind and the elements and also then you are more open to people. I think now… I'd had a motorbike in England as well, and I think a motorbike somehow cut through the class differences.

I kept a journal as I travelled... descriptions of people and places and events and scenes but also some... some fantasies and introspection. I would send the journals to Thom Gunn in San Francisco and he kept them for me.

Most of those journals have never been transcribed, although when I was in Alabama, I think in '87, Kate, you conveyed to me a request from a… a journal called Antaeus, they were going to have a number devoted to travel journals. And I asked you if you could find my Alabama travel journal and you did. And that was quite a dramatic time in Alabama because the motorbike blew up. And... and I then hitchhiked a lift for... for the carcass and myself on a truck, but before we got going on the big journey there was three days at a truck-stop called Travel Happy, near Tuscaloosa. And I wrote almost non-stop in the 72 hours at the truck-stop. This was my, sort of, a portrait of trucking life and somehow trucking life seemed to me very, very romantic. And so... so Travel Happy was published in '88 and, to some extent, Travel Happy could… yes, there were a few awful things. But I... I loved travelling on the motorbike, and I was on the road for... for six months. I... and as I said earlier, I would travel most... most weekends, and I was young and I felt good and I was healthy and I was enchanted by the West and the Southwest. And I was in love with the new young president and the feeling of optimism and honeymoon was very intense then.

I particularly liked Colorado Springs where the Air Force Academy was. I'd said earlier that I’d had these thwarted desires to be an airman myself and a pilot. And... and I was, sort of, taken by seeing this... this generation of young men who... who would fly and... although flying for me is also associated with doom and Saint-Exupéry, and so forth. But... but the romantic idea of the young, I think, partly conveys a feeling of doom.

I continued to write a lot when I was in California. I had introduced myself to the weightlifting scene there by doing a champion squat. In fact I squatted with 625 which was above my record. And I... I was a habitué of Sydney’s Café near the pier in Santa Monica and the whole scene there and I thought I would like to write a... a beach novel. And, again, I kept voluminous notebooks, but it became apparent to me that I... that I was not a novelist; I was only a describer and I never felt it possible to bring together all of these beach notes in the form of... of a portrait.

I remember with great affection my... my friend Jim Hamilton. Jim Hamilton had also been an ardent motorcyclist and he’d had a hideous accident with compound fractures of both legs, was in bed for 18 months but in those 18 months he made himself a powerful mathematician. He discovered a talent for mathematics and… but the two of us got on well together and... like all of us there, Jim did everything to excess. He... he had sudden dangerous drinking bouts and one of them killed him. He got pancreatitis, the pancreas burst and peritonitis and... and he died.  He was only – I don’t know – 30 or 32. We were all that sort of age. His daughter is one of my many godchildren. I... I don’t have any children, I have about a dozen godchildren including your child.
 

I think I’d been interested in neurology, what is now called neuroscience – although the word didn’t exist then – probably since... since I was a teenager, but meeting patients in detail was very exciting to me with one patient who had jerky movements, synchronous with flashing lights. She... and actually a sister of hers told me this had been in the family for five generations. And I went to Ohio and I looked up church records and gravestones. And I... and I liked… this was one of the things which was included in my ill-fated myoclonus book.
At that time, however – already at that time – I think, the case history was supreme for me. And, although, I was not sure what form it should take, I remember back in '64 I saw a man with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, or Jakob-Creutzfeldt, with a terrible rapid dementia. This was long before the incidence of mad cow disease and juvenile CJ and I wrote two case histories about him, one, full of medical jargon and the other rather like a short story. And I somehow felt that the proper case history would come somewhere in between, that it should be full of authentic detail but that it should have all the drama and emotion of a short story or a novella.

Kate, you asked what sustained me, you know, and how I lived when I was travelling.  I... motels were cheap then, just $2 or $3 a night, but I had a sleeping bag and I often slept outside. You have to be careful where you sleep outside. Although... because on one occasion when I was driving down from San Francisco to Los Angeles, I bedded down on what seemed to be a natural bed of something beautiful and soft and I slept very well, inhaling the… well, in the morning I realised that I’d bedded down on a huge mass of fungal spores. This is Coccidiomyces, a fungus of the Central Valley and I must have been inhaling fungus spores all night. Coccidiomyces illnesses are almost endemic in California. Most people only get something like a cold and this is what I got, although I think I probably still have positive skin reactions to Cocci but one of our patients at UCLA got severe neurological involvement and... and meningitis.

How did I live? Partly I got some money from my parents, but also before I had set out on my travels I spent a time working with two neurologists, actually two neurosurgeons, Bertram Feinstein and Grant Levin. Bertram Feinstein was the husband of… was then the husband of Diana Feinstein. Is it Diana or Dianne?
[Q] Dianne.
Oh, Dianne Feinstein.

Before I set out on the bike I worked for a few weeks with Bertram Feinstein and Grant Levin who were neurosurgeons investigating the treatment of Parkinsonism by icing particular parts of the brain. If you knock out part of the... the globus pallidus, they call this pallidectomy, whatever, then... the tremor might get less. It’s an interesting paradoxical situation of damaging the brain in order to... to relieve the patient from some neurological symptoms. And they were generous to me and they would, sort of, give me $20 notes as... and sometimes more and so, really, they... they paid for that and I... I repaid them. I've repaid all my debts financially. I... I was short of money for... for many years. When I got my first car in 1972 I’d only had motorbikes until then. I... I had to get a loan from my brother and, similarly, in 1979 when I got a mortgage on a house in City Island.

I’ve mentioned my interest in photography in my UCLA days as well as in case histories and both of these came together when I arranged an exhibit at the… which was shown at the American Academy of Neurology. It was on a rather exotic subject, it was called the Axonal Dystrophies but this was a general term. It applied to some patients I’d seen. It also applied to the effects of vitamin E deficiency in rabbits and also to the toxic effects of some chemicals when they were given to mice and the mice would jerk and spin around. I... but also my exhibit on the Axonal Dystrophies which cost me many delightful hours in the darkroom as well as having a little bit to do with... with our... our vitamin-starved rabbits and our toxic mice. This was a hit, as I thought it would be. Really it was a, sort of, advertisement, it was a way of saying to the neurologists of North America: hey, this is me! I’m… and I got two job offers from New York, among other... among many others. At that point, although in many ways I enjoyed life in California, it… I didn’t seem to be going anywhere. I thought it was idyllic in some ways, but also rather regressive. In relation to drugs which I was then heavily into, but perhaps in relation to the easy, sleazy life of Muscle Beach. And that I needed to go to a hard, real place and a place where the action was and, perhaps, find myself as a... as a creative person, or whatever. And, so I accepted one of the offers and I came to New York.

This... this exhibit of mine showed the neuropathology of axonal dystrophy and I... when I came to New York I... I did a... I had a fellowship in both neuropathology and neurochemistry, but that, as I mentioned yesterday, was a disaster. And it was a huge relief to me, in '66, when I could start seeing real patients, namely the migraine patients in a clinic and the patients at Beth Abraham Hospital, a chronic disease hospital in New York. Patients which included 80-odd people who had had encephalitis lethargica and were frozen in extraordinary post-encephalitic states. With the migraine patients I was fascinated and moved by their stories and their sufferings and often by their... their resilience and their ingenuity, which is not just a question of attack of migraine, but living with migraine or the migraine life. I think this was really, in a sense, my apprenticeship in medicine. I was a real doctor, I was a physician. A lot of the patients gave me stories that they had seen their gynaecologist, their otorhinolaryngologist – their this, their that. I also then got a feeling of what I thought was wrong with American medicine, that it consisted entirely of specialists and there were no general practitioners, the base of the pyramid. My father was a general practitioner, my two older brothers were general practitioners and I found myself feeling like the general practitioner these patients should have seen to begin with. I was not a super specialist on migraine, I was the general man who enquired about every aspect of their life.

The head of the migraine clinic – or the headache unit – was a man of some eminence called Arnold Friedman. He’d written a good deal on the subject and he was high up in various institutions – and that’s the wrong phrase. I think Friedman took a shine to me, if that’s the... if that’s the correct word.

So, Arnold Friedman, I suppose then was a man of about 60, I was just 33. Friedman thought I was bright and I think he wanted me to be a, sort of, protégé. He was friendly towards to me, he secretly arranged for me to do more clinics than everyone else and... and to be paid slightly more and, he introduced me to his daughter. I even... even wondered whether he thought of me as a potential son-in-law. And... and then there came a strange episode. I would meet him on Saturday mornings and tell him about interesting patients I’d seen in the week, and one Saturday I told him about a patient who, instead of having a headache after the zigzag, had awful abdominal pain and vomiting. And I said I wondered whether one should exhume the old Victorian term of abdominal migraine. I said, I’d seen a couple of other patients with this and suddenly, Friedman became a different man. He turned scarlet and he shouted and he said, 'What do you mean? Talking about an abdominal migraine. The word migraine comes from hemi-crania. It means a headache. You are working at the headache clinic. I will not have you talk about migraines without a headache!'
So, I... I sort of, drew back amazed; this is one of the reasons why the opening sentence in my Migraine book is: Headache is never the sole symptom of a migraine. And why the second chapter is entirely devoted to forms of migraine without a headache. But... but that was a small explosion. The bigger explosion came in the summer of '67. I would always go back to England in the summers and then, to my own great surprise, I... I wrote a book on migraine. And I sent a telegram to Friedman saying that somehow or other a book had just gushed out, that I’d taken it to a publisher who was interested and I hoped he might... Friedman might like it and might write a foreword. He... he sent back a telegram saying, hold everything for the moment.

When I came back to New York, Friedman didn’t look at all friendly, he looked rather disturbed. And he almost tore the manuscript of the book out of my hand and he said, who did I think I was to write a book on... on migraine. And I said, 'I’m sorry, it just happened'. He said that he would send the manuscript for review to someone very high up in the migraine hierarchy, or what Jonathan Miller used to call the Migraine Mafia. So, I was very taken aback by these reactions. About a week later I saw Friedman’s assistant Xeroxing my manuscript. I didn’t pay much attention to that but... but I noticed it. And then about three weeks later Friedman gave me a letter in which all identifying characteristics of the sender had been removed – the name and the address. And this letter was full of invenomed and often personal criticism of the book and its writer. I said to Friedman that this is a... a personal attack and it is not carefully reasoned and Friedman said, 'On the contrary', you know, 'this is... this is what your book consists of. It’s basically trash'. And he went on to say that he would not in future allow me access to my own notes on patients, everything would be locked up and... and he warned me not to think of going back to the book. He said if you do, not only will I fire you but I'll see you never get another neurological job in America. At that time he... he was, if not president, very high up in, I think – I’m losing a name, Kate it’s not the American Academy of Neurology, the... the other one…
[Q] The American Neurological Association?
Yes, yes.  He was very high up in the American Neurological Association. I mentioned his threats to my parents, and my father, I think, in a rather cowardly way said you... you better not anger this man. You know, he could ruin your life. And I... so I suppressed my feelings for six or seven months which were six or seven of the worst months in my life. I continued seeing patients and being fascinated by them, and then in June of '68 I thought I couldn’t stand this anymore. I made an arrangement with the janitor at the headache unit to let me into the clinic at night. And he would unlock it and I would then, between midnight and three in the morning, I would look at my own charts and copy out what I could. I then told Friedman that I wanted to spend a… take a long holiday in London and he said, 'Are you going back to that book of yours?' And I said, 'I have to'. He said, ‘It’s the last thing you’ll do’. I went back to England, sort of, quivering, stayed in this quivering state, I then got a telegram from him firing me, and this made the quivering worse.
And then suddenly I had a completely different feeling. I thought this ape is no longer on my shoulders, I’m no longer being muzzled, now I am free to write but I also had the sense of a deadline. I, myself, was dissatisfied with the 1967 manuscript and I... I decided to rewrite the book. The feeling of deadline was literal for me as I said that on September 1st , I said to myself: if I do not have the finished manuscript in Faber’s hands by September 10th I shall commit suicide. And under this death threat, the suicide threat, I started writing but within a day or so the feeling of threat had disappeared and the joy of writing had come on me. There were no drugs at this time but this was a time of extraordinary elation and energy. It almost seemed to me that the book was dictated, everything organised itself automatically. I would only go to bed for two hours a night. And a day ahead, on September 9th I took the book to Faber’s. I then... I then walked – Faber’s was then in Russell Square – I walked over to the British Museum, which was five minutes away and... and there I... I had the very strong feeling: I, too, have produced something. It may not be much but it’s real and it will be outside me.

I’ve never had such a good feeling, and a feeling of having made something real and of some value, that’s never been as strong as it was with that first book which was written in the face of such threats from Friedman and, for that matter, threats from myself. Curiously, or otherwise, I think I became hypo-manic when I returned to New York. I think it’s the only time in my life when spontaneously something like this happened. I was... I had a great sense of joyousness and, if you forgive the word, blessedness. I had a feeling that I was somehow surrounded by light and that other people were shadow people. I wanted to shout, ‘Hallelujah!’ But I was too... too good mannered to shout hallelujah. I went to concerts every night, Mozart operas, but also Fischer-Dieskau was in town and singing.

During those excited, exalted six weeks or so in the fall of '68 I... I didn’t stop writing, but I thought I might add to the Migraine book all sorts of details as to what might be seen in the visual aura and what might be going on in the brain. I sent these excited addenda to a neurologist in England, a very good one called William Goody, who had written a lovely foreword to the book. And Goody said, ‘No’. He said, ‘The book is fine as it is’, he said, ‘But I think in what you’ve been sending me, there are thoughts which you will return to again and again in the coming years’.  And I think he was exactly right there, I'm glad that he protected the book against my too-muchness and my exuberance, which I think had become rather pathological by that point.
In fact, 25 years later, when I met my, alas recently-deceased friend, Ralph Siegel who was a very good mathematician and a computer simulator of nervous activity, meeting him on the one hand and seeing an exhibit of migraine art on the other hand, reactivated these thoughts of 25 years earlier. And I then did write the Part Five which... which was fairly coherent, whereas it would have been impossible. It’s interesting that one can have thoughts which are... which are premature, and how sensitively Goody perceived this.

The book was supposed to come out in 1969, and this got postponed to 1970. But then the whole of 1970 passed, and I worked with Faber's to arrange the illustrations and the bibliography, everything was ready, but 1969 passed and 1970 passed, and though towards the end of 1970 a cousin of mine, Carmel, said, ‘You have to have an agent, to mediate between you and the publishers otherwise you will be fucked around’. I got an agent, and... and then Faber's came to. They actually brought the book out early in ’71, although the imprint on the publication page says 1970.
I was in London in January of '71, the morning it came out. I was staying at home, and my father came in shaking, holding The Times in his hand, ashen, he said, 'You're in the papers'. And there was in fact a very nice article which called Migraine brilliant, authoritative and original, or something like this. But just so far as my father was concerned, I had committed a dangerous folly in appearing publicly, and being in the papers. And... and this coincided with some feelings I’d had myself, and at that time I... the word ‘publish’ was always misread as ‘punish’. I felt that I would be punished if I published anything, and yet... and yet I had to, although I think that... this literally took the form of some self-destructiveness to my own work.

In that same... 1969 and late 1968, while I was waiting for Migraine to come out, I started seeing the Awakenings patients at Beth Abraham. I moved to a little house – or half a house – which was next-door to the hospital and from... I did that in September of '68, and then I would spend much of the 24 hours with these patients. A lot of these patients were torpid by daytime but excited by night-time, so I had to be there at night-time.

I had to apply for a special license from the Drug Enforcement Administration to use L-DOPA which was considered an experimental drug. I had to pledge myself to do a double-blind study and keep notes of the sort they insisted on. I reneged on both of these. First, when I gave L-DOPA in March of '69 to three patients, and a placebo to three other patients. It was evident that the placebo was doing nothing, but the L-DOPA was doing everything. These were people who had been almost inanimate for 30 or 40 years, who had burst into explosive life. At that point I thought there's... it would be wrong, ridiculous and wrong and unethical, to withhold L-DOPA from anyone, so I made it available for all of the people. Also what was going on was so complex in both neurological and human terms, that the silly little inventories which the FDA wanted seemed to me ridiculous. I thought one had to have full, sort of, biographic notes. I kept very detailed notes and journals, and some of the patients did. I also at that time started camera... carrying around a camera because I thought these are things which have never been seen before, and may never be seen again...must have a visual record as well.

To come back, or rather to jump forward again, to January of 1971, Migraine came out. It was reviewed very pleasantly both in the general press and in the medical press. I’ve omitted a story here. With the original draft of Migraine in '67 there was a reader at Faber's who made a peculiar comment. His comment was, he said, 'This is too easy to read. This will make people suspicious – professionalise it'. This might have been said of the rather novelistic case history I’d written about Jakob-Creutzfeldt [sic] in 1964. But anyhow I think the right sort of balance was achieved in... in the re-writing, and... and I think my father, who had been so alarmed when he saw something in The Times, started to be reassured when he saw good things in The British Medical Journal and The Lancet. And the fact that that... that this was not a scandal, that I had perhaps written a reasonable book which my colleagues liked.

By 1971, I found myself in a rather difficult position with regard to publishing anything about the Awakenings patients. Two years earlier, in the summer of '69, I... having been working for 18 hours a day with these patients, I took off for London in a state of exhaustion and excitement. There, when I was in London, I wrote the first nine case histories of Awakenings. I offered them to Faber. They had... they said they weren’t interested. I also wrote the torso of two other books. One was a book on tics, because by that time many of the post-encephalitic patients had developed sudden movements and tics. And the other was going to be an academic book on subcortical functions. My idol Luria – I need to talk about Luria – my idol Luria had written a book called Higher Cortical Functions. I thought I would do the equivalent with subcortical functions.

Luria had written a... a magnificent book on higher cortical functions. I felt that what I had been seeing, especially in these patients, was the activation of subcortical functions of one sort and another. The great Swiss neurophysiologist Hess had the same feeling that these patients with encephalitis lethargica illuminated all sorts of subcortical functions, and his work on that had won him a Nobel Prize. And now I was seeing this for myself especially with the wild activations of L-DOPA. So I had a torso book, so that was a very busy month. I wrote the nine case histories of Awakenings, something like 40,000 words on tics, and at least the torso of this book on subcortical functions.

In 1970, I started to publish something about my patients in what, for me, has always been a favourite form, the epistolary form, the Letter to the Editor. And in one week I sent off four letters to the editor of The Lancet about these patients, which he liked and he immediately accepted. And I had a vision that I would like to have a letter to the editor in all 52 issues of The Lancet. This would become a weekly thing: 'News from our western front, Oliver Sacks telling us about his exciting patients in New York'. I wish I... I wish I had done more. But what happened was my then boss got angry. He said, 'Why are you publishing these things in England? You’re here in America, you must write something for JAMA and not these... these anecdotal, picturesque letters, but a sort of statistical survey of all the patients and how they’ve done'. I did this reluctantly, and JAMA published it. And whereas I’d got lots of charming letters, personal letters, after my letters to The Lancet, there was a strange, rather frightening silence after the letter in JAMA.
And then in October of 1970, a whole issue of JAMA was devoted to highly critical and sometimes accusatory letters from various colleagues about my letter in July. Basically, the authors of these letters said, 'Sacks is off his head'. They said, 'We ourselves have seen dozens of patients, we’ve never seen anything like what Sacks describes'. One of my colleagues in New York said that he had seen 162 patients at a hospital in New York, and he’d never seen anything like it. I wrote back to him saying, 'Dear Dr M, 15 of your patients are now under my care. Would you like to visit them and see what’s going on?' I didn’t get any answer. And it became clear to me then that some of my colleagues were very much downplaying some of the negative effects of L-DOPA. There was one letter saying that even if what I described was real, I shouldn’t publish it because it would impact, negatively impact – horrible American phrase – it would ‘negatively impact the atmosphere of optimism necessary for the therapeutic reaction to L-DOPA’. I...I was very angry with the editor of JAMA. I think he should have given me a chance to deal with these letters publicly. I think it was dishonest and malicious to have published these attacks. You know, I could have made a careful and dignified, and useful, response in that same October issue.
But anyhow this got me riled up, and I was then feeling – in the latter part of '70 and in '71 – how can I publish this stuff? I had a strong feeling that... that I was the luckiest neurologist in the world. That I was seeing wonderful things, and not simply one extraordinary patient, they were all extraordinary.

An elderly neurologist, Purdon Martin – James Purdon Martin – in England, when he retired at the age of 65, decided to spend his retirement looking and working with post-encephalitic patients in London. And he wrote a wonderful book on the subject. And he also made a special journey to New York in September of '69 to see my patients. And that couldn’t have been easy for him, because I think he was already in his 80s. He said he had seen nothing like this since the acute days of the epidemic, 50 years earlier. And he very strongly said, ‘You must write about this, and all of this in detail’.

But to go back to '69, I’d written... the way I’d wanted to  write in 1969, but I couldn’t go on because I’d lost the manuscript – lost or destroyed the manuscript – I’ve said I... I had a bad history here. I had forgotten that I’d made a carbon copy of the manuscript and that I’d given it to Jonathan Miller. And in ‘72, in June of ‘72, Jonathan Miller took the typescript across the road to Duckworth, the publishers, and Colin Haycraft, his neighbour.
Gloucester Crescent was then, and perhaps is still, full of wonderful people, and Jonathan lived opposite Alan Bennett, and Alan Bennett was next door to Colin Haycraft and Duckworth. Colin did an amazing thing. I went to see Colin and he gave me the nine case histories in proof. Without consulting me or consulting anyone, he’d gone straight from uncorrected typescript into proof. And it was proof for me that he really thought the book was good. I don’t know how much money was needed then; this was, I think, a little before or only at the beginning of the advent of... of digital typesetting. I know with Migraine everything was done by hand, and I had these long, long proofs. So Colin... said, 'You’ve got to continue.' I spent three months in London that summer, and as I think I mentioned before I’d had a neck injury and I... I couldn’t... I was in a high collar and I couldn’t write or type. But it was in that summer, when I lived near Hampstead Heath, that I dictated... I didn’t dictate but I told the story of other patients to this shorthand typist. And in the evening would go down and discuss them and read them to my mother.

So the... the summer of '72 was a joyous time with the Golden Wedding of my parents, my brother from Australia coming with his wife and little children, and... and completing the case histories. But then... but there was some... I think there was some premonition, I don’t know, I had a sort of fear, I always have fears and premonitions of... of death, and accidents and... my own or... or others. I went back to New York, and then in November I got a phone call from my brother David saying that our mother had died, that she’d had a fatal heart attack in Israel. I... I flew back to London. I think the relationship with my mother was very close, and probably rather ambivalent. And... but I was devastated by her death and what kept me going for the first week was the formal mourning, the sitting Shiva, when all the family – including the surviving siblings of my mother – we all sat on low chairs and people would... and the food was made for us, and people came and talked, often happily and joyfully about her. This was not just a sharing of misery, it was a sharing of celebrations.
Many of her students came along and I heard stories which I’d never heard before of... of her generosity to students. How she had even sent some of them through medical school. It was also clear from listening to my cousins that my mother could be a marvellous aunt, although I thought in some ways she’d been a terrifying mother. But she was gone, and then after the Shiva I was in... I don’t know what to call it, but a very intense and lamenting and tearful mood. And it was then that I stayed in London and wrote the rest... the rest of Awakenings. [John] Donne’s meditations on his sickness were very much in my mind.
 

Colin [Haycraft] didn’t trust my... he knew of my mischievous and... and writing-destroying proclivities, so I was basically locked in the office with pen and paper, and I had to slip the manuscript under the door, page by page, as I wrote it. And by... something occurs to me in relation to that, but I will keep it for the moment. Anyhow by December the book was written. The last page had been given to Colin, and it was time to go back to New York, and I... I took a taxi to the airport feeling that the book was done. But then, in the taxi – and I snapped my fingers when I thought of it – I realised that something absolutely crucial had been missed out. Something, without which, the entire structure would collapse. And so I hastily wrote that, and this was the beginning of a period of feverish, feverish footnote writing, which continued for two months. This was long before the era of Xerox but I would send my footnotes express mail to Colin.
And then he said to me, in February 1973, I had sent him more than 400 footnotes. He said 'They are all fascinating,' he said, 'but in aggregate they come to three times the length of the book, and they will sink it'. He said, 'You can have a dozen', and I said, 'Okay, you choose them'. He said, 'No, you choose them, because otherwise you’ll be angry with me for my choice'. And so the original Migraine [sic] had a dozen footnotes. When it... when it came out, the original Migraine had a dozen footnotes.
[Q] The original...
Sorry?
[Q] The original Awakenings?
Oh I’m sorry, yes. So the original Awakenings had a dozen footnotes. When the American hardback came out I snuck in another dozen footnotes. But when the paperback came out, which Penguin published in '75, I... I who had been so submissive and surrendering became slightly aggressive, and... and I think Julia Vellacott, my then editor, was steamrollered a bit and I had about 100 footnotes or whatever in the book.

By February of '73, Awakenings and its footnotes were in Colin [Haycraft]’s hands, and I had the first proof of the entire book. In February, I went to Oxford – I went to England – and I also went to Oxford to see Wystan who at that time had lodgings in Christchurch. I wanted to give Wystan the galleys of Awakenings, and he was in fact the only man who saw the galleys of Awakenings. It was a very beautiful day, instead of taking a cab from the station I decided to walk, and I arrived somewhat late. And when I saw Wystan he was swinging a watch like this. And he... and he said, 'You’re 17 minutes late'. One... Wystan was an exceedingly punctual man and... and expected extreme punctuality from others. But also, I think, his punctuality – his own punctuality – somewhat tormented him. And he told me of a recurrent dream which he used to have. There was a train to catch, very important train, crucial, everything depended on it. But obstacles kept arising. He got diverted, this happened and that happened, and he got more and more frantic and desperate. And then he saw that the... and heard and saw that the train had actually started, and it was too late to get it. And at that point he would have an immense sense of relief and he would wake up with an orgasm.
So that’s how it is when extremely compulsive people are liberated briefly from their own compulsions. I may have had my prolonged mental equivalent of an orgasm after having escaped the suicide threat and given the... the manuscript to Fabers. I really had a sort of orgasmic two months.

Colin wanted... the book, some parts of the book, to be... to come out in newspapers first, but this would have delayed the publication of the book from June, which was the original slated date. I wanted it published in June because I was going to be 40 on July 9th and I wanted to feel that I had written something by the age of 40. I also didn’t like the idea of the book dribbling out.
So the book came out on June 28th and here, unlike Migraine, which had had an equal response both from general reviewers and medical reviewers, there was a complete gap with Awakenings which got very well reviewed in the press generally, especially after [Al] Alvarez’s review, but there was not a murmur from my colleagues. There was no mention of the book in the medical press. Later, in January of '74, I... there was an article by the editor of a rather briefly lived paper called The British Clinical Journal. And he said that he thought the two strangest... two of the strangest phenomena in England in the preceding year had been the publication of Awakenings, and what he called the 'mutism' of the profession, and the complete lack of medical response to it. But there was plenty of general response, and in December, Colin had a sort of celebration and Christmas party combined. And all sorts of people came along, including my father who was recovering from a... a year of mourning for my mother. And my father, who had been so anxious about my publishing, now saw that there are... there were all sorts of eminent people there and it seemed to be okay. And Jonathan said to me, 'You’re famous now'. And... although I didn’t really know what it meant, no-one had ever said anything like to me before. He of course had been famous for, you know, for... years, from Beyond the Fringe, or... or before that... whatever famous means.

The dangers of publishing, especially publishing true stories about living people, I have been on... on a sort of moral edge here for... for 40 years. It didn’t really arise with Migraine because I only published little vignettes of people, without too many identifying details.

There was an incident in 1970, when the sister of one of my patients at Beth Abraham came to me holding The New York Daily News and said, 'Is this your medical discretion?' And I realised that what had happened was that The Lancet had released my medical Letter to the Editor to Reuters or A&P [sic], and it had been picked up by newspapers everywhere. The... my letter was about the patient whom... who inspired Harold Pinter’s play, A Kind of Alaska. The... now there was nothing bad in the letter, it was sort of full of interest. It could not have been recognised by anyone other than a family member, or someone who... who knew the patient very well. This was a woman who had had the encephalitis very acutely in 1926 and went into some strange trance-like state for 43 years, until she was awakened in '69. But this made me very nervous.

I couldn’t have written Awakenings without the encouragement and permission of the patients themselves, who... who said, 'Tell our stories or it will never be known'. They had an overwhelming feeling of having been disposed of by society, put away, forgotten, lepers. And they... but I myself was hesitant after that thing with The New York Daily News. And I thought to myself, well perhaps if I just publish Awakenings in England, the patients won’t know about it, and it won’t cause any repercussions. But one of the patients, intelligent woman – a very intelligent woman –had got wind of this, wrote to Colin, who gleefully sent her a copy of Awakenings. And then it was out. This patient herself... she didn’t mind my having told the... really in a way, the... the tragedy of her life, which involved her getting the encephalitis when she was 12, coming to Beth Abraham when she was 16, and being... a living statue for close to 40 years. There were certain personal things which she didn’t like. There was one sentence in which I had referred to her as obese, bearded, and acromegalic which was all true, but she... she didn’t like this... this description of herself, and I don’t blame her, and I have a story I will... I will tell later with regard to that.

I did in fact... the only alterations I made in Awakenings were, in fact, when it came out in hardback [in the US], were with regard to her when I omitted some of the stuff which had given her offence and enlarged on her sterling qualities.

In... October of '73, I was approached by Duncan Dallas of Yorkshire Television and... who wondered whether... how I would feel – and how the patients might feel – about a documentary being made, and said he would like to come over and meet the patients. And he came over for 10 days and met many of the patients who warmed to him. And I warmed to him not just as a potential film-maker, but I was delighted to learn that he had written a doctoral thesis on [Antoine] Lavoisier and that he was in fact a chemist manqué, and had a laboratory of his own. So when we weren’t talking about Awakenings we were talking about chemistry and the history of chemistry.

I had had one review in London which although it was a positive review, irritated me slightly. I, of course, had not said that this was Beth Abraham Hospital in the Bronx, New York. I gave it another name, and I said that it was in the village of Bexley-on-Hudson. And anyhow, one of the reviews said, 'This is an amazing book, the more so since Sacks is talking about non-existent patients in a non-existent hospital, who have supposedly had a non-existent disease, because there was no worldwide epidemic of sleepy sickness in the 1920s'. So it was partly this, and partly the patients also being behind the filming, and they... I had shared this review with some of them. And some of them laughed at it and said, 'Show us, or the book will never be believed'. And so I... I felt my credulity, I don’t have the right... take that back, I felt my credibility, my believability, was somewhat on the line and this was one of the reasons why, after meeting Duncan and after his meeting the patients, I said, let’s go ahead.

So Duncan came again, this time with his film crew, and in 10 days the documentary was made and it was shown in England in January of ‘74. And people liked it a lot, and I liked it, and, most importantly, the patients liked it. A very different matter from what was to happen with a subsequent documentary which Duncan made.

So in... early in 1971 after this article and the slew of replies to it, I saw Ray, Witty Ticcy Ray, with his 'ticcy witticisms' and his 'witty ticcysisms’. These were his coinages. I was extremely fascinated by what was going on with him, and not only the tics but the... the speed of thought, the acceleration of thought, the wittiness, and what he was telling me of his life, although life was very difficult for him. Although it was a sign of his strong personality and toughness and affectionate nature, that he had a good job and was happily married. But his... he couldn’t walk down a street without everyone looking at him, you know, he’d been a cynosure and a target for disapproving glances since he was five years old. The day after seeing Ray, I thought I saw three people in the streets of New York with Tourette’s, and the day after that another two.

Seeing these people in New York amazed me in two ways. First, Tourette’s had been... was described at that time, as extremely rare, and as occurring perhaps one in half a million. And I thought, if I’m not mistaken, it’s at least a thousand times commoner, which in fact is just about right. Secondly, I thought I must have been blind not to see this before. I needed to see someone with Tourette’s closely, and get an idea what it was like, then I could recognise it in the streets. And this made me think of... of many things in the history of neurology. Muscular dystrophy had been described for the first time in the late 1850s, and following the initial case description dozens of descriptions appeared. And [Jean-Martin] Charcot said, ‘Why... why did we need...’ Charcot said, ‘The disease has always existed, it’s ubiquitous, it’s not uncommon, why did we need Monsieur Duchenne [de Boulogne] to open our eyes?’
Well anyhow, seeing Ray opened my eyes to Tourette’s. And it had quite a lot in common with the post-encephalitic patients, partly in the wild activation of subcortical mechanisms of various sorts. And... but it was also in another way richer, because the... these were people living in the real world and reacting to others. And so an intense new interest came to me in Tourette’s syndrome after seeing Ray.

An intense new interest had come to me after seeing Ray. And I thought there must be other... many other people like this, and perhaps they would all recognise each other as brothers and sisters in pathology, and form a sort of fraternal association or sort of Tourette’s syndrome association. This was a fantasy of mine. In 1974, I found that my fantasy had become a reality, and I was invited to one of the early meetings of the Tourette’s Syndrome Society in New York. I then had the opportunity of meeting other people with Tourette’s, and in September of '74 I... I spoke with the then president of the Tourette’s Syndrome Society saying I would like to write a book on Tourette’s. And he said he would gladly send me as many patients as I would like to see, if this was agreeable with them. But I will continue that thread later or maybe I should continue it now, because... by the pricking of my thumbs something evil this way comes.

In '74, and '75, '76, some events were to happen which darkened my life. When I came back to New York, after the publication of Awakenings in the summer of '73, the then director at Bronx State Hospital asked if I would... he invited me in for a long talk, amongst other things we talked about schizophrenia and mental illness. I had been working for the previous seven years as a neurology consultant at this state psychiatric hospital doing a clinic a week, and finding out if people diagnosed as schizophrenic might in fact have some neurological condition or something else, and [Leon] Salzman, the then director, a very good man, who had written an excellent book on the obsessional personality, invited me to come in half time to the hospital, and... and said he thought I would be particularly interested in a... a ward which dealt with young, autistic and psychotic and retarded people, Ward 23.
At... autism was not a hot subject at that time, no-one was talking about autism in '73, and I... so I accepted the offer, and at first I enjoyed being on this ward, although it upset me deeply as well. Neurologists, probably more than any other specialists, see tragic cases, people with incurable, relentless diseases which can cause great suffering. There has to be, along with fellow feeling and sympathy and compassion, there has to be a sort of detachment so you’re not drawn into a hopeless identification with a patient.

The particular ward I worked on had a... what was called a behaviour mod, or behaviour modification policy, of using rewards and punishments, and in particular punishments, so the... the slogan of the ward was ‘therapeutic punishment’.
I hated to see the way in which the patients were treated... and physically abused.  And it reminded me of the way in which I had been treated and physically abused between the ages of six and 10 when I was in Brafield, and I felt myself falling sometimes into an almost helpless identification with the patients. But there was also a more constructive and adult side, and this was when I discovered that some of the patients were musical. I had a piano of my own at the time, an upright piano, and I arranged for it to be taken to the ward, and I would sometimes play for patients, and otherwise mute inaccessible autistic people would sort of crowd around me. I also found that... that there could be a, sort of, non-verbal interaction over a pool table, and the pool table and the piano were my therapeutic instruments, these morally neutral things, while others were locked in seclusion rooms and... and immobilised physically.

[Q] Do you remember any of the stories that you wrote about [in an unpublished manuscript]?
Some of them. I remember one... one of my essays was called Desire and Delight, and was how agitated... people agitated with desire, could become calm and delighted sometimes when they heard music, and so it really had to do with what Sherrington called ‘appetitive and consummatory states’. I was later to see this very strikingly... are we still running... I was later to see exactly this with... with Lowell, this was a young man with Tourette’s syndrome whom I was to see many years later, and we travelled quite a lot together, and on one occasion we were in London, and he was very excited because he was due to meet a young Lebanese woman with Tourette’s, and he got more and more excited as we approached the apartment where she was living. And outside the door, a stream of – I don’t know whether the word exists – a stream of pornoloquy, a sort of stream of... of excited filth, sort of, poured from his mouth along with, sort of, epileptic ticc-ing, and then the door opened and the young woman appeared, and she was indeed very beautiful, and over the next hour Lowell drank in her beauty and ceased to tic. It was the most amazing thing, and I think an intensely appetitive state when he was really going overboard with desire was replaced by this peaceful, joyous consummatory state. I'm... I’d seen these states often in my post-encephalitic patients and, you know, life partly consists of these, so my first essay was on desire and delight.

I took off for Norway soon afterwards because I thought that would be a good peaceful place to write my diatribe. But, I had a series of accidents one after the other, gradually getting more and more serious. One of them, which shook me up a good deal and could have been the end of me, was when I lost an oar... I’d rowed out on the fjord, on Hardangerfjord, and I lost an oar, but I somehow made my way back with one oar. And then, the next day, I climbed the mountain, and... I don’t know how much of the story I told. The next day I started out for a little mountain climbing. I saw a notice at the bottom of the mountain which as far as I could construe, it said beware of the bull, and it also had a little jolly cartoon of a man being tossed by a bull. I thought of this as a sort of Norwegian sense of humour, you know how they are in Scandinavia.  How could you have a bull on a... on a mountain, or any livestock on a mountain?
So I... I was strong and energetic then, and I used my gymnasium-trained strength to... to ascend the mountain and climb up the mountain. At first I... I was a little apprehensive that I might meet the bull, and then I dismissed this from my mind, a lot of nonsense, but... but it wasn’t a lot of nonsense. And I came, sort of, nonchalantly, and gaily, and swingingly, round one boulder, one big boulder, and found myself face-to-face with a bull sitting on the path, face-to-face, snout-to -snout. I... terror is... is too mild a word for what I felt, and... and the sight of this, and the feeling of it, induced a sort of hallucination. The bull’s face seemed to expand until I could see nothing else. But then, very daintily, as if I just decided to end my walk at that point, I turned round and descended the path. But then, alas, my nerve broke, panic took over me, and I started to run on this icy muddy mountain path, and faster because I heard heavy, thudding hooves, and heavy breathing behind me, or I thought I did, it was probably my own breathing, and my own thudding, and then suddenly, I don’t know how it happened, I was at the bottom of a cliff with my left leg twisted grotesquely underneath me.

One has dissociations in times of extremity. My first thought was, someone has had an accident, a bad accident, and then I realised it was me. I tried to stand up and the leg gave way like a strand of spaghetti, completely limp. I then examined it, and in examining it I did so very professionally, and imagining that I was an orthopaedist demonstrating an injury to a class of students, I said, 'You see the... the quadriceps tendon has torn off completely, the patella can be flapped to and fro, the knee can be dislocated backwards,' I yelled with that, 'This causes the patient to yell', and then again I came back to the fact that I was not a professor demonstrating an injury, I was the injured person. I had an anorak, I tore the anorak in two, and I had used an umbrella as a walking stick, this was before the age of miniature umbrellas, and I... I broke off the top, and I splinted the stem of the umbrella to my leg using the torn anorak and then started my descent. At first very quietly, because I thought the bull, without falling down a cliff, may have just pursued the path and was behind me.
The... since we’ve mentioned Duncan Dallas who did the documentary of Awakenings, the thought of him and his crew came to me when I was there. I was alone. No-one knew where I was. I thought the chances were very much against survival, but I thought, gosh, wouldn’t it be nice if a helicopter appeared and there was Duncan and his crew, a great scene here, showing... show the bull, show me, and then I could be lifted up in a basket in the helicopter. A sense of... of how dramatic this was... was partly in my mind.
Well, anyhow, I... I didn’t think I would make it. I’d heard earlier that evening, they said, of a fool of an Englishman who... who had climbed the mountain and had been found three weeks later near the summit with both legs broken.

There were many different moods as I came down the path, I felt very... many, many, memories came to me, I didn’t see my life in a flash, but many, many, memories unreeled.  They were nearly all good memories, grateful memories, memories of summer afternoons, memories of having been loved, memories of having been given things, and I have to say, memory of the feelings that I had also given something back, in particular I thought, I’ve written one good book, and one great book, although I think I used the past tense and the third person, it was already sounding like an obituary: ‘At the time this happened, he had, however, written one good book, and one great book, and perhaps this was in his mind when he met his untimely end’.
I... I had almost given up hope, and it was eight hours later and getting very dark, and I was, I think, pretty shocked then, a huge amount of tissue swelling in the leg, fortunately no bleeding, and I... I heard a voice, 'Hello!' and I looked up and I saw two figures on a ridge. The man holding a gun, and a smaller figure who was his son, and they came down and they rescued me, and, I think, being rescued from almost certain death must be one of the sweetest experiences in life.
Anyhow, I don’t want to tell the whole of A Leg to Stand On, but I did decide to write about it and under another title.

When I was in hospital with this... injured leg, the tendon had been reattached, but all sorts of... of nerve tendon connections had been severed or damaged, and the leg was immobilised in a long cast, and invisible because of the cast, I lost the sense of having that leg... for two weeks. And then it came back and came to life and became, was animated and became part of me again. Music played a crucial role in this.
So, after the mountain, the prologue, this book then was about, if you want, the losing and the reclaiming of a limb, or the death and the resurrection of a limb. And I’d called one book Awakenings, I thought I would call the next book Quickenings, and my leg book under the title of Quickenings was in the Duckworth catalogue for 1975, nine years before it actually appeared.

Incidentally, something which isn’t in the book because it’s... it occurred after the ending, the book only really covers a nine-week period of the accident, and being in the hospital, and... and convalescence, and what I thought was complete recovery. When I got back to New York, on one occasion I had a very, very, long swim, and when I came to... although something peculiar was happening to my kicking... and when I came to get out of the pool, the quadriceps had lost all its tone, and I couldn’t use that leg and I somehow had to pull myself out of the pool and get someone to help me. And... on another occasion I smoked some pot, not a large amount, and also then the quadriceps lost its... its tone, so I think I probably hadn’t got full functional innervation for a couple of years or something. I would also have strange illusions. I would feel that the... the leg had suddenly moved when it hadn’t. I think, there was a... probably a bit of neuroma formation and crosstalk between sensory and motor nerves.

Why did I take nine years to write A Leg to Stand On when I had written Migraine in all of nine days? It was not for want of trying, and when I couldn’t write, I engaged a secretary and I tried to dictate the book. It kept going wrong and I... the term didn’t exist at the time, but I think I had something of a post-traumatic stress syndrome, and whenever I thought of the subject, I would get very anxious, and the writing would become strained and... and wrong. But there were other things going on. A very unfortunate series of events happened with a Tourette patient, and the Tourette book which I had wanted to write. And... and on the positive side, I... I wrote about Witty Ticcy Ray, and this, which was published in the London Review of Books, and this for me became a different sort of writing.

In general, my favourite reading in neurology and psychiatry are... are 19th century case histories.  They have a detail and a richness, and a warmth, and... and a personality, which I think one very rarely finds in... in a case history now. The... in fact, I think, there was good reason to think until some resurrection of the case history around 1990 that case history was dead, and that the journals – Brain Neurology – which had once been full of wonderful case histories, were now full of... of essentially statistical or research articles with... with very little human interest. But there was one contemporary who was different, perhaps contemporary is the wrong word because he was, I guess, 30 years my senior, and this was the Soviet neuropsychologist, AR Luria.

Luria came to London in '58 and gave some talks about a pair of identical twins and their speech development, and... and this combined observational science, theoretical depth, and human warmth in a way which I thought marvellous.
When I came to New York I was to read two just published books of Luria, his Higher Cortical Functions[in Man], and one called... the title has escaped me. Well, and another book full of histories of frontal patients with frontal lobe damage, which very much upset me – this may be the reason why I can’t think of the title – it upset me because, as I read this book I thought: there’s no place for me in the world. I thought: Luria has already written it, he had already seen, said, written and thought anything I can ever say, or write, or think, and in my anger I tore the book in two. It was called The Human Brain and Psychological Process. I told the library that something had happened to the book and I got a new copy as well as a copy for myself.

In 1968, a book of Luria’s came out called The Mind of a Mnemonist. I read the first 30 pages of this thinking it was a novel, a rather Turgenev-like novel. I’m particularly fond of Turgenev because of the richness of detail, and then I realised that it was a case history, but the most detailed and deep case history I’d ever read, but a case history with all the dramatic power and the pathos and the feeling of a novel. It seemed to me perfect of its kind, and it, on the one hand, and Auden, on the other hand, allowed me to give Awakenings the shape it had. I... I think I could not have written Awakenings without the exemplar of Luria and the... and encouragement of Auden who said, ‘You must... you must broaden, you must use a much larger palette and one of which some of your scientific colleagues may disapprove’.

Just before Awakenings came out, in fact, on its publication day on June 28th, Richard Gregory had a wonderful... was a man I... whom I met in Colin’s office and whom I admired and loved very greatly – and I’ve been very grieved at his death recently, and I want to write about him – but Richard wrote a wonderful review of Awakenings, and... I wrote an article... about Luria. And then in July, I got two letters from Luria, in receiving letters from him, Luria in his autobiography describes how as a young man, in fact as a 19-year-old who had ‘founded’ the grandiloquently titled Kazan Psychoanalytical Society, he received a letter from Freud who did not realise that he was writing to a 19-year-old, and Luria described his excitement at receiving a letter from Freud. I had a similar excitement receiving a letter from Luria.
In his first letter, he dealt at length with all the points I’d raised in my article and thanked me for writing the article, though in no uncertain terms, though very courteous tones indicated that he thought I was deeply mistaken in various ways. And then, a few days later, I got another letter which was his response to Awakenings, and... and there he spoke of his delight with Awakenings. And... I never met Luria, some inhibition prevented me from going to Moscow, which I could have done easily.

I had an intense correspondence with Luria until his death, although alas, I... I never met him. He could be very much to the point when he wanted to and when I was... I wrote to him when I was in hospital with my leg. I felt he was the only man... this is the only man in the world who might understand what is going on and with whom I can communicate. And there were intense letters about this, and I was then hovering about... should I write about it, should I not, and Luria sent me a telegram containing four letters, or two words, 'Do it'. The shortest, concisest telegram I ever had. I did do it, but it... it took another 10 years.
The... Duncan Dallas wanted to meet Luria and the mnemonist. Duncan had made one documentary with BF Skinner, then the one with me, and he wanted to do a third one with... with Luria, but Luria said the mnemonist was... had died in the interim and... and that he himself was not in good health.

In 1979, I was approached by two young men who were film producers  [Walter Parkes and Larry Lasker] and who had produced a... a good documentary called [The] California Reich about neo-Nazis in California. And they were interested in making a feature film about Awakenings, and a... a contract was drawn up in 1979, although in fact, nothing was to happen there for another 10 years. In the interim, I continued to struggle with the Leg book, and at last with invaluable help from you, Kate, and my publisher Jim Silberman, who is really a marvellous editor, and others, I completed the Leg book, which came out in England in '84, and was variously reviewed, typically, the lovely reviews which I got, were eclipsed in my mind by a hateful review I got from [James] Fenton, the poet, which upset me very deeply and brought me to a depressive halt for three months. But then I came to, and in addition to the... oh yeah, reviews... but when the American edition came out, it was given a marvellous review in the New York Review of Books by Jerry Bruner, a man of much greater intellectual weight than Fenton, although Fenton himself is no fool and a very gifted poet, and someone whom I admire when I forget my hatred, and anyhow, that’s a long time ago.
With another... incidentally, another reviewer who wrote an assassinatory review of Hat is now one of my closest friends, but that’s another story which I will come to.

Jerry Bruner’s review allowed me to reclaim some confidence and some writing, and in fact it was so positive, and I was put in such a positive mood that I wrote something like a dozen more case histories for The Man who Mistook [His Wife for a Hat] in as many weeks. I wrote four case histories in the last four days of 1984. So, I can be very affected both negatively and positively by reviews.

Incidentally I was given the Lewis Thomas Prize at Rockefeller for what they call the Scientist as Poet. Interestingly, his... he of course made a mid-life change and when he was about 50 he... he said to himself, I have written 200 well-esteemed scientific articles, but I do not feel I have expressed myself, and I want to do something really different with a much more personal and emotional quality, and he said he started to write something... no, that he first planned something out in the same way as his scientific papers, the outline, and it was no good, and he then said, that won't work, and he just started writing without any plan beforehand or any conscious idea of what he was going to write about, and that became the new way of writing.

Well, I have a number of colleagues, of fellow neurologists, who have started to have rather similar feelings, let's call it the Lewis Thomas crisis. Namely, they have written fine neurology papers which have been in the journals, but they want to write more expansively. They either want to write a popular neurology book or perhaps something... or essays. They want to write in a much more open and unbuttoned and personal way. And... I... this has partly defined my own position because I have not been attacked by that particular form of frustration, because my own writing has... has had the double quality from the start of being both scientific and... and personal, and at least as an attempt to bring the two of them together, which was something which Luria spent a lifetime trying to do, and which he felt allowed to do when he became older. He... he was in his late 60s when The Mind of an Mnemonist was published.

To come back to the Leg book, I felt that if I didn't write about the accident it would happen again. But I also felt that if I did write about the accident it might happen again with my... with my crooked unconscious.
Anyhow, early in '84, after a year of painful editing in which a 300,000-word manuscript was reduced by Colin to 58,000 words, the... the book was going into proofs, and just at that point I had another accident and did the same to my right leg, although this was in the Bronx in... in an icy gas station. I... I'd stopped... it was on City Island, where I lived then, I'd handed my credit card to the attendant, then because I'd been sitting a long while in the car, I thought I'd just open the door and stand up. The moment I stood up, I fell down on ice like that, and when he came back with the receipt he found me on the ground half under the car. He said, 'What are you doing?' I said, 'Sunbathing'. And he said, 'No', he says, 'what happened?' And I said, well, I said, 'I've broken an arm and a leg'. He says, 'You're joking again'. I said 'No, this time I'm not joking, you better get an ambulance'.
And so the ambulance came. When I was taken to hospital the surgical resident said, 'What's that written on your hand?' I said, 'Oh, that's a patient, she's... she’s... with hallucination, she's got Charles Bonnet syndrome, I was on my way to see her'. And he said, 'Dr Sacks, you're the patient now'.  And it was only at that point that I... that it came to me that I was the patient, and this actually is a reason why I think the intended piece on Charles Bonnet was not in the Hat book along with my piece on musical hallucinations, but it will now come out 25 years later in my hallucination book.
[Q] Didn't Colin have a comment afterwards?
Oh yes, I'm sorry, yes. When Colin heard that I was in hospital – I was in hospital when the proofs arrived – he said, ‘You'd do anything for a footnote’.

I did in fact do a little writing when I was in hospital. The British Medical Journal used to have a little column called Clinical Curios where instead of an elaborate case history, one would describe a patient briefly. These were rather similar to sort of the way doctors talk among one another: there's this lady came to me and so forth, and I'd sent them some clinical curios, but they said they were too long and could I be briefer. So when I was in hospital... I'm very strongly right-handed... I wrote them very painfully and slowly, much shorter things with my left hand, and... which they accepted. They said I was... they were amazed I could rein in my loquacity so well and go from 5000 words to 50 words or whatever it was, and I... I explained about the accident and that I didn't have the use of my right arm, and they said they were very sorry but it did wonders for my style.

At that time I was also visited in hospital by Robert Krulwich who is a very good man in radio and television. And Robert came along with a microphone and a recorder, and he asked me to tell him some stories about patients, and so in fact the... some of the stories, the case histories, from The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat were heard on radio before they were seen in print.

Then in, I think, '87, '88, the long dormant option of making a film with Awakenings surfaced, rather suddenly, and I was approached, I think it was at Halloween in '88, they said Peter Weir had been very taken by the subject, he would be visiting New York and hoped to meet me, and they would be sending a script to me.
I'm sorry, I've omitted something which is that the... obviously there was a visit the previous year with the two producers and a script writer, a man called Steve Zaillian. I... but I hadn't seen any scripts, and suddenly here was a script and a film director. If only there had been more time. The script arrived as I’ve said, in fact, on Halloween night and... which is sometimes called Fright Night in America, and I think this partly tainted my reaction to the script which... this original script, which I thought was melodramatic and... and frightful in the extreme and designed to cause fright and was, sort of, a Halloween version of Awakenings. And then the next day Peter Weir came, and this was very unfortunate, he was a director whom I greatly admired, but I could not accuse and abuse the... the script strongly enough, and he said, well, I can hardly make a film, you know, where the author hates the script. And... but he also said that he wasn't sure that he... how did he put it, he had some Australian phrase, only someone who lives in Australia... reefs... shoals and reefs, yes. He said that he felt there would be many shoals and reefs in making a film about Awakenings.
Incidentally I have... I always visited Peter when I went to Australia and he visited me here and we've been good friends, and I... I love his work.

Then there was more work on the script, and then in '89 I was contacted and told that Penny Marshall would direct the film and that she would be visiting me with De Niro who would play the patient.
It's as well... it's as well that Penny was there because otherwise with De Niro's shy silence and my shy silence, not a single word... we would have sat in silence for four hours, and not a single word would have been exchanged, but bird-like, sort of, Penny... Penny kept the conversation going. I think at that time perhaps Bob was already absorbing the... the silence and inwardness of one of these patients prior to L-DOPA, and... but a very powerful presence. I was told that Robin Williams would... would be me. He couldn't come at the time because he was about to father a child. I had very much liked the film which Peter, I'm sorry, which Robin had made with... with Peter Weir. I didn't like the Vietnam film so much. So I... I was excited by having actors of this calibre, and various changes were made in the script and then Robin appeared, I think, probably the following month, and... I was intoxicated by Robin as I was awed by Bob. Robin wanted to come around with me to see patients but also to... to go to restaurants, and... so we spent a lot of time together, he hung out, if that's the right phrase. We hung out together. I've never been sure what ‘hanging out’ means. And I forgot that, I didn't realise or forgot that during this time I was in fact the subject of his continuous, minute, professional scrutiny, though a scrutiny which I think was, fortunately, affectionate and sympathetic.
And it was only about three weeks later when we were chatting in the street, and one isn't too conscious of one's own postures, but I got into something which I'm told was one of my pensive postures, something like this, and I realised that Robin was in exactly the same posture. He wasn't imitating me at that point, but I think he had got my postures and my turns of speech and my idiosyncrasies, and it was very extraordinary, it was like having a sudden, instant, younger twin. And I think that it... it disquieted us both a bit and we decided that there needed to be some space and time so that he could disburden himself of any imitation and let things go down to a deeper level and meet his own feelings and experiences so that he could then create a character of whole cloth, a... a Robin-like character though one based on me, and not, as it were, an instant mirroring.

But I spent, in general, much more time doing the filming with De Niro. I was the technical consultant, whatever that means. Actually I was the neurological consultant, I would... I would get to the set very early. For example, the question came up: how does someone with Parkinson's with no postural reflex – they may fall suddenly – what does a fall look like? And I was... I was describing this to Bob and how suddenly and heavily and limply the person falls, and at that moment, suddenly and heavily and limply, he fell on me and almost knocked me over. And at that point I thought: that's not acting. I thought he had somehow himself suddenly lost all his postural reflexes and had become Parkinsonian on the spot.
I... I'm... all through the filming, and sometimes I'm... when we were having dinner afterwards it wasn't very visible above the tablecloth, but I might see if I looked down that his foot was still turned in, the way Leonard L's foot was turned in, in the daytime, that he hadn't, sort of, liberated himself from the persona. I became afraid that if one acted Parkinsonian with sufficient intensity that one might in fact destroy the basal ganglia and become... become Parkinsonian.

So the film was made. I think it was about two months of filming. It was filming which led to a very acute weight gain on my part because they would have bagels with egg salad laid out for... just a huge number of people were... were involved, like 200 people carrying things... vast... and I thought that to avoid overeating, I would never, in fact, start a bagel, although if I found a partly eaten bagel or the remnants of a bagel, I might be permitted to eat that. What I didn't realise was that everyone else had the opposite philosophy, that they could start a bagel so long as they didn't finish it, and that my own permission became a compulsion to finish all the half-eaten bagels, and in three months of filming I put on 40 pounds entirely from half eating... half-eaten egg bagels.

There were some other things that... in that filming... on one occasion, I... I was interviewed outside, and I was leaning against a car and interviewing, and I suddenly had a gigantic sneeze, and the impact of the sneeze set the car's siren going, which was extremely loud and no one knew how to turn it off. And finally the battery died, and Penny said that I cost them half a day's filming... that I'd cost them $10,000 with my sneeze. She said that's the most expensive sneeze she'd ever encountered.

When De Niro heard that there were still a number of post-encephalitic patients at the Highlands Hospital in London, he wanted to see them and I went along with him. He had been rather sceptical of various things, in particular of how an apparently motionless and paralysed patient could suddenly respond and catch something, and... and with a quickness and a suddenness which... which astounded me and which took me by surprise. At one point he suddenly grabbed a pair of socks and threw it at a patient and the patient caught it, and that convinced him... it convinced the patient that the patient could move, and it convinced him and it convinced me, and it was a... it was a very striking, natural demonstration. He spent two days with the patients and, I think, observing them more closely than anyone had since Purdon Martin, this great neurologist who devoted his later years to observing them.
Also with a friend of mine who has Parkinson's, De Niro spent a day and a night with him. Ed had said, 'Look, you know, I'm going to eat, I need to go out, I need to go to bed'. De Niro said, 'That's okay, I'll stay with you all the while'. I don't think he said much, he never says very much, but his ability to absorb... among other things, Ed had said, in his rather explicit encyclopaedic way, 'I have...' he said, 'you talk about freezing', he said, 'I have seven sorts of freezing, let me explain’. And Bob said, 'No, I'll observe'. Amazing observer.
With Robin, I had the feeling of two very distinct stages in acting. First, a superficial stage of mimicry, and he's an incredible mimic. I saw this once when he'd come along to a ward at Bronx State Hospital, and in the car afterwards the voices of half a dozen patients were there... the voices and postures of half a dozen patients. And... but then... then he has to go to a deeper level, as he had to do with me. With De Niro, I never saw the earlier level. I... maybe it was somehow done internally, and then what... what came out was... was the final action.

I've never felt too involved in films, plays, operas, or ballets based on my work, and all of them have existed. I'm now glad that the movie of Awakenings was made. There's a lot of very good, solid stuff in it and... and the sort of Hollywood kitsch I... I don't mind too much. I was very sensitive about it at first. Although... in a way I'm half sorry that I put off Peter Weir, I wonder what he would have done. I'm also sorry... I'm losing a name, the German director.
[Q] Werner Herzog.
During the actual filming of Awakenings I got a letter from Werner Herzog saying that he had been deeply moved by Awakenings and would I consider a film version with him? I wrote back to him saying that I had admired his dark imagination – I used that phrase – his dark imagination for many years, but that I had been too diffident to write to him and now it was too late because it was already being done. But he did in fact come to New York while the movie was being made, and he was amused and outraged at seeing 200 people being involved, and he said at that, he said, 'When I make a film,' he said, 'there's really just me and the cameraman and the actor, or sometimes he is the cameraman and the actor and the director', you know, there are three people and not 300 when he makes a film. And I also wonder what a film of Werner Herzog would have been like, and I've continued to see him over the years.

Prior to the movie of Awakenings, there had been a radio play in Canada which was with six actors and myself. I was acting the doctor, and I found that sort of amazing because hardly any script was needed. The book itself, you know, could be acted.
There was also a theatrical version in Chicago, and... then of course... I'm trying to... I'm trying to think of the dates. There was the Pinter play. Incidentally, did we send all the correspondence I had with Pinter?
[Q] Yes, we did.
We did, okay. I was very, very awed by the Pinter play. In many, many externals it was completely different from the case history, but at the same time it had a... it had such a depth about it and it was so Pinter.

In 1981, I got a letter from Pinter in which he said that he had read Awakenings when it came out in '73. He had immediately thought, this is stuff for stage, but he couldn't think how to deal with it and he put it out of his mind, and it had stayed out of his mind for seven years. But then the previous summer, in the summer of 1980, he said he had a dream, didn't know what it was, but he awoke with the first words and the first scene of the play in his mind, ‘Something is happening’. And the play then wrote itself in three days. So this was a wonderful description of what I regard as almost a paradigm of the creative process, that first there is wrestling with a problem consciously and not getting anywhere. And then you let it go and you forget it. And then it has been incubated outside at levels inaccessible to you, so you don't know anything is happening, and when it's ready, it erupts into consciousness. What FWH Myers calls ‘subliminal uprush’. These are the three stages Poincaré speaks about with mathematical invention, and I think these were the three stages which Pinter has talked about, and he included the play, which I... I read with great delight.
The more so, as seven years earlier I had been sent a play also inspired by that particular case history from a playwright in Philadelphia who said that he had just read Awakenings and he was so excited, he said he was obsessed by what was going on and... and he'd written this play, and it was... and it was going to be shown in Philadelphia and would I like to come to the opening? And I wrote back and said, slow down a bit, you know, this has not been discussed. I said, in fact, there is already... a dramatic option has been taken on Awakenings, and I think I... I think you need my permission. And... but if I... if I like it we'll find a way of doing things. He sent me the play and I cringed as I read it. I cringed because it was so close to Awakenings. I cringed because it was a... a parroting and a paraphrasing and an aping and a mimicry of Awakenings, and I wrote back, I used some excuse, I said, I'm very sorry but, in fact, the patient herself and her large family are alive, you know, and this will definitely be seen, and I... and I don't think you can go ahead. But I felt that this playwright, you know, had immediately regurgitated Awakenings, and he had not let it go down into the depths, and this... this struck me as, you know, the Pinter play brought home the difference between real creation and... and this sort of mimicry.

A Kind of Alaska opened in London in 1982, and I went to the opening performance where Judi Dench plays the patient. I was immensely moved, and moved to tears by the performance, and also often to laughter, as it's a wonderful play. And I went up to Judi Dench to meet her and to convey my compliments, and I asked her if she had in fact seen any such patients or... or read the book or seen the documentary, and she said, 'No, Harold wouldn't allow that'. She said, 'Harold wants us to create a character entirely from his words'. So I thought that was very interesting. I also went to the final performance with Judi Dench, and I didn't like it as much. I didn't say that to her, but she told me spontaneously that she had now seen some of the patients and that she had seen the documentary of Awakenings, and I think that perhaps this had had an adverse affect on her, although I've seen the opposite in... with other people, with other actors.

I went to see Whose Life is it Anyway? about a... a sculptor who was rendered quadriplegic and finally, I think, commits suicide or intends to commit suicide. I thought that the representation of the quadriplegic man was incredible and I went up to Tom Conti afterwards and I asked him if he'd had much to do with quadriplegic people. He said, yes, he said he'd been out to Roosevelt Island to a place, which existed then, where all people with quadriplegia, either from high neck injuries or who had had polio and were paralysed up to the neck, they were called ‘the heads’, these were people with no bodies, and he said half of them wanted to commit suicide, but couldn't. But also, he... he had watched them very closely and he would spend hours every day imagining he was quadriplegic. He had rather long hair at the time, and one of his ways of dealing with hair which fell into his eyes was to direct... blow up, blow a lock of hair out of his own eyes. And so I'm sure there that his close observation of the patients was crucial.

I went to see a play called Wings. The playwright had based his original play partly on the fact that his father had had a stroke and had been rendered aphasic, had lost the power of language. In the play, there is a female aviator who was played by Cicely Courtneidge, and I went along with a cousin of mine, an actress cousin, and at one point, Carmel, my cousin, said to me, 'How do you find the play? Isn't it wonderful?' And I said, 'No, it's terrible'. And she said, 'What do you mean?' And I said, 'It sounds nothing like aphasia'. And Carmel said, 'Can't you forget you're a neurologist and just give yourself to the atmosphere, the feeling of the play?' And I said, 'No, I can't'. Then afterwards, we went behind stage – Carmel would always take me behind stage – and met Cecily Courtneidge who was very gracious, and... and I... keeping my fingers crossed, I congratulated her on her performance, and said, 'I guess you must have seen a lot of people with aphasia?' And she said, 'No, never seen anyone with aphasia'. And I wanted to say, ’It shows’, but of course I didn't.
So... so I don't quite know how much direct experience counts and whether it counts positively or negatively. I think it was positive for Tom Conti, maybe negative for Judi Dench, and the absence of experience I think was... was, for me as a neurologist, but clearly not for Carmel, was a glaring... but this raises the question of... you can act Ophelia and King Lear, you can act any Shakespearian character, all of these are part of the human repertoire, but can you act aphasia? Can you act Parkinsonism? I was very concerned about this when the filming of Awakenings came up. I don't think something like Parkinsonism can be imagined or can only be imagined from outside.
A propos of that, Ed, the Parkinsonian patient whom De Niro spent so much time with, on one occasion I was walking with Ed to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and Ed suddenly started shaking and bowing over, and becoming acutely Parkinsonian. He had just time with a tremulous hand to pull out a syringe of apomorphine, used for such emergencies, and to plunge it into his thigh, through his trousers, into his thigh, and then about 30 seconds later he straightened up and smiled, and said, 'I've forgotten how to be Parkinsonian'. And then he added, he said, 'In 30 or 40 minutes, when the apomorphine wears off, I shall remember how to be Parkinsonian, and in that moment, be it'. And somehow being it, remembering it, and acting it, they're all one. They're all one.
This is a reason why, with my Leg book, when I describe the strange alienation which occurred, which I think is not imaginable, I suggest to the reader that the book should be read under spinal anaesthesia, because if you have a spinal anaesthetic, not one of these silly epidurals, you know, a real, massive one, effectively this transects the spinal cord, functionally, and what lies below... it's not merely that it's numb and paralysed, it is not you, you feel that you subjectively terminate around the level of the umbilicus, and that below that is a pair of hips and legs which could have been brought in from the local anatomy museum. It's dead, it's not yours, it's nothing to do with you even though it seems bizarrely continuous with you. If you've had that experience, well, then... then this is similar to my leg one, and I can confirm this for myself because when I had the second leg injury I asked for it to be done under spinal. So, maybe there should be theatre audiences who... who all... who all paralysed for the Tom Conti, they would need to be quadriplegic. You can't... one cannot imagine any neurological thing, although I've spent my life attempting to do so and to describe. And... I feel I've got as near as anybody, and at the same that that is infinitely far.

[Q] Remember some years later when someone published a book that, sort of, used 60 pages...?
Oh yes, right, sorry, there have been a lot of plagiarisms over the years. One was a book on Migraine which the author incomprehensibly sent to me, incomprehensibly, because the book contained a literal quotation 60 pages long. The first 60 pages of my book was in his book without any inverted commas. I wondered what to do, if anything, about this and my agent sort of said, 'Ah, forget it. Forget it'.
They've... beside the real... beside the dramatic and other versions of Awakenings, which are legit, there have been quite a lot of... of other ones which have been scams. I... I don't mind actually, too much, I certainly don't mind now.

After Hat was published, I got a letter from a woman telling me of the thrilling performance of a... of an opera called The Twins at the Edinburgh Festival. An opera based on my piece, The Twins. And I was taken aback because I had not been approached for any such opera. And... Colin said he was sorry, he'd forgotten to let me know and to seek permission, but he was sure I would like it, so I said, 'I'm sure too, but let me listen to the opera and get the libretto'. Something which I regret is that I... I stopped it. I stopped it because there was something in the libretto I didn't like, and what I didn't like was an amplification of something I didn't like in my own work. I had described the twins as having extremely myopic eyes and spectacles, and sort of peering around, and having very thick spectacles, and in the libretto they were wearing small telescopes over their eyes, and... I've... I've always been sensitive, and people are sensitive, about physical description and this was what one patient had objected to in the book of Awakenings, but I... it may have been... it may have been a work of art and I... I would not want to stand in the way of a work of art.
It was at the time that I was approached for an opera based on The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat and I... I couldn't imagine what that would be like, and then [Michael] Nyman, the composer, said he would show me a treatment. In fact, he showed me the complete opera the next day, and so he had obviously done it and... and sort of assumed I would like it. I said to the librettist [Christopher Rawlence] that it was very important that he... he speak to Mrs P, the woman who would be mistaken for a hat, to see whether it would be okay for... for him to write a libretto. In fact, a very nice, warm, very cordial relation sprang up between Chris and Mrs P, and she occupies a much more important place in the opera than she does in my account. I was scared and anxious... very, very tense when the opera was performed here in New York and Mrs P was sitting there. I was watching... watching from the aisles and interpreting, or misinterpreting every expression on her face and every movement, but then she came out, and Nyman was there, and Chris, and she... she said, 'You've done honour to my husband', and I... I loved that, and it made me feel we hadn't taken advantage or misrepresented in any way. I hope I can do honour to patients and that operas or plays or whatever, films which are inspired by my work that will also do honour to the patients. But I have a bad feeling about... about The Twins. They themselves were severely impaired intellectually and would not have comprehended.

I want to speak about some events which followed the publication of The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat. There had been a... a review by a... well known neurologist... well, actually a very good neurologist, a chap called John Marshall who was at Oxford and whose work I admired, and I was very glad that he wrote a review in the... in The New York Times, and it was predominantly a positive review, but with one qualification. He said, 'Dr Sacks is disingenuous. He pretends to know nothing about a subject and only to get interested in a subject when a patient appears, and then to, sort of, find out more, whereas we know this is not the way neurologists work. Neurologists bone up on a subject first and then see the patient, full of... knowing all the published work on the subject'. I wrote to thank him for his review but protested at this point, and he said, that's okay, you know, we... we know how things are. But then early in '87, I got a letter from a patient, a man, an artist, who said that some months beforehand he had had a car accident. He had been amnesic for a day and had some other problems. He couldn't read for a day or two. He said the police report of the accident, he said, appeared to be written in Greek or Hebrew and was unintelligible, but the most important and distressing thing was that he had lost all perception of colour with the accident, and this hadn't returned in the least. He asked me whether I had ever encountered such a condition and whether I could be of any help. I wrote back to him, saying, no, I had never encountered this and I didn't know if I could help, but he should come and see me.
When he came, he brought in a thick folder of papers on acquired achromatopsia to give it the... the proper title of colour blindness of cerebral origin following a stroke, an accident, or whatever. Basically, he brought me the world's literature on the subject, and he said... I said, 'Where did you get this?' And he said that he had written to my reviewer, to John Marshall, and John Marshall's response had been to send him all the literature. My response was to come and... was to say, 'Come and see me'. And I... later I told that story... that story to John Marshall, but I don't think I changed his mind.
Now, this was a very... a wonderful and interesting man. A gifted artist and articulate, he described how devastating things had been at first when he found himself, as he put it, in a... in a leaden world. How he... he couldn't imagine returning to painting, he was an abstract expressionist who was quite famous for his use of colour, and he didn't know how he could continue as a human being. He was appalled by his wife's appearance, by his own appearance, he couldn't imagine colour. He couldn't retrieve it from memory. This interested me very much because I... it had never occurred to me that colour might be constructed in the brain, perhaps by many different parts of the brain working in concert, and that this construction was as necessary for memory and imagery as for perception. He even told me that when he got migraines, and in a migraine one can have a zigzag which typically has brilliant colours associated with it, he said his migraine fortifications were black and white.
I... now let me get the order right. So I was very, very interested by this patient, and when I went to La Jolla, I was asked to give a talk at the Salk Institute, followed by a dinner. Francis Crick came up, seized me by the shoulders, sat me down next to him and said, ‘Tell me stories’. In particular he wanted stories of visual mishaps, of alterations of visual perception or imagery. So I told him a number of stories, including the story of the colour-blind painter. And this was the start of a correspondence with Crick. I'd never... I'd had a, sort of scientific... a more clinical correspondence with Luria, but this was now a much more scientific correspondence with Crick, and I was started to be drawn into neuroscience. I think the Hat book was... was almost exclusively descriptive, whereas now I had to think, what is going on in the brain, and where, with this loss of colour, and can anything be done about it?

Crick had a young protégé, a neuroscientist called Ralph Siegel, and some months after meeting Crick, I met Ralph Siegel, or perhaps that's too blunt a way of putting it. I, in fact, had been at a concert in Carnegie Hall. I had a notebook with me and I was actually writing in my notebook all through the concert. A few rows behind me, unknown to me, there was Ralph Siegel, and he saw this strange man who wrote in a notebook non-stop all through the concert, and then he realised that he'd seen the man at a visit to the Salk, and Ralph came down and introduced himself. And this was the beginning of a scientific and personal relationship, which was very important, I think, for both of us, and very productive, and alas, ended quite recently when tragically Ralph got a... a brain tumour and died. Ralph was... had heard Crick talking about the colour-blind painter and... and when I said, 'Would you like to meet the man?' he said, 'Yes, very much, if this would be okay with the patient.'

There was also a very good ophthalmologist friend of mine, Bob Wasserman, and we were to form a sort of coalition, a working trio, a collaboration where... I'm sorry, that's the word, a collaboration. We formed a collaboration with several patients over the years, over 20 years, all of whom had various visual problems. The colour-blind painter was one, another was a man who had been virtually blind from birth and who had then been given vision, or some vision, by removal of a cataract, and who was enabled to see but had no idea what he was seeing. He could make no sense of the world visually. All of us in infancy are making sense of the world by correlating visual impressions with... with touch and smell and hearing and later language, but that essential business of constructing an intelligible visual world had not existed for this man, and he was really disabled by being made to see. He had been very comfortable as a blind man, he got around well, he had his own interests in his own life, and whereas now he had to deal with a world which was visually unintelligible. Really an extraordinary business, and here again Ralph and Bob came down to Atlanta where this patient lived, and... and we made a study of him.

The colour-blind painter – his name was Isaacson – tried to paint in colour. He said, 'I know colour'. There’s a thing called the Pantone colour chart. He could say what colour green, that were 312 on the chart, say a particular chair was in a Van Gogh painting. He thought he could paint by numbers, and he used different tubes of coloured paint or powder or whatever. His artist friends came in and could make no sense of the painting. They really saw a random application of colour. I was interested to take a black-and-white photograph of these chaotic... apparently chaotic canvases, and this showed the form of flowers in black-and-white, so he was portraying the form but getting the colours all wrong. And then he threw out the colours and thought he would only paint in black-and-white, and one special sort of painting he did in black-and-white, he wanted to illustrate what his leaden world was like. And in his studio he... he partitioned off a small room and put in it a table laid for dinner, with food on it, and the walls, the table and everything he did as... in leaden colours. And I retrieved from this, this one artefact which is fruit as he saw it.

I’d been interested in vision and how we see things, I think since... since boyhood, and this had been stimulated by doing colour photography and stereo photography and time-lapse photography, and by having visual migraines, where over a few minutes, all sort of visual changes could occur, including loss of colour. And so, I... I had a little sense from my own experience of how it must have been for Isaacson. It’s interesting to lose colour totally for 15 minutes and know you’re going to get it back. It’s no fun if you think it’s going to be permanent.
Although interestingly, with Isaacson, three or four years later a suggestion was made, an intriguing suggestion, that it might be possible to re-programme another part of his brain to perceive and construct colour. This was a far out suggestion, but I mentioned it to Isaacson because I wondered how he would respond, whether he would say, whoopee, you know, do it. His response astounded me. He said that, 'If you had come up with this, you know, when I first saw you, I would have said, hallelujah, because I hungered and panted for colour and my world was deficient and abnormal and horrible'. He said, 'But now my world has been reconstructed, and what I see seems to be delicate and refined, and I think I have a heightened sense of boundary and contrast and movement and depth'. In fact, Isaacson had had an exhibit, at which his black-and-white paintings – because he couldn’t do any more colour paintings – his black-and-white paintings had been exhibited and many people have said, the old man has got into a remarkable black-and-white phase. And no one knew that this phase was in fact a very creative adaptation to a neurological or perceptual disaster.
Anyhow, when we made the suggestion to Isaacson that he might... might be possible to give him colour back, he said he didn’t want it. He said, now his world was complete, and he liked it very much, and if colour were to come back, it would be an intrusion. Later, I asked some people who had been congenitally colour-blind, and this was another visual adventure I went on. I went with Bob Wasserman, and we visited a small island, a coral atoll in Micronesia where a seventh of the population was born without any colour receptors in the eyes, without any cones, and they were congenitally [colour] blind. This had been going on for several generations and there was an entire achromatopic culture or subculture there. And Bob Wasserman and I investigated this in detail, and we went with another colleague, a Norwegian colleague, Knut Nordby, who himself was a congenital achromatope, like his brother and sister. I often like to have... I was going to say, a sort of ambassador with me. I’m very conscious of the gulf which may occur between doctor and patient. And having my colleague, my learned colleague, with me, whom the islanders instantly recognised as achromatopic, they saw that he was wearing two pairs of sunglasses, and that he immediately made for the shadow, and so... it wasn’t just the poor colour-blind natives and the... the learned investigators, one of the investigators was himself totally colour-blind.
But anyhow, on one occasion I asked Knut, in fact, several times I asked him... because he was very interested in colour, and peoples’ reactions to colour, and the use of colour metaphors, and he was endlessly inquisitive as to what a colour world was like, what it was like for the rest of us. And I said, 'Well, would you like, if... if you could be given colour, would you like it?' And... and he said, 'No'. He said he had... his brain had constructed a complete world as it was, and colour would be unintelligible and intrusive and anarchic. And when I had asked him the same question for the nth time, he said to me, 'Would you like X-ray vision?' And I thought, and I said, 'No, I’m... I'm fine as I... I wouldn’t like it, I’m fine as I am', and he said, 'So am I'. And that was the end of that conversation. But this colour-blind painter, and meeting Ralph Siegel, and meeting Crick and having a collaboration with Siegel and Wasserman, this went on for 20 years and we saw many people together, the most recent of them whom I wrote about being a woman who... who was born with cross eyes and... and had no stereo vision – but perhaps I’ll come back to her.

Ralph was a blend of... of experimental physiologist and theoretical and computational neuroscientist. In particular, he worked with monkeys, and these monkeys had electrodes implanted in their brain, and... and he could observe in great detail how they responded to colour and to other visual stimuli. When he realised how ill he was, he changed from writing scientific papers, which were highly esteemed; he wanted to write some more personal essays. And these will be published posthumously under the title of Another Day in the Monkey’s Brain. I... we so hoped we could get a copy to Ralph while he was still able to appreciate it, but alas, the... the brain tumour moved too fast. But Ralph would immediately pull me into a physiological discussion: what part of the brain is involved, what is going on, can we simulate this on a computer. Yes, another piece of work I did with Ralph had relation to Migraine. He was fascinated when I told him about the complex patterns one could see in migraine, not just the zigzag, but hexagons and geometrical patterns of many, many shapes, including fractal patterns. And Ralph was able to simulate these, some of these, on... on a nerve net in a computer. And this really enabled me to... to add a significant part, which I co-authored with him, to my... to my Migraine book.

I had been pretty isolated until 1986, partly perhaps because I... I wanted to be. I think I partly left England feeling that... that I was perhaps eccentric or would not fit well into the rigid... into the sort of rigid medical hierarchies in England, anymore than I would fit into the military. This was one of my reasons for leaving England. And after my training was complete in neurology in California, I... I wanted to move into a, sort of, hiding place. I... well, that’s not a good way to put it. I hoped there might be interstices in medicine which I could occupy, untroubled by… and also by... by collegial criticism or contact. This was very much my situation at Beth Abraham Hospital. This was a... a poor, unknown chronic disease hospital, beneath the notice of neurologists, but in Beth Abraham I found my Awakenings patients and treasures galore, and I could spend as long as I liked with a patient. But I... I saw a few patients outside, the first one was Witty Ticcy Ray, and there were a few others.
But then after 1986 I had much more contact with... with colleagues, and Ralph introduced me to various visual colleagues of his, and I got a sense of the neuroscientific community. I didn’t even know the word neuroscience in 1986, and obviously there had been a huge transformation since my physiology days at Oxford in the early '50s. At that time one knew almost nothing about the brain. Physiology stopped very much at the level of the spinal cord and the brain stem. People had no idea, for example, how perceptions were constructed, or the very sentence, ‘perceptions are constructs’, would have been meaningless… would not have conveyed anything in the 1950s. So, the whole… Ralph himself embodied a new neuroscientific reality and vision. As Crick did, of course, and he introduced me to many others, perhaps very especially a visual neuroscientist called Charles Gross, Charlie Gross, who was the first man to find cells in a monkey’s brain which could respond specifically to the [sight of a] monkey’s paw.
It had been demonstrated before by Hubel and Wiesel in the early 1960s, that the brain had receptors which might respond to the orientation of lines and to angles and to elementary geometrical things like this. But when Charlie Gross found, in 1969, that there might be cells specific for the recognition of hands, or of faces, well, it’s... it's very interesting. He himself was incredulous of his own findings, and embedded them almost invisibly, almost in parenthesis, in a paper. And people didn’t respond, or they didn’t see this, and more than 10 years went past before there was a huge explosion to do with the recognition of specific parts of the brain, and even specific cells or cell clusters which were crucial in the recognition of face cells and... and all sorts of specific perceptual features. There was another… so visual neuroscience occupied, and still occupies, a considerable part of my life. My last book was called The Mind’s Eye, my current book is about hallucinations, and predominantly visual hallucinations. But there were other interests as well.

I... I felt very honoured and very excited by meeting Crick and by the correspondence… I… this was really my first encounter with a major scientist of that calibre, but our correspondence and our sharing of interests were all in the visual realm, including that of visual consciousness. I met another figure, who was and remains crucial to me, and this was Gerald Edelman. Gerald Edelman is a neurobiologist, a great neurobiologist, who is in La Jolla. Edelman had got a Nobel Prize for his work in immunology, really showing how... how immunological identity was formed. There had been the notion that one might have a sort of rack of preformed antibodies, but Edelman showed that this was not the case, but that the immune system learned and... and responded appropriately. And after Edelman had achieved that, he then looked at the nervous system and wondered whether there was a similar selective action with populations of nerve cells, and whether personal identity could be built up in the same way as immunological identity.
One can… a book has recently been published in Holland, I think it’ll be published generally, it’s been a big hit, saying: my brain is me. Well, in a sense your heart and your liver and your lungs are you, but they are only immunologically specific, and if you do something to damp down reactions, then you can get a heart transplant or a liver transplant. You can’t have a brain transplant because a brain is someone else, although it’s conceivable that... that little bits of the brain might be transplanted one day. There had been an astonishing article in The New York Review of Books, by a man called Israel Rosenfield, about Edelman’s work. I’d never heard of Edelman, and when I read this article, I... I don’t know what… all the phrases, like, I was awestruck, I dropped dead, blew my mind… and... because clearly Edelman had a theory of... of the nervous system and of how one became an individual, unlike anything which had existed before. About six months later, I met Edelman, Israel was there, plus a friend from Italy. I couldn’t follow the conversation, because Edelman talked at great speed and without interruption – he is a monologist – and then when he left us and walked away, I saw that he was walking very rapidly, and looking at the ground and paying no attention to people around him, and this... this increased my awestruck feeling of total absorption and powers of concentration.
But for me, the real epiphany came in '88, when Edelman and I had been invited to a conference in the Vatican. It was a very strange conference because it was about brain and mind, and brain and spirit. It was opened by Edelman, it was concluded by the Pope, and I was somewhere a very small contributor in the middle. But after the conference finished, I had dinner with Edelman. We were in a restaurant with... with paper tablecloths, and Edelman talked, and how he talked and the tablecloth became covered with diagrams, and I could stop him, and asked him to go back over things. And as I walked back from the restaurant I... I sort of, thanked God that I had lived to this day. I thought it must have been similar for people in 1859, when the Origin of Species came out – a completely different, wonderful world picture. Edelman’s book was called Neural Darwinism, and... and I saw him as sort of, as... and he sees himself, as the Darwin of the... of the nervous system. Crick cracked a joke or so, and used to call neural Darwinism, neural Edelmanism, and Edelman would both smile and feel slightly prickly whenever he heard that.

Edelman thinks in terms of populations of cells and... and repertoires of cells, and of selective powers, and for the first… in the foetus at one point there is a huge, superabundance of nerve cells, and these are pruned to a considerable extent, even by birth. So already, selective processes have been going on before there has been any experience. And Edelman likes to say that in identical twins, the brains are not identical, the... the fine features of brains are quite different. But, given the brain one has at birth, then further shaping of the brain will be the result of experience. Experience will strengthen certain connections and perhaps other ones will be weakened. And one way and another one becomes a match for the world, and the world matches one, through this... through this sort of selection.
A simple example of this occurs in babies as they learn to reach. The details of reaching are not programmed, perhaps something about the general structure of reaching, but the baby has to experiment, and from the baby’s experiments, an optimal of... or idiosyncratic and unique and individual way or reaching is... is arrived at. So, reaching is ‘evolved’, it is not just programmed.

There had often been a notion that brain structure was fixed and would develop in a... in a certain way. The term, dedicated or pre-dedicated, was often used, that there would be dedicated modules for... for this and that, whereas Edelman showed very much how... how representations were made on... on the basis of experience. I’m sorry, there’s a thought which was… yes. Implicit in Edelman’s view of the brain is that we are individuals, that we have to do things in an individual way, that we must all forge an individual path, and that we are not automata with programmes. I have been increasingly distressed, I think, over the years, by various analogies for the nervous system. Originally these were telephone analogies, then there were computer analogies, and people would speak of the brain as... as hardware and various programmes in the brain as software, and I wanted to say, yes, but where is the person? I... I don’t think there was the beginnings of a biology of the person, of the individual, whether that’s the individual animal or the individual human being, before Edelman. And this... and this individuation in human beings, of course, extends to the highest level of consciousness, to seeing ourselves, seeing our own autobiographies and our… and where we’re going.

I tend to fluctuate a certain amount between the... the general and the specific. Now, in particular I found Edelman’s books rather difficult; I’m not the only person who finds them difficult. I found them difficult because they were so abstract. I wanted to say: give me an example! And in fact, my copies of his books are... are annotated with clinical examples. I tend to start from the clinical example. Edelman, by the way, has often said to me, very much as Crick said to me, 'Tell me stories…give me clinical data'. And there were these two great theoreticians in La Jolla, the great theorists of the nervous system, and they were both starved for evidence. They needed data from the laboratory, but they needed clinical data from people like me.

I developed an unexpected interest in 1986 when I was sent a book to review. It was a book called, When the Mind Hears, by Harlan Lane, and it was… and it portrayed the amazing history of deaf people and sign languages. I was upset when I saw how interesting and extraordinary this was, because I had... I still wanted at that time to write about Tourette’s syndrome, and I realised this was going to be shouldered and pushed aside by sign language and deaf people. But I was very excited by the book, and it precipitated a personal adventure for me; it and another book about how there had been a massive population... quarter of a population in Martha’s Vineyard, or part of Martha’s Vineyard, had been born deaf. And the title of this other book, which I read at the same time, was, Everybody Spoke Sign Language.
In Martha’s Vineyard in 1850, for example, a quarter of the population was deaf, but all the population signed, hearing and deaf, and given this, there was… the deaf were no longer singled out, they were just seen as farmers, scholars, uncles, husbands, teachers, like anybody else. I... I found this astounding, and I got into the car – had I had a motorbike I would have gone on the motorbike – I got into the car and I went to Martha’s Vineyard, and the... there’re no longer any deaf people there, but some of the oldest people in 1986 had still been native signers, and might themselves fall into signing when they were together. And this was astounding, seeing hearing, talking, people who in fact were signing to each other by preference. But these two books launched an adventure for me, which took me to the Gallaudet – the university of the deaf, many schools for the deaf, and it led to my meeting Ursula Bellugi who has been the great linguist of sign language, along with a man, now deceased, called William Stokoe, who was the first to realise, around 1960, that in fact the deaf were not gesturing or... or using pidgin English, but there was a… but Stokoe realised there was a genuine language with its own syntax and vocabulary.

So, for me, well, this... I was introduced to a... a culture within our culture. I’d never really thought much about cultural things, but deaf people have a vivid sense of their own history. There is a sort of oral, or if you want, manual culture, in which deaf poets and storytellers would sign their stories or poems. There was a… there have been theatres for the deaf, and when I went to Gallaudet I... I talked about the hearing-impaired, and one of the students there said, 'Why don’t you look at yourself as Sign-impaired?' And it was a very interesting turning of the tables, because there were a thousand students all conversing in Sign, and I was the inarticulate one who could understand nothing and communicate nothing, at least in Sign. I later learnt a little Sign, but I was no good at it, I am no good at languages, unlike an older brother of mine in Australia who was a genius with languages and had 30 of them. But I... I was never much good.
But, it was astonishing to meet people who viewed life in a... in a different way, as later it was astonishing on this little coral atoll on Micronesia, to find a subculture of... of these colour-blind people who… I remember when I first went there, I was at one point…had seven colour-blind people with me, and they indicated that, really, I was the defective one. They said, 'You shouldn’t think of us as colour-blind'. They said, 'Colour is probably of no interest anyhow. Think of yourself as being insufficiently sensitive to texture and surface and boundary and line and depth and movement'. When I first communicated with a... a woman with congenital colour blindness in San Francisco, I said I’d like to meet her. She said, 'I won’t see you if you regard me as a patient, you will have to acknowledge that my vision is different, but not inferior to yours'. And so, similarly, deaf with a capital D means... ethnically different, linguistically different. Deaf people are very insistent, often, on using a capital D; deaf with a small d means medically deaf. So, for me, again, this was an acute expansion of interests so that language and culture from a very different angle became especially interesting to me.

Meeting deaf people and encountering sign language didn’t just make me think about language and culture, although this was an entirely new thing for me, it made me wonder what is going on in the brain? Is the brain of someone who is born deaf, who has no auditory input, well, what’s going on? Do they have auditory parts of the brain, have the auditory parts atrophied and... and shrunk, or are the auditory... or what would be the auditory parts, being utilised for something else? This was a subject which had been very much investigated by a neuroscientist called Helen Neville, who worked with Ursula Bellugi at one point and then moved to Oregon. And Helen Neville showed very clearly that the… what would be auditory areas in a hearing person had been reallocated – this was a term she used – had been reallocated for vision, and that deaf people were in a sense hyper-visual, in particular they had much greater acuity for analysing what went on in the peripheral visual field. And with signing, you look at someone’s face, but the actual signs are peripheral. This is one of the things which makes it difficult for people like myself who... who are not born deaf, to learn it, because our vision is not good enough. At one time deaf people were denied driving licenses. In fact, they’re the safest drivers on the road because they are much more conscious of things happening in the periphery than... than any hearing driver.
The… now, this again, is a somewhat Edelmanian thing. The old notion was that on a genetic and molecular basis you had visual cortex and auditory cortex and tactile cortex, and that was that. But now, it was clear that experience could alter this, and the cortex would take on – would not shrink but would take on – whatever functions experience needed. And given a world of extreme visual attention, hyper attention such as congenitally deaf people have, then, you know, then other parts of the brain are... are converted to visuality, and so this is about the plasticity of the brain, and how uncommitted certain things are, and the way in which they assume function based on experience. And in fact, the first time I mentioned Edelman in a book was in my 1988 book, Seeing Voices, and in precisely this... this context of a different brain because of a different experience. And here, the... the difference is so sharp and the experiences are so sharply different.

Prior to Kate’s arrival on the scene in '84, I did everything myself. Migraine and Awakenings and the greater part of the Leg book had been written when Kate came on the scene, and at first Kate worked part-time with me, and then full-time. Now, what does she do? Well I want to say what didn’t she do; she became a real collaborator. When I visited the deaf, we did sign immersion courses together, and... so Kate was one of the people I dedicated Seeing Voices to. I... I can’t quite imagine how I would go on without Kate, and… but then I don’t have to imagine it. I... no doubt she will outlive me and… but it’s a... it's been a very curious and intimate sort of relationship in which friendship, editing and collaboration have... have all blended together. Kate was very close to Ralph and Kate knows all the people I know, and she’s also... she's also able to recognise people, which I can’t do, because I have congenital face blindness and I’m absentminded and now I can’t hear either, I’m really rather helpless in social situations, and sort of, Kate will... will guide me through them. But it’s been a... a very good, fertile relationship and it’s… and I think it gets stronger all the while, and I think I’m going to dedicate the present book to her.

Going back to the 1960s, when I came to New York I was dangerously drug-addicted. Perhaps addiction isn’t... isn't the right word, but I would take huge doses of amphetamine every... every weekend, and these were potentially fatal doses. I sort of specialised in overdoses. On the last day of the year in 1965, I looked at my... my then emaciated face in the mirror; I’d lost something like 60 or 70 pounds in three months. Amphetamine diminishes the appetite and you lose interest in eating. I... I had a sudden sober moment on New Year’s Eve in '65; I looked at myself in the mirror and I said, 'Oliver, you will not see another New Year’s Day unless you get help. There has to be some intervention'. And then I took myself along to a... a psychiatrist, a psychoanalyst, whom I… under whose piercing but benign scrutiny… no, I don’t like that.
[Q] How did you find him, by the way?
I… when I was in Los Angeles, I… a friend of the family, Augusta Bonnard, who was herself a psychoanalyst, had suggested that I go and see someone. There is quite a story attached to that, but I won’t... I won't say it here, and I went reluctantly to see a psychoanalyst there. The psychoanalyst said, 'Well, what brings you here, Dr Sacks?' I said, 'Ask Dr Bonnard, she referred me', and I... I wasn’t too helpful. I was also stoned all the while, and... and if one is on amphetamine, you may be very quick and facile and you can form associations and things seem to proceed with miraculous rapidity, but it... it all blows away, it leaves… there’s no depth, there's no imprint. Things were utterly different at the beginning of '66 when I sought out an analyst for myself, knowing I was in deep trouble. His name had been given to me by his predecessor in Los Angeles.
Now, I have been seeing Dr Shengold for, well, more than 46 years. I saw him this morning. Perhaps I should say that I am speaking in 2011, and that I first saw him in January of 1966. No doubt this is one of the longest analyses on record – or at least, I like to think so, and I think also we’re beginning to get somewhere now. But Shengold and I have grown old together and have gone through life’s stages together. I still think of him as Dr Shengold, I would never… I don’t even think of his first name, and I am always Dr Sacks to him. The proprieties are always there, but it is because the proprieties are there, that there can be such freedom of communication. And this is something I feel with... with my own patients. They can tell me things, I can ask things, which would not happen in ordinary social intercourse. It’s because I am the physician and they are the patient. And... and I think, above all, Shengold has taught me attention, listening, and... and what is sometimes called listening with the third ear, listening what is behind the babble, what... what goes on. I think good doctors have to be almost... almost telepathic, or certainly highly empathic, and... and need sometimes to guess what... what their patients cannot say or may not know consciously.

In 1974, the year Awakenings was published in the States, I was approached by Bob Silvers, who was one of the editors and founders of The New York Review of Books. I’d heard many tales of him, not least from Jonathan Miller and from Susan Sontag, and many others, and I felt thrilled when he approached me to write something. I wrote... I’m sorry, I believe I have a date for him, I think it must have been 1976, because what I wrote was about two patients with Tourette’s syndrome, Witty Ticcy Ray, which I had not written at the time, and another patient... oh, who had an extremely complex, extraordinary form of Tourette’s. The other patient was uncomfortable with my publishing anything about him, and so I withdrew the article, which was already in proof, and I... I think this may have upset Bob a bit, and it upset me, but things happen. I then did not have any contact with Bob for, I guess seven years, but in 1983 I had a birthday party. It was my 50th birthday; I hadn’t had a birthday party since I was 21. I didn’t even acknowledge birthdays. But I... I lived then on City Island in the Bronx, and I had a birthday party.
We put up a big marquee in the garden, all sorts of people came, and timidly I invited Bob Silvers, and to my amazement, he came. And this really was the launching… after an abortive start in '76, this was the launching of a relationship, both personal and professional, which has certainly been very, very important for me.

I realised I couldn’t write about the other patient with Tourette’s, but in 1980 I did write about Witty Ticcy Ray. The form of writing, or the way in which it happened was interesting, because this originally took the form of a letter to a colleague. And this letter to a colleague then became the piece, but for me, the idea of a letter, the idea of epistolary form is very central, and I would regard an article or a book as a letter for anybody who is... who's interested. The London Review of Books published Witty Ticcy Ray in 1981, and they also published some other pieces, they published the original version of The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat, and some other pieces of mine.

In 1984 I went to a writing centre, or... or an... an artist’s colony in Blue Mountain in the Adirondacks, the Blue Mountain Center. It was a new experience for me, I’d never been… found myself among writers before, and I didn’t really regard myself as a writer. In some ways I still don’t, I am simply a doctor who does a little... a little writing on the side. Disingenuous... I can feel it, the disingenuous smile on my face, but I do feel I am a physician first and a writer afterwards. I went to this art colony for a month. I found myself completely without any thought of writing and blocked for 15 days. On day 16, I happened to pull out a book, which was the memoirs of Luis Buñuel, the film director. And there was a phrase in it in which he expressed his fear of losing his memory, as he said his mother had done catastrophically when she became old. This phrase about losing memory suddenly activated all my memories of a patient, an amnesiac patient I had started seeing eight years before that. And so I wrote nothing for 15 days, on the 16th day I wrote The Lost Mariner, about this patient, and then I immediately became blocked again from 17 to 30, and so I don’t know whether this was a successful visit or not. It was an odd one, and... and all the other people who had been writing and typing industriously looked askance at me at this strange creature who does nothing for 15 days, then writes a masterpiece, then gets blocked again for 15 days. But anyhow, I... I liked this piece very much, I think partly because I had been working with this patient so long, and I... I liked him as a human being.
And I offered the piece to Bob Silvers at The New York Review of Books, and he liked it, although he made an interesting comment. He said, 'Can I see your notes on the patient?' and I said, 'Sure'. And he looked through my notes, the notes which I had made immediately at the time, he said, 'Many of these are more vivid and immediate than your writing, insert some of your notes, weave things together so we both have the immediate response to the patient, and the more reflective one as you look back over the years'.

So Bob Silvers published The Lost Mariner, as it was called, in... in '84, and among others this elicited a letter from Norman Geschwind , who was the most prominent neurologist and the most original and creative neurologist, probably, in America.  It was a wonderful letter and I wrote... I was very excited at hearing from him, I thought, here’s another Luria-like figure coming into my life.  And I wrote back, but there was no reply because Geschwind had had a... had had a stroke, a catastrophic... stroke and died.  He was quite young and this was a great tragedy, a personal loss to everyone who knew him and to all his students.
His students revered him and my closest friend now in neurology, Orrin Devinsky, is himself, to some extent, a Norman Geschwind-like figure, but he has done everything he can to find lecture notes and everything and to bring Geschwindiana of all sort to the... to neurologists.
[Q] Was he a student of Geschwind?
Oh, yes... yes, Orrin was indeed a student of Geschwind. And... the... in his autobiography Luria speaks about the Vygotsky... Lev Vygotsky who was...well, Vygotsky has sometimes been called the Mozart of psychology, and the... Luria said that meeting a genius like Vygotsky shaped his life; and, I think, Orrin would say the same or Geschwind.  I wish I had met a genius of that sort when I was young and impressionable, but, at least, I’m very glad that I... at least in letters that I met Luria when I was 40, and then Edelman when I was 54, because I think I’m still impressionable.

Bob Silvers was my editor after The Lost Mariner, and I took to him The Case of the Colour-Blind Painter, and I said to Bob, 'You know, one can’t really talk about this patient without having some reproductions in colour'. For example, showing the artwork he’d tried to do in colour, which is just a hopeless, chromatic chaos, unless you have a black-and-white reproduction of it.  And I also wanted to show the photograph of... this dish with a real orange on it to illustrate the difference.  Bob said, 'We’ve never done anything in colour before' and I said, 'There’s always a first time!' and so this was it. And, in fact... this dish with an orange and some of Isaacson’s pictures with colour, and otherwise, were published and this was the first time The New York Review of Books used colour.
Of course, poor Isaacson couldn’t see it, but he felt glad that... that it was his story which had introduced colour to The New York Review of Books.

It was Bob Silvers who sent me this book, When the Mind Hears, about the history of deaf people.  I did, in fact, write a sort of essay, review, narrative... what would have been a review of the book became a narrative and included my visit to... to Martha’s Vineyard and to other places, and this was published by Bob.
And then in 1988, the following year, he phoned me and he said, 'You know that Gallaudet has blown up'. I said, 'No, I...' at that time I never listened to the news, I never looked at the papers, I didn’t know what was happening.  Bob said, yes, there had been a revolt of the deaf students and they did not accept a hearing... they would not accept a new hearing president for the university, they wanted a deaf president. And they were carrying along placards saying, ‘Deaf Pres Now’.  Would I go down as a sort of journalist and cover the revolt? This was a completely new sort of thing for me, but I did indeed go down accompanied by a photographer friend and a colleague at Gallaudet, a hearing man who was a very fluent linguist... a hearing man who was a very fluent signer and a professor of linguistics there.
My role as observer got compromised when the deaf students were marching on the capital, and I was... I was walking by the side and making notes.  And one of the deaf people grabbed me by the arm and essentially said, 'Come on, you’re with us'.  And the... I’m not a... any sort of activist, I’m not a political preacher, but I was rather glad when the photograph in the paperback of Seeing Voices showed me with the marching students.
This is only... I’ve only marched with people twice, I’ll mention the other march, or, perhaps I should mention it now. It was, in fact, in that same year, in 1988, when there was a meeting of the Tourette society, which had grown enormous since the... its early meeting which I’d  gone to 1974. And there was a meeting in Cincinnati and the Governor of Ohio had declared, you know – these crazy things happen in America – the Governor had declared it Tourette Awareness Week.  Well, one of the Touretters had gone into... Kate, I’ve forgotten the name of the...
[Q] Wendy’s.
Yes.  One of the Touretters had gone into Wendy’s, which is a restaurant with cheap food, a fast food restaurant with branches everywhere, and he had made noises and ticced and shouted and may have had an obscenity or two, and they came up to him and said, 'You have to leave'.  And he said, 'I can’t help it, I have Tourette’s syndrome, and this is Tourette’s Syndrome Week, you... you must understand'.  And they said, 'We don’t give a fuck, get out'.  So he came back to us, and told us the story and then I aligned myself, the Touretters marched on Wendy’s, 200-strong, and I was again in their midst.  So these have been the only times in my life I’ve marched. I’ve marched with the deaf and I’ve marched with the Touretters, both... both in '88.

Well, I covered this article for Bob, and then I had two articles, and I thought, perhaps they might make a little book.  I imagined a sort of... a little bridge or isthmus or whatever. But, in fact, the middle part of the book... hugely expanded, became the real part of the book and the intellectual part of the book, but it was a strange way for a book to come together.
Over the years Bob’s published many, many other articles, including an article I wrote about remembering Crick.

I also published quite a lot in The New Yorker, and I love my editors there.  But there’s always been the most perfect amity and goodwill between The New Yorker and The New York Review of Books, and between Bob Silvers and the editors at The New Yorker. So this makes me very happy because sometimes editors are not entirely happy for one to go elsewhere.
I’m not a New Yorker writer, I’m not a staff writer, although I was once invited to be, but I like the feeling that I can write for anybody. And... and I do, and sometimes it’s a blog; I’ve done a couple of pieces of electronic writing.

A piece came to me, and was almost forced on me urgently just before Christmas last year.  I knew a conductor, a 95-year-old conductor who was called the oldest conductor at Carnegie Hall.  And he had worked also with the St Cecilia Chorus for 60 years, and he’d written a wonderful book about music, and he was just a marvellous old man who seemed so youthful and resilient and spritely.
When there was going to be a Messiah, some of the heavy singers would, you know, who were 60, some of them, would plod in with the heaviness of 60, and David, at 95, would leap onto the podium and... like a boy of 20, and in a beautiful mellow baritone voice he would always talk to the audience first about... say about the Messiah and how Handel had... how some of the most devout seeming and solemn songs, in fact, had been taken by Handel from bawdy Italian songs at the time.
David had a strong feeling there’s no such thing as religious music or military music, there’s music which can be used in the context of religion or falling in love or... or whatever.  And, in particular, David’s... he would do a Christmas oratorio, but he would also do the Messiah every Christmas.  And, now, for the first time in 60 years there was not a Randolph Messiah because he had died earlier this... that year, rather suddenly. And I wanted to write a piece about him, and to start the piece by saying, something is missing, you know, what we’ve had in New York for 60 years, every Christmas, has gone. And there was no time to... you know, I wrote the piece on December 20th and it had to be published by Christmas, it had to be published electronically, and I was very glad when I could send it to the Paris Review electronically.

In general, I am rather old-fashioned and do my writing with a fountain pen, or with two-finger typing on an old IBM Selectric typewriter. But I’m mellowing a little bit now to... to electronic writing and, clearly, for better or worse this is... this is going to be much of the writing of the future, already I think a fifth of book publishing has become electronic.

My... my editor at the The New Yorker has been John Bennet, who is just a marvellous editor and whenever I am chaotic or muddled he can see his way through things so... so well. And once one has been edited by him one doesn’t need any more editing, so some of the pieces which have been in The New Yorker, and equally in The New York Review of Books, have gone straight into... into collections. 

Bob Silvers, I should say, is the most scrupulous editor I’ve ever know, and when I wrote my piece on the revolution of the deaf, and then immediately afterwards took off for Australia, I was pursued by faxes and phone calls. He would phone me to... to ask how I felt about replacing a comma by a semicolon. It’s wonderful that 45 years later Bob is still at the helm, and talk about youthfulness at 80, Bob has no diminution in his energy, he looks 20 years younger, and he... he’s a marvellous man.
And there was a quiz recently in The New York Times, and they said, who is your favourite New Yorker?  So I wrote Bob Silvers.

In 1973, when Awakenings was published in England and selected as... as a book of the year by five people in The Observer, Jonathan said to me, 'You’re famous now'. But I got no impression of that, or whatever that means. Awakenings didn’t do particularly well here, and... and although I think it was gradually getting momentum, especially among medical students who would sort of, I think, sometimes have copies in brown paper, you know, like pornography, they would read it secretly because it was still disapproved of by the... by the high-ups in the profession.
My Leg book did not do particularly well, and it was not expected that The Man Who Mistook His Wife For a Hat would do well. My publishers, my... who were then Summit Books, and Jim Silberman was the publisher and editor, and he, too, has been a very important influence in my life. He can spot the heart of a piece quicker than anyone else – he’s... he always gets a bull's eye – but Summit had a small printing of 10,000 books, or whatever. And then, suddenly, and almost before any reviews appeared the book was on the bestseller list of The Times, and Summit had to do another printing, and then another and another and another and another. And the book soared, and this was my first experience of having a... a best-seller and becoming known.  And so that, perhaps, was fame in... in a more tangible sense.
One aspect of this, and this has continued and, in fact, increased continually over the years, I got hundreds of letters from people... I got dozens of letters from people who asked about Jimmy, the Lost Mariner. They said, 'How is he, you know, how’s he doing? Give my best to him'.  And it was extraordinary how, you know, how people... so Jimmy was felt as a human being and... and I did give some of their regards to him, though, of course, because he was amnesic he... he forgot it straight away, although, perhaps he got some good affect from this, I think he probably did. So there were many, many letters and then many invitations.

I was interviewed by The Wall Street Journal, and... and I was quoted as saying, 'It’s impossible to publish a case history now, medicine is all statistical', or something like this. I then got a letter from the Editor of JAMA, The Journal of the American Medical Association, saying that he had read this in The Wall Street Journal and it was not the case, and to show that it was not the case he invited me to submit a case history. So I said, 'Fine', and I submitted to him the case of the colour-blind painter. When it arrived they said, 'Of course, this will need peer review'. I was a bit taken aback because this hadn’t been mentioned to me before, they said, 'Can you suggest any reviewers?' And I mentioned Richard Gregory as one reviewer and another reviewer. I said of both of them, these are people of very broad visual interests and... and spacious mind and generous temperament, and they carry a lot of intellectual weight.
I said, on the other hand, do not send it to Doctor X, who will feel that I’m trespassing on his territory and will throw a conniption if he gets this, he’ll boil me alive. Well, I then got sent... I then got sent an annihilating comment, or series of comments and I phoned up the editor, oh, it was one of the sub-editors, and I said, 'I cannot imagine that Richard Gregory, even if he was psychotic or delirious would write such a hateful thing, and could be so mean-spirited'. I said, 'I trust it was not Doctor X', and she didn’t answer, and then I said, 'Okay, I understand'. And she got very upset and she said, 'Look, we’re not supposed to... to disclose the names of reviewers', so I said, 'Don’t worry, you haven’t disclosed anything'. But I will say that this is all passed now, and Doctor X and I are good friends, but I found that disconcerting.
And... on the whole I... but I do continue to submit occasional things to... to medical journals or scientific journals. I had a letter with Ralph Siegel in Science, and I was very pleased when Brain, the very prestigious journal which goes back to 1870 or the 1880s published an article of mine, an article which was not peer-reviewed and which was not attacked and which was in my own style, in fact, it was really the... the primordium of Musicophilia. 

I had become very close to Stephen Jay Gould, I will... I’ll come back to this. Stephen Jay Gould had a monthly column in the magazine Natural History which he had maintained, I think, for 25 years. He had written 300 articles, whether he felt well or ill, and there were times when he was almost fatally ill, he would have an article every month without fail in Natural History.  But he died early in 2002, and I was asked to fill in for him, and write an article about astrobiology, so called... life on other planets, possibilities, what might it be like. It was an assignment I enjoyed because I have a taste for science fiction and I thought of all the Wellsian novels and the War of the Worlds and The First Men in the Moon, and so forth.
And... but there was a new editor, not Steve’s editor. Steve’s pieces had never been messed around with by an editor, they really went straight through. Whereas, this new editor was very pernickety, and... and also, very reluctant to send me a proof. He said, 'We don’t use proofs'. I said, 'But, you know, how can we work together if I don’t have a proof?' I was then sent a proof and we agreed, or I thought we had agreed on what was there, what was to be said, but when the article came out it had some sentences, whole sentences which made me cringe because I hadn’t said them, I would never put them in this way, and they’d been stuck in by the editor. I... I was considerably upset at this.
I think, now, this particular editor has matured and mellowed and is probably very good. It was an unfortunate coincidence that I got him at what he felt was... was a very vulnerable time, and had probably... was submitting a highly idiosyncratic article in place of... in place of the Stephen Jay Gould articles which had appeared in the previous 300 issues. So, perhaps, the circumstances were special, but I thought it dishonest to change my words or put in his own words after we had agreed. But... so there are editors and editors.

In... in 1990, around Christmas time, when I was in England, one of the papers, one of the big Sundays, approached me as they approached others, to say, 'What has been your favourite book this year?' And I said that it was a book... I wrote that it was a book called Wonderful Life by Stephen Jay Gould, and I talked about the book. I’d never met Stephen at that time, although I read whenever I could his monthly articles in Natural History, and I’d also read his... his great serious monograph on Ontogeny and Phylogeny in '77. And I particularly liked Wonderful Life, which was as lyrical as it was encyclopaedic, and... and it gave one a tremendous feeling for the... for the sheer luck – or bad luck – which could befall animals or plants, and the huge role of chance.
One of the things Stephen said in the book was if we could re-run evolution it would be completely different, and it was only a particular combination of contingencies which have produced us. (This was a thought very much in my mind when I wrote the... as it were, the posthumous article for him on astrobiology, what form might evolution have taken in other circumstances and other planets given different physical parameters.)
Stephen wrote me a lovely letter, he said he’d seen this and he thanked me and he hoped we could meet. There was some exchanging of letters but we didn’t meet until a television journalist in Holland approached six people, Freeman Dyson was one of them, Stephen Jay Gould was another, there were two philosophers and there was Rupert Sheldrake.  And we were all separately interviewed and then we were put... we were to be brought together in Amsterdam, put in separate hotels, none of us had met the other, with a notion there would be some wonderful and possibly violent confrontation as... as six brilliant but very different minds all... all jammed together.
In the interview which was done with me I... they said, 'Do you know Stephen Jay Gould?' and I said, 'No, I’ve... I've never met him, although we’ve corresponded', I said, 'I think of him as a brother'. And now I’m going to say something which... which may have to be omitted. They mentioned the other figures whom I’d also not met, but admired, and they said, 'And what about Rupert Sheldrake?' and I said, 'Who’s he?' Later, after we’d all met, I... I wrote a letter, a very nice letter and sent a book to Rupert Sheldrake, I never got an answer, and I think he must have seen this awful and indiscrete piece of television.
But, anyhow, we were all brought together in Amsterdam in a programme which was called A Glorious Adventure [sic], and which conflated the individual interviews with the meeting. So it was there that I met Stephen Jay Gould, and there that I met Freeman Dyson, both of whom became friends and played an important part in my life.

Stephen taught at Harvard but he lived here in the Village, and we were within walking distance – neighbours. In fact, Stephen loved walking and he had a huge architectural knowledge of New York and of old New York and of what was there 100 years ago. And the... there were so many different aspects to Stephen, he was extremely musical, he adored Gilbert and Sullivan, I think he knew all Gilbert and Sullivan by heart. On one occasion when we went out to a mutual friend on Long Island and Stephen basked in the jacuzzi for three hours keeping the water warm and singing... singing Gilbert and Sullivan. He also knew a huge number of war songs.
The... we got on well together, I admired him and I often wrote him letters, precipitate letters after articles of his. So... so this was not a forced thing. I bewailed the fact... I said, 'I wish I were a real scientist like you', and he wrote me back a marvellous letter and said, you know, you are, but you are a scientist of the individual, and this is not a scientist of populations and you are unique in your way, and don’t do yourself down. I never had too much intellectual self-confidence, but Stephen was a booster, and a very positive force.
I went up to Harvard sometimes and I heard him lecture, and he was an incredible lecturer, the place would be packed, there would be 300 people there. And... and he was very open to students visiting him.

Steven was... and... and Rhonda, his wife, were impulsively generous, and Steven... arranged a lot of birthday parties for me. He would always, himself, bake a birthday cake for me using his mother’s recipe, a recipe she gave me after he died, because... and he would always... he would invent... he... he himself, would always write a doggerel poem which he would recite, and he was very good at this, he could sort of... on one occasion he turned out a sort of... a version of Jabberwocky, which was... which was marvellous, and... and for me, and for my birthday.

On another occasion, knowing that I liked elements, he insisted that everyone come as an element. I’m rather bad at names and sometimes at faces, and, for example, there was a particular man whom I remember as argon, but I don’t remember his name, and I can’t remember his face. If people will identify with an element I never forget them. The... one close friend... yes, Helen, she... she was 40 and 40 is zirconium, and she had zircons all over her... zircons are beautiful jewels. The... so there was a... a lovely contact, both personal and professional. I think I was very lucky here because from what I’ve heard and what I’ve read not all contacts with Stephen were so genial.
But, I think, it was easier because I was not in his line, I was no competitor. And, similarly, I get on very well with botanists, and I get on well with chemists because they appreciate my interest in their subjects but, at the same time, I’m not competing in their subject. So Stephen loved that I loved zoology.

Stephen had a brush with death when he was 40 or so, he got a very rare malignant tumour called a mesothelioma, and this, almost certainly, because he had had contact with asbestos in the old buildings at Harvard. Ninety-nine per cent or more than 90% of people with mesothelioma don’t make it. Stephen was determined to make it and... and he felt he would be one of the lucky ones, and he was one of the lucky ones, aided by very heavy radiation and chemotherapy.  But he... he had a... he’d had a very strong personal experience of deep illness and facing death, and I think that when he came out at the other side, this... he’d always been energetic, I think that it energised him even more. There was not a minute to waste, who knew what might happen next?  I think, maybe, his heightened creative sense of contingency may have been partly inspired by the mesothelioma.

In January of 2002, Stephen wrote an interesting article about numbers, he brought out that he had written 300 articles for Natural History in 25 years, one article every month. That... exactly 100 years ago his great-grandfather or whatever, had arrived at Ellis Island and there were many numerical ratios and coincidences he brought up, it was a... a strange article. And, in retrospect, I... I can’t help wondering whether there was something ominous about it, or premonitory.

An article which... which, in retrospect, I couldn’t help thinking had something ominous or premonitory about it, although Stephen appeared in his usual health and spirits. But, shortly after this, at a routine medical examination he was found to have a cancer in the chest with metastases to the brain and the lungs – stage four cancer of a particularly malignant sort.  He was determined to complete what work he could. The two metastases in the brain were removed and he continued to do his classes at Harvard. At that time, you know, because he’d had brain surgery on both sides they left just a central ridge of hair, like a sort of... like an Indian chief. I believe that style of hair has a special name, and the only concession he made to illness was that he would sit instead of standing.

He had just managed also to complete his big book on The Structure of Evolutionary Thought [sic], huge book, 1,500 pages. His magnum opus after Ontogeny and Phylogeny, and he’d also referred to ‘the big book’ and that it had been exactly... yes, that’s right, exactly 25 years. Ontogeny and Phylogeny had come out in 1977, then he had spent 25 years, among other things, writing monthly articles, and now, on the 25th anniversary of his first big book, another even bigger book.

The only... there was an... some emotional breakdown at Steven’s final lecture. He wept and many of the students wept. He came back to New York, and almost instantly plunged into coma and died. It was as if he had kept himself going by sheer willpower, and then having completed his teaching, having seen the book out, he was ready to let things go and... he was only 60.
One also has the dark feeling, one can’t help wondering and people who’ve had double cancers like this, whether treatment for the first cancer, especially heavy radiation might have led to the second cancer. This question arose with Susan Sontag who survived an evil cancer 20 years earlier, and then developed another cancer. And it also happened with my good friend, Ralph Seigel, who first developed a lymphoma in the throat, had heavy radiation to it and then developed a brain tumour.
Whether this is just doubly bad luck, or... or whether treatment itself, of this intensity can prove mortal later, I don’t know. It’s an uncomfortable thought.

I always tended to identify more with my mother’s side of the family, and my mother and her side of the family, I think, were more interested in genealogy and pedigrees and where they came from than my father and his side of the family.
My mother would tell me about her father who’d been born in 1837. I found this almost incredible that he would have been almost 100 when I was born, but then I was the youngest, of almost the youngest of his 18 children. He had been born in Russia in 1837 and at the age of 16, to escape being... the word’s gone from me, it’s not imprinted...
[Q] Impressed.
Yes. And when he was 16, to avoid being impressed by the Cossacks, he managed to procure the identification and the passport of a dead man called Landau, and with this fled the country, went to Germany and there, married a 16-year-old bride. Marriage at 16 was apparently nothing unusual in those days, at least in Jewish families, maybe Catholic families and other families too. The... and it was in Germany that he had the first of his many, many children. He lost his first wife in 1871, I think, married again and then had 13 children. But the five children of the... five first children and the 13 later children were all close to one another.

When my mother died she didn’t have much in her wallet, but, strangely, she had a picture of her own mother as her mother must have been at the age of 16. Why my mother should have had this I don’t know; I think she was close to her own mother and she also knew her grandmother. My mother knew her own grandmother who had lived to a very advanced age.
On the maternal side... on the maternal side most of the ancestors there... one knows nothing about the ancestors behind the grandfather. But behind the two grandmothers there are multiple ancestors in Germany, and especially in a little village called Gunzenhausen.  And many of my forebears, her forebears, were rabbis in Gunzenhausen and took the name Gunzenhausen, and... and lie buried in the cemetery in Gunzenhausen.
When in 1965 I went to Munich to get a new BMW, a new motorbike, my first journey was a pilgrimage to Gunzenhausen, which is pretty close to Munich to see the graves of my ancestors.

On my father’s side... alas, I never knew any of my grandparents. I couldn’t have known my mother’s father, he would have... he was 96... he would have been 96 at my birth. I didn’t know her mother either. Nor did I know either of my father’s parents. His father was my namesake. In Yiddish his name was Elivelva, in Hebrew, Eliahu Zeev, and in English, Oliver Wolf. He was the original Oliver Wolf Sacks.
I have cousins and nephews and others in which Eliahu – Elijah – is turned into Elliott. My proper name, I suppose, should be Elijah Wolf Sacks, but I’m happy with Oliver, although I’m sad that the Wolf has fallen out because I... I like the animal sound and smell and stink of Wolf. And actually when I first came to America I thought I should have a change of identity, and for my first year I dropped ‘Oliver’ and only used ‘Wolf’. And, now, very occasionally, I get a letter or a postcard to Wolf Sacks and think: who’s that? And I realise this is someone who knew me then, 50 years ago.

My father’s father lived in a... a shtetl... a Jewish village called Joniškis in Lithuania. He must have married around 1875, or so. My parents were of the same age, and, I think this was probably so of their mothers, though not of their fathers. And my father was one of four children. I hesitate... I hesitated before I said four because one of the children was never mentioned. I think I’d already told his story, so I... I only knew three of the children.
They had left Lithuania in 1897 or 1898 when my father was three, so he had no memories of Lithuania. But his older... his elder sister, Lina, was 15 years his senior and she had many memories of Lithuania. Between them there was Alida who... who became close to my father in 1918 at the time when the great flu epidemic occurred and people were dropping dead in the street, adults... seemingly healthy young adults could die within three hours of getting the flu.
My father, as a newly-qualified general practitioner, was suddenly overwhelmed with work.  He engaged his sister, Alida, who was then bereaved, having lost her first husband in South Africa, he engaged her as his dispenser, and he engaged a young Scottish doctor who had also come from Lithuania as his assistant. Naturally, the assistant and the dispenser fell in love and they married. The assistant’s name was Eban, and his name, Eban, was given to the two earlier children of the... of the father who died. And one of these was Aubrey Eban... who had a dazzling academic career, he took a triple first at Cambridge, very unusual, a triple first, and he was also President of the Cambridge Union, which has the toughest... the Oxford and Cambridge Unions are probably the toughest debating societies in the world, and they are preparation for parliament or the diplomatic service or whatever.
There was a strong Zionist feeling in the air in the 1920s and '30s. Alida was herself a good linguist, and in 1917 she translated the Balfour Declaration which granted potential sovereignty and a land to the Jews. She translated this into French, Russian and other languages. And Aubrey, himself, became a major figure in the young Zionist movement.
I did not share the Zionist feeling, indeed I got very upset by it because our house was always being pre-empted for Zionist meetings, and they were very noisy and... and rude; people would come upstairs and barge into my bedroom looking for the lavatory. And such... and on such a trivial basis I became rather... well, not exactly anti-Zionist. I don’t like any ‘ism’ or any ‘ist’.

After leaving Cambridge, Aubrey went into the army, and being very fluent in Arabic, he was transferred to the Middle East. He... and then, of course, after the war he became strongly and passionately identified with. .. with Israel, he became the voice of Israel, he was first the Israeli Ambassador to the United Nations, and later he became Foreign Minister in Israel, and Deputy Prime Minister. And then dropped out of politics completely in, I think, probably in ’67. He... he deeply disapproved of the taking of the West Bank, he thought there would never be any peace or any reconciliation, and in this view he was utterly separated from the government, which wanted to hold onto the West Bank forever and... and Aubrey, basically having achieved, by his ability and eloquence, the... the highest positions, was dropped.
But he then, I think, enjoyed much of the rest of his life as a historian, although he missed the... the cut and parry of debate, or whatever it’s called. He spent a year at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, and I asked him how he was enjoying life there, and he said, 'I pine for the arena'. The arena. He... he was wonderful, he was a wonderful gladiator in the arena, he could... invariably courteous, however murderous, though... though I don’t think ‘murderous’ is the right word, but his eloquence could have caused his assassination. He... he was a very remarkable man and I’m glad that I got to know him in his later years when he would often come to New York and we... we became quite close.
 

So my grandfather’s sister, my great-aunt, came to America with her children, children who would then have been first cousins to my father. They in turn had children, and these children are first cousins once removed of mine, and I got to know one branch of them very well, the Kaplans, who became Capp – they changed their name. The eldest of them was Al Capp, the cartoonist. He had two younger brothers, one of whom was also a brilliant cartoonist.
Then there was Elliot, who was a playwright, and the youngest one was Madeline, a brilliant woman whom I loved and was really very close to, although her life was cut across by a stroke when she was about 50, which rendered her aphasic. But she was aphasic with such wit, and such brilliance, and such ingenuity, I... she gave aphasia a new meaning.

I saw quite a lot of Al, who was a... a strange figure in the 1960s, in the middle and late 1960s when I met him. All of the brothers had been communists or fellow travellers, that was the thing for an intellectual person to be in the 1930s, and then of course with the purges, and this and that, many people were disillusioned, but because Al had become famous and because he had a communist or fellow travelling past, HUAC – the House Committee for Anti-American Activities... have I got that right? – wanted... wanted him.
I... as far as I understand, one of his brothers took the heat. I don’t know the details, but however, Al did something which I think is sometimes called identification with the aggressor – he himself, from having been ardently liberal and strongly left, became ardently conservative and strongly right. And it was a reversal, although he could never quite become the darling of the right, because his... his sense of satire and mockery and wit were such that one never knew when he was being serious or not, and... and things he said could be very damaging if one... if the tone was misunderstood. So... so there was this extraordinary sort of position he was in.

When he was 10, Al had an accident and lost a leg. The... he never got a light natty prosthesis, he had a very massive wooden leg. It weighed about 40lbs and he liked to stomp with a wooden leg. He was sometimes aggressive; I could imagine him kicking people, dealing a mortal blow with that oaken... that oaken leg of his. It may be, I don’t know, one doesn’t know about compensation, was some of Al’s aggressiveness, some of his libido, some of his in-your-faceness, some of his out-thereness to do with being maimed, showing he was not a cripple but a sort of super-person.

I’ve just been reading a very interesting article in the quarterly Journal of Psychoanalysis by a very old retired psychoanalyst. I don’t know his exact age but he’s clearly in the mid 90s, if not the late 90s, but is... is wonderfully intelligent and eloquent, writing about extreme old age and... and how people face old age and the notion that they have a very limited time left. He is a man who has been a... a rationalist and a sceptic all his life, but he has been very shaken by the death of his wife of 70 years and... cannot help wondering if there is any sort of... of post-mortem existence or survival. He brings this up very, very delicately, and I think perhaps more importantly he talks about a ‘mystical’ view of life, which is one to some extent removed from time and temporality, and competition, and other people, and a feeling of... of oneness with the universe.
And now I am getting up there myself – although I think someone close to 100 can have a radically different view of life from someone close to 80 – now I’m getting up there myself, I... I think that, like him, I’m beginning to taste certain advantages of... of old age. I think one of them is that I can, to some extent, see life, or my life, as a whole and... and experiences and feelings are organising themselves, and there's... there is some sense of completion, whatever the completion of a life means, and the wholeness of life rather than the feeling that while there’s time I must still make use of the pleasures that remain, although of course that... that feeling is also there.
I... I don’t entirely dislike being old now. It’s not a feeling that I’ve had for that long, I don’t think I started to have it until I was 73 or 74, and then it was connected with getting a cancer in my eye, and... and the prospect of... of illness and death associated with that. In fact the cancer hasn’t acted up, but who knows?
I’ve also had all sorts of orthopaedic problems in the last two years. I’ve had operations on knee, hip and back, and I’m somewhat less mobile than I was, but... but I think the inner organs are sound. But I... I do begin to have a certain sense of serenity and leisure, which I don’t think I had before. I saw this very clearly in my father when he was in his 80s and... he said that he had a feeling of time and leisure in his 80s, which he didn’t have in his 60s or his 70s. He continued as a busy general practitioner, in fact, until his dying day when he was 94, but some... something easy and spacious and far-sighted and... and serene got into him. I think I can see that in a lovely photo I... I have of him, and it may be all nonsense about… I think it is all nonsense about the golden years and senior citizens, these odious, odious fraudulent American phrases, and... but there... there can be something real and positive about... about aging, and maybe I should write about this, I don’t know.
Most of my professional experience, alas, is of... is of aging gone wrong and Alzheimer’s and illness. Though having said that, working with the Little Sisters of the Poor, who... who came together in the 1840s in Brittany and then spread all over the world, opening homes for the elderly, I’ve been going to the Little Sisters as a neurologist for... for nearly 40 years and I see every sort of medical and neurological problem, but I also see some very old people who wish to live in community, who have outlived their.. .their friends and neighbours and may not have any family. I see a lot of healthy and serene old people in their 90s, often as... as distinct from ill and frantic old people in their 70s. The... a lot of people in their 90s don’t seem to fear death, at least this is so with, I think, the Catholics in the home. They... they say that they have had a full life and Lord when, you know, when the Lord wants to take them, that’s okay.

I’m robustly and even aggressively atheistic. I’ve been so all my life and increasingly so with age. I’m practically ready to... to draw swords with a creationist. I... I’m certainly appalled at the entry of religion into the public realm in America. I think religious extremism everywhere is the most dangerous thing on the planet, and it goes with... with bigotry and hatred and fanaticism and violence. I find it incomprehensible that 80% of Americans believe in angels or aliens and... and can be biblical literalists, although I do appreciate the... call in... in human nature for an explanation of everything and a feeling of support and benevolent protection, although I think the... the god of religious extremists has a machine gun rather than a sceptre or... or a healing hand.
But there can be evangelical atheists like friend Dawkins and others, and I don't... I think that’s a form of extremism and I’m not sure that I... I like that.

In public I’ve gone no further than to say that I’m very uncomfortable about the intrusion of religion into politics, education, medicine – the suppression of stem cell research and so much other research. I think of all my Parkinsonian patients who... and others who need and are longing for some sort of breakthrough with stem cell research, a breakthrough which will probably happen but which has certainly been retarded by policies here in the last 10 years. But I’ve... I've had some periods of, I don’t know what to call it, serene... serene and sublime and perhaps mystical at-oneness myself. I’m more likely to get these in the country than the city. Solitude and nature direct my thoughts away from the... the irritating stimulating human bustle of the 21st century and of New York City in particular.

I’m... so I'm sympathetic to mystical traits in human nature, though highly antagonistic to... to certain theological ones. My own mystical feeling is nothing to do with... with a God, but just a feeling of the harmony of nature and of us being one of it.

I’m... I'm very grateful to be alive, in particular sometimes on lovely days I say, 'I’m glad I’m not dead!’ But Ralph is dead. Many, many... a third of my contemporaries are dead. I feel lucky and even blessed to have lived into my late 70s because I’ve had more life, I’ve done more things, I’ve met more people, but I think I’ve also – and this hasn’t been a conscious effort – somehow got more of a feeling of the... of the wholeness of life. But Ralph just died at 52 and... I think perhaps until the end, may have… he used to say, 'It sucks' – angry, bitter feeling, very understandable at this cruel chance which cut... was cutting him off in the prime of life. Towards the end he no longer had that rage, which he would... he would sometimes clench his unparalysed left fist, especially when he couldn’t find words and he was tormented by aphasia. Towards the end he didn’t seem to be tormented and whether this was stoicism, bravery, a philosophical stance, resignation, or even partly an organic indifference, I... I don’t know. I think his last weeks were peaceful, but still he was done out of a big chunk of life.

My brother David got a cancer when he was 68. He was... he was a very vigorous 68-year-old, and... he was also a physician but someone who lived a very active social life, something of a dandy, and... and very fit. He ran every morning and it was there that he found himself getting a bit short of breath, and finally he got a chest X-ray taken, and when he saw that X-ray he thought: either this is the wrong X-ray or I’m a dead man, because he could see that the pleura covering the lungs was studded with metastases. It wasn’t the wrong X-ray. He said he felt death like an express train, you know, rushing along towards him. He was... he was terribly angry and upset and very understandably. Though again, I think the last days were peaceful, but to some extent this was in contradiction, or rather, I’m sorry, in contradistinction to what happened with my oldest brother, who lived in Australia, whom I was very close to, who got a cancer – cancer of the pancreas – at 80. And Marcus was very sad, he had just retired from general practise and was ready to go round the world, and he was a marvellous linguist and he was going to go to... to Greece and Japan and everywhere. He said... when he got the cancer he said, 'I should have done this before, one shouldn’t wait, you never know what will happen'. Mercifully he had no... no pain, but he... he declined over a year... I want to say gracefully, I mean he wasn’t happy about it, but... but it was not the agitation and the raging. Perhaps this had something to do with his personality, perhaps it had something to do with the fact that he was 80 and retired, and to some extent felt he... he had completed his life, whereas David was still in... in the rush and fury of life.

I... I was listening to some Schubert this morning, his Fourth Symphony, which I think he wrote very early when he was 18 or so. But Schubert wrote everything very early because he died when he was 30 or so, but... but what heights and depths he’d already reached.
I’m not sure what Schubert died of, whether it was tuberculosis, sort of the artists’ disease or something else. We know that the Winterreise, this... this sort of terrifying song cycle was written towards the end, but one feels transcendence all the way through, transcendence. Maybe I’ve been talking about transcendence.

Hertz, who discovered radio waves – which used to be called Hertzian waves – and really he was the first man to... to confirm Clerk Maxwell’s notion of light as an electromagnetic radiation and one which might have all sorts of wavelengths and frequencies beyond our... our visible spectrum. Hertz was a wonderful physicist and human being who died in his 20s, and there’s a very remarkable letter he wrote to his mother in which he... he said he was sad about this, but to have a short full life was better than having a long empty life. He would have preferred a long full life, but the essential thing was fullness. And perhaps in his way, Ralph felt some of this. Perhaps it started to come on him when he knew he was ill and... and he decided he must have some personal expression and started writing the... the fine essays and narratives and memoirs, which in a way were putting life in perspective, and putting his own life in a... in a broader context.

Dying young, one... one thinks of all the soldiers who... who die in war, the numbers are relatively small now. This overwhelmed my... my father, who... who of course... who was born in 1895 and saw his own generation and so many of the most gifted people of his generation, whether they were poets or physicists, wiped out. I know more about scientific history than, you know, perhaps the history of art or literature, and one thinks of... of Moseley, young Moseley, who divined the atomic number of the elements and the rationale of the periodic table, being killed by a shell at Gallipoli, 27-year-old Moseley. I mean this was a... a potential Einstein.

Death, death, every day people are blown up, but then every day people are dying of starvation. The nightmare which came to Malthus at the end of the 18th century and which stimulated Darwin, I think the Malthusian, or Malthusian, I don’t know how to pronounce it, the Malthusian nightmare is... is much closer. Not only are we running out of resources of every sort, but we are... we are fouling the planet and our own bodies with wastes of every sort. There’s no part of the planet which is not radioactive, and there’s no part of the ocean that doesn’t have human dirt in it – plastic, whatnot. The... and while I like to think I’m entering some of the personal serenity of old age, I... I am anguished at some of the things going on in the world, and though I am unmarried and childless, I... I wonder what we are imposing on our children and grandchildren and the generations to come, they won’t be grateful to us.

With my first three books, with Migraine and Awakenings and Leg, these were conceived as books, even though sections are… the Migraine came out of a single rush. The other books to some extent were written in sections, but... but with a sense of the whole there, whereas starting in 1981, I started to publish individual pieces, case histories of Witty Ticcy Ray, of the man who mistook his wife for a hat, of the amnesic mariner, The Lost Mariner, of the old ladies with musical hallucinations, with at first no notion that... that these could come together in any way. But – and I think I may have owed this considerably to you, Kate, and also to Jim Silberman, who detected or felt there was a sort of unity, at least of... of tone and feeling, if not of theme, which... which could, and should, bring these pieces together as a book, a collection, and one could open the book at any place, and yet, perhaps a certain vision of patients, of the brain and of physicianhood, and the relation of doctors and patients could all come together.
And I think this was not, as I say, a feeling I had myself at first, but I then warmed to the feeling, although I continued, especially in the latter part of 1984 after I’d got over the... the depression produced by a hateful review of the Leg book, and warmed by a wonderful review of the Leg book by... by Jerry Bruner, and then I wrote several more pieces, although not... although not explicitly thinking of a book, but just multiplying pieces.

The very last piece... the last piece I wrote, which was very early in ’85, I... I wrote in a Japanese restaurant in San Francisco. It was the piece about the man who had lost his sense of smell following a head injury, but then after six months thought he was smelling... thought it was coming back. He seemed to smell his morning coffee and... and his aromatic tobacco, and he was checked up and there was in fact no return of smell and he seemed somehow, imagination seemed to be filling in what perception could no longer do. And also I... I wrote deceitfully about the young man, a medical student who, following habitual heavy dosages of amphetamines, entered a strange state in which he had an enhancement of a sense of smell, could identify individuals and places easily, and... and was so overwhelmed by the sense of smell that he almost imagined he had turned into a dog, although other things were also enhanced. Needless to say I was speaking of myself and of a strange period in my own life which had happened during amphetamine taking. I feel happy to... to acknowledge this now, although at the time I felt it would not be the right thing to do. I’m prepared to acknowledge a lot of things now, which I wasn’t prepared to 25 years ago.

This heterogeneous, this strange assemblage of pieces did seem to come together in a sort of way, and they were arranged in sections which seemed to unify certain things. I spoke of deficits, of excesses, which Hughlings Jackson, the great neurologist in the 19th century would have called negative symptoms and positive symptoms. I was always more turned on by the positive symptoms, I prefer mania to depression, I... I prefer Tourette’s to Parkinsonism, although I will deal with them all.
Probably the... the depressive ones are in some sense deeper and may allow more introspection, and one’s got to have both, probably.

Hat came out and was a hit... I... and I continued to get letters in relation to it. For example, since I wrote then of the two old ladies with musical hallucinations, I got, almost as soon as the book was published, many, many letters from people who had had musical hallucinations but had never mentioned it to anyone.

A lot of people with musical hallucinations wrote to 'Dear Abby'. This was a newspaper column, but Dear Abby was a real person, and Dear Abby in turn wrote to me, and then I wrote something in... in Dear Abby’s column more strongly, sort of reassuring people, and I don’t know whether I suggested that they contact me but I’ve had scores, if not hundreds of letters about musical hallucinations all following my writing of this in... in the Hat book, and it was this rich harvest of human stories which I was able to use in Musicophilia when the larger single section of that book is devoted to musical hallucinations.

I also got different sorts of letters from people who’d read the title story of The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat, the story of a man who, because of some disease in his brain, especially the visual parts of his brain, became unable to recognise things and people and made absurd mistakes. But one of the earliest problems with him was he became unable to recognise faces. And I got many, many letters from people who’d read this and they said that they, too, had a difficulty recognising faces, but they had never become ill, this had been lifelong with them, and it was also the case with their sister and their father. And I was very surprised at this because I had never heard of a congenital inability to recognise faces, although I had long secretly suspected that I had such an inability myself. And when I went to visit my brother in Australia, I found that he... he was as defective as I was in recognising faces, and his wife had to prepare him for each patient because otherwise he might fail to recognise someone he’d seen the day before.
But finally, these letters which had started in 1986, moved me towards writing a piece on congenital face blindness in myself and in millions of others, and in outing the whole subject and trying to defuse it, which I did under the title of... of Face-Blind in The Mind’s Eye. But there was a 25-year gap then between the first letters and the final dealing with things.
I’m very quick in some ways, and very, very slow in... in others. When writing comes it may come with a rush, but the... but there are long, long incubations and there must be many, many things which are going on underneath all the while. It didn’t actually occur to me, I think, to write on face blindness and you... when Knopf said that the manuscript I’d given them was too short, could I write anything else, you said, 'What about face blindness? This has been in and out of your mind for 25 years’, and then I wrote it. I think, however, the suggestion might have had to come from the... from the outside, at least from you.

After the Hat book the... I moved for part of my life into a quite different mode, and this was the world of the deaf and sign language and meeting deaf people all over, in fact all over the world, and writing Seeing Voices.
This... this was also a time when I became very interested in what it was like to have Tourette’s syndrome in different communities and different circumstances, and with my Tourettic friend, Lowell, I went round the States visiting families where there were Tourettic children or Tourettic parents, and spending quite a lot of time up in Northern Alberta in a Mennonite community which had a very high incidence of Tourette’s and which indeed is called, jokingly, Touretteville by those who know about it. But... but alas the Tourette book, one way and another, never came to fruition, has never come to fruition, and I’ve written many scattered pieces on Tourette’s, but... but alas the book I once envisioned has not come about.
But I was beginning, after Hat, also to get calls from people who had major problems, seeking clarification. The first of them was the painter with sudden total colour blindness who visited me in '86. And there were others, there was the man in Atlanta who had been born blind and then given vision, but couldn’t make sense of the world. Who was... he had a total acquired agnosia.

Then there was the memory artist, Franco Magnani, one of his pictures is hanging up here. The Exploratorium in San Francisco had an astonishing exhibit called The Memory Artist, in which pictures of Pontito, the little Tuscan village where Franco had been born, were apposed to photographs taken from the same viewpoint, and there was an astounding accuracy of these paintings, and I got to meet Franco. I visited his house, which was full of paintings and I got his story, which was a very singular one. He told me how the Nazis had entered Pontito in... in the war and done a lot of damage there, and how upset his mother had been and how he, as a child, had said, 'I shall make it again for you'.
And then he described his early life, he’d been a sailor, he’d roved to and fro, he hadn’t really known what he was to do, where he was to live, he didn’t know himself. And then his decision to live in America, to live in San Francisco and the strange crisis which befell him when there was high fever, there were nightmares, maybe there were seizures, and in these he would see Pontito as it had been before the Nazis came. And when he left hospital he continued to have visions of Pontito. I would... sometimes when I was with him, he would lean forward and his pupils would dilate and he would stare at something and perhaps move around and he would tell me then that a three-dimensional, sort of holographic model of Pontito had risen in front of his eyes and then he started to paint what he could see so clearly. This, I think, was the first time I had… so I didn’t think of Franco as a neurological patient, but he was an artist, and yet he was being inspired by something very extraordinary in neurological terms, an amazing power of reminiscence. He didn’t have a prodigious memory in... in other ways, but... but his memory of Pontito... his memories consumed him, I mean, there were clearly obsessive things, but the sheer power of, whether it was imagination or hallucination, and of ability to actualise this in painting.
So, this was a new departure for me and my story of Franco, I’m not sure that case history is the correct term, it may have been more like a novella, although I think it was full of careful observations that appeared in The New Yorker in, I forget, the... the early 90s. So, there was the... the colour-blind painter, there was the man given vision in middle life, there was Franco with his visions and there was Stephen Wiltshire in England. One of my Hat pieces had been about an autistic boy who had an amazing talent for accurate drawing.

After the Hat book came out I got a letter from England, speaking of a... a boy in England, also autistic, also a savant, with an even more amazing power of drawing.  And indeed his drawings had been published; I think a book of his drawings had been published and... and I was asked if I would see him when he was brought... when he came to New York. A visit had been scheduled for him largely to... to draw New York. Stephen was fascinated by buildings above all – the more complex the better.
And so then... I met Stephen, he was about, I think, 11 or 12 at the time. He... he wasn’t too verbal then. He never seemed to look at one directly; his... his eyes wandered off. He had some repetitive stereotyped movements of his head. He visited me in my little house in City Island where I lived. And I asked him if he would draw the house. I think he... he sniffed a little bit because his earlier drawings had been of St Paul’s, of the Natural History Museum, of huge Gothic... huge Baroque buildings and my little house wasn’t much. But he... he threw a brief indifferent glance at the house and then started drawing. He didn’t, sort of, do an outline, he started at one edge of the paper and just moved over. And unfortunately the drawing was taken from him at that point because I think he would have moved on and drawn the rest of the street. I think that single indifferent glance had taken in the entire street. And I saw this sort of thing again and again.
I was to do some travelling with Stephen. I went... I went with him and his agent/teacher, Margaret Hewson, a very remarkable woman who... who had taken Stephen under her wing. They had travelled together to... to Amsterdam, where Stephen loved the houses, the tall, narrow Rembrandt-like houses, where there are hooks at the top. And so I went with Stephen and Margaret… so, I went with Stephen and Margaret Hewsen and a film crew to Russia. First to Moscow and then we took a train to Leningrad which had just reverted to the name of St Petersburg. And... it was amazing and wonderful to see Stephen’s drawings, but it was extraordinary to see, in a way, his own indifference to them. If a drawing blew away I don’t think it would affect him too much, he might do it again. He didn’t do drawings spontaneously, he did them on direction. I don’t know if there was any spontaneous initiative there, but his style was there in every drawing and also some idiosyncrasies. When I asked him to draw my house a year later, he drew it again but he gave it an American flag. I think he felt it should have an American flag. He had been charmed by the onion domes in the Kremlin and after that he started putting onion domes on every structure, whether or not it had an onion dome. Anyhow, I wrote about Stephen and... and writing about Stephen, as writing about Franco, as writing about the colour-blind painter, involved illustration. Their... their work had to be seen; there were essentially no illustrations in, in any of my earlier books, so... so these were four visual people.

I had another visit. I’ve mentioned my interest in Tourette’s syndrome for many years and at a Tourette’s syndrome meeting in Boston I met one of the speakers. But he was a very unusual speaker and while he was talking to me he suddenly put his foot on my shoulder, a tic which required extraordinary flexibility of the... of the hip flexors. And this speaker, himself had Tourette’s and was able to have a double viewpoint, both from the inside as to what it was like having Tourette’s and as a physician-scientist looking at it, looking at himself and looking at others. This, sort of, double vision is tremendously important; it was what Knut, the colour-blind... word’s gone from me... it was what... it was what Knut, the colour-blind scientist had. He knew what congenital colour-blindness was like from the inside but he was also a scientist who could investigate this. I was fascinated by this physician with Tourette’s, the more so when he told me that he was a surgeon. I said, 'You’re joking, a surgeon?' You know, 'One of these and you’ll have the aorta in two!' And he said, no, he said, when he operated there was no Tourette’s and not even any impulse or thought of Tourette’s.  He wasn’t suppressing it, it just wasn’t there, immersion in the surgery had taken its place.
 
Well, I was very astounded at this and I felt I had to see it and so I made a journey to the little village in Alberta where he practised. And I saw how accepted he was by the community. I sat through one of the... one of his outpatients. He did... did have some tics and vocalisations when he was seeing people. One of his vocalisations was to say, ‘Hideous, hideous, hideous, hideous!’ And one of his patients had an extensive congenital deformity which was hideous, but I was interested then that there was a tactful apocope so what came out was just, ‘Hid, hid, hid, hid!’ and he never said the word ‘hideous’ which I think might have been upsetting to the patient. And, of course, I... I watched him in a long operation; a radical mastectomy, not... not a hint of any ticcing, though when surgery broke off to look at some X-rays, you know, he was, he was all over the place. And this man has become, as my friend... as a friend of mine, a Tourettic composer has become, a role model for people with Tourette’s. They... he shows how one can have fairly severe Tourette’s, yet not only come to terms and be at peace with it oneself, but be accepted by a community – very, very, important. So, I... I wrote about him; he also flew... he also flew… I’d been rather alarmed by his driving which was... sometimes there were sudden brakings and twistings from the steering wheel, though he’d never had an accident. And I was even more alarmed when he suggested – he was a pilot – that I fly with him in his plane to Calgary. And I thought he might suddenly, sort of, put the plane upside down. He was fairly ticcy in the plane, but, of course, you have more space here. My original title for that piece was The World’s Only Flying Touretter Surgeon. I’m slightly sorry that title wasn’t used. He wanted me to use his real name or he was quite agreeable, Mort Doran. You know, he felt he... he didn’t object to going public, especially when he saw what I’d written.  But my editor at The New Yorker, John Bennet, felt that he, that one should use a pseudonym. And the next day I gave John Bennet the manuscript in which the surgeon’s name had been converted to Bennet and I think John was... was a little taken aback.

In relation to autism it was becoming increasingly clear in the 1980s that autism didn’t necessarily mean severely impaired intelligence, inability to communicate, that there might be some people with a form of autism who might have certain restrictions or limitations but were fully capable in many other ways and perhaps highly gifted or productive. I first learned… well, this was a thought which was emerging in the mid '80s and when I visited Uta Frith, who was a great expert on autism, working in London, Uta Frith said to me, 'You must see Temple Grandin; a remarkable woman living in Colorado. She has already written an autobiography and go visit her'. And so, having gone north to Alberta, I now went south-west to Colorado. And I met Temple and we spent a few days together. I... I saw her extraordinary empathy for cattle and her equally extraordinary obtuseness in certain human relationships. She was at pains to be courteous but it was clear in many ways she didn’t quite know what was going on in other people’s minds. She was a woman of... of very good intelligence with remarkable powers of visualisation. So, that she had become famous in the States for designing – Kate, what’s the word I want?
 
[Q] An abattoir, a slaughterhouse.
 
No, it’s more than that.
 
[Q] Well, there were animal facilities of all kinds.
 
Yes, right. She had become famous in the States for designing animal facilities for all kinds, including humane slaughterhouses, if that’s not a contradiction in terms. She, herself, was very, very alert to animal suffering and the sort of even careless things which could make a cow’s last days a terror and stress it unendurably. And, so, she designed facilities which would allow cattle to have a peaceful death. These immensely intricate facilities, she designed entirely in her mind, not only visualising statically but playing little scenarios of… so, for example, that the cows would not see their forerunners being decapitated or anything. And only when the design was absolutely completed in her mind, she put it on paper. There would be blueprints with nothing before. I mean I was somewhat reminded of what... of what’s the case with a lot of Mozart’s scores. It was all worked out in his head and then it was on paper with no deletions, just the finished thing. So, I found Temple very remarkable and she was agreeable to my writing about her and liked what I’d written. And I wrote about Temple as well. So, here are six outsiders whom I wrote about.

When I had visited Uta Frith we talked mostly about Stephen and other savants. Uta Frith’s own work and that of her colleagues was especially to do with autistic savants. Though, of course, there were these other people. I think Uta felt that I should see someone with what then was beginning to be called Asperger syndrome, just to see that not everyone was like Stephen, perhaps this might make a footnote to the Stephen piece. But, of course, when I met Temple she needed a piece and a grand piece all to herself. I remember when I took that piece to The New Yorker the then editor, Tina Brown, said, 'This will be an American hero, an American heroine'. And I think to a considerable extent this has been the case; Temple has written many other books.  She’s been around and there’s even been a... a feature film about her, a very good film.
 
So, then these are six people whom I had, as it were, made extended house calls on.  My father loved house calls. When he was... when he was 70 he retired but he was back to work in 24 hours. When he was 80 he retired but he was back to work in 48 hours. When he was 90 we said, look, at least give up the house calls. And he said, 'No, I'll give up everything else but I'll keep the house calls'. My father felt that house calls, seeing people in their own environment was crucially important and you could find all sorts of things which you would never see in the surgery, in the clinic, in a hospital. And for myself, my visits to the colour-blind artist and... and the other five people I’ve mentioned, these were all extended house calls.

Then there was a seventh piece I wrote about a patient under my own care at Beth Abraham. A... a highly musical young man who had been a passionate Deadhead in the 1960s and who had then, like a lot of disturbed and passionate and drug-taking young people of the time, had been converted to religion. You know, William James says somewhere that the cure for dipsomania is religiomania; this might have been the case with George W Bush. But... with Gary, as a disturbed young man, the salvation lay in the Hare Krishna movement and in a Swami who had a place on Second Avenue and attracted people. And Gary got into the movement, he became an acolyte in... in the Hare Krishna temple in Brooklyn and there... there he was allowed to develop a huge cerebral tumour. And the changes it made in him were all interpreted as signs of spirituality. His... his steady loss of eyesight was seen as turning to the inner light. His steady loss of emotional reaction and his indifference were seen as serenity. His parents were kept at a distance and really, people were... were almost kidnapped by the Hare Krishna, as they’re kidnapped by all of the cults. And the friends and relatives are kept at a distance. Finally, his parents visited Gary – by then I think he was in another temple – and they found their blonde, blind, bland son almost unrecognisable.
 
And it was also... he was taken to a neurosurgeon, well, the tumour was discovered, he went for neurosurgery, this huge tumour was removed but it had been the size of an orange and it had done a good deal of brain damage. And in particular it had pressed on structures, what are called the medial temporal lobes in the hippocampus, and had rendered him amnesic. So that when he had his surgery in 1974, as he recovered from it he still thought it was 1968. The intervening years had been lost for him and also he was unable now to remember events which were happening to him. You could have a conversation with Gary, five minutes later he wouldn’t recognise you, although he retained his intelligence and his great musicality and a sense of humour. Gary became a patient of mine, came to Beth Abraham in 1975. And... but here, again, he came in with his guitar and he became attached to Connie, our music therapist, although, I think he often didn’t recognise her and sometimes he thought there might be multiple Connies. He once said to Connie, you know, 'I met someone with the same name who plays the trumpet' and Connie said, 'That’s me'.
 
I determined on a... on an abduction. Many years earlier when I was at UCLA and I had had a blind, paralysed patient who wanted to ride with me on my motorcycle up to Topanga and I went in with a few weightlifting buddies and we kidnapped her. There was a somewhat similar kidnapping, though not quite as drastic when, with Kate and Allen [Furbeck], her husband, we took Gary to a Grateful Dead concert. As we approached the place, he sniffed the air, which was full of cannabis, which was full of pot and he loved that. This also struck me as very interesting, that he didn’t have amnesia for the smell of pot. And indeed I think that smell may avoid some of the amnesic mechanisms. He loved the first half of the concert when the Grateful Dead played early music from the ‘60s. He knew it all, he knew it by heart, he sang along, he was animated, he was full of enthusiasm and at that moment it didn’t... didn’t seem to me and wouldn’t have seemed to anyone around him that there was anything the matter with him.
 
In the interval he met Mickey Hart, the drummer of the Grateful Dead. But in the second half of the concert, where the Grateful Dead played newer stuff, and we are now speaking of – what was it, Kate – about 1990 or something like this? Gary was very perplexed. He didn’t know any of the music; he couldn’t sing along and he said very interestingly, he said, 'This is like music of the future'. He said, 'This is like music which the Grateful Dead might compose and perform someday'.  His great musicality enabled him to see the possibility of continuity, and that was very, very astounding. Gary… I played Grateful Dead CDs on the way back, I wanted to keep things going for him. But the next morning, he had no memory of having gone to the Garden, Madison Square Garden. Although, curiously, I think there was some memory of the music he had heard. Anyhow, I wrote about Gary and Gary, like Temple, has also become the subject of a feature film quite recently, called The Music Never Stops [sic].

I now had seven long case histories, more narrative, more elaborate than anything in Hat and so I brought these together under a title which was suggested to me by Temple Grandin. She said she was trying to understand human beings, they were really very odd. She said she often felt like an anthropologist on Mars and so... and so the seven pieces were brought together as An Anthropologist on Mars and... and of course, illustrated by drawings, by the... by paintings and drawings by the artists. My own opinion is that this was a finer and deeper book than The Man who Mistook his Wife for a Hat although I think it was never quite a hit in the same way, but I think it may last longer.  And I dedicated it to the seven people I wrote about.

As I talk about Isaacson and Bennet and Temple and Gary and Virgil, they come alive for me again as... as I hope they come alive for... for readers. I’m also glad to be able to talk about them while I still have memory and mind, roughly, intact. Alas, too many of my contemporaries have... have got Alzheimer’s or Lewy body disease and I don’t know what the future holds for me. And I feel it’s important that I... that I talk and write while I’m able to. This, alas, didn’t happen with my cousin, Carmel, who... Aubrey’s sister, she’d had a very full and fascinating life as an actress and as many other things, and I know that when she became ill she wanted to get a word processor and to write a memoir. But she didn’t and dementia overtook her. On the other hand, I’m very glad that my... that Aubrey’s widow, Suzie, at the age of 88 was able to write a quite wonderful memoir which is not only popular but really important. Because of... because she was herself privy, you know, to the centre of Israeli politics and everything which went on in the Middle East for... for 50 years.
I, but I... I like to speak and I’m glad I can speak now of... of my… I don’t know whether to call them patients, subjects, characters, friends, collaborators, sort of all of these. There was a... a film, I think it was called Moulin Rouge, of Toulouse-Lautrec and José Ferrer, the actor, impersonated or acted Toulouse-Lautrec. He... I think he walked around on his knees, it was rather an amazing orthopaedic achievement. But why I mention it is that when, after a fall, a catastrophic fall down a flight of stairs, you see Toulouse-Lautrec dying, as he is dying La Goulue and all sorts of his characters from the Moulin Rouge... come to him and dance in front of him. I find myself emotionally affected by this and... and I imagine and... bid him farewell and I, sort of, imagine that some of my own characters may… I’m not usually emotional, I’m very surprised and somewhat embarrassed that... that my voice becomes unsteady and tears enter my eyes, but there you are.

My patients/subjects/collaborators, you know, have meant a lot to me as, I think, I did to them, and as I hope their stories now mean a lot to... to others or sometimes... sometimes mean something to some others.

An even more remote neurological adventure was suggested to me in... I think it was the start of '92 or was it '93? Kate, you handed me the phone and you said, 'It’s John Steele from Guam'. 'Guam?' I’d never had a phone call from Guam. I didn’t know where the... where it was. I had known… I’d had a little correspondence with a John Steele 20 years earlier. John Steele... that John Steele was a... a physician in Toronto who had co-authored a fascinating article on migraine hallucinations in children, really a beautiful, illustrated paper. Anyhow, I lifted up the phone and it turned out to be the same John Steele. He told me how he had since made his life in Micronesia, first in some of the Caroline Islands and now in Guam. Why was he phoning me? He said there was an extraordinary disease endemic among the native people, the Chamorros in Guam. And many of them had symptoms, extremely similar to what I had described and which had been visually documented in my Awakenings patients. And would I… and there were very few people now who had seen these post-encephalitic patients, and could I, with that background, come and cast a… come to Guam, go on rounds with him, meet some of these people and... and I immediately said yes.  I’d like to say I took the next plane to Guam, but there was probably a little while preparing to go.

I arrived in Guam, I was met by John Steele. A... a rather eccentric-appearing figure in the airport. It was swelteringly hot and everyone was in colourful shirts and shorts. John was fully and nattily dressed and had a tie and a straw hat, and... and a sports car. And, anyhow, we drove off where, as we were driving, he filled me in about the history of Guam and he also pointed out stands of cycads, a very primitive tree which had originally forested the whole of Guam and there were still big stands of cycads. And he pointed this out because he knew that I was interested in cycads as well as in neurology. And indeed I think he’d used a phrase that I could come to Guam either as a cycadological neurologist or a neurological cycadologist, but in particular the cycads were supposed to be responsible for the strange disease on Guam.

We arrived at a little village called Umatac. Umatac was built at the point where Magellan had reached Guam in, whatever it was, 1534. And Umatac was somewhat remote from the other villages and towns on Guam, but Umatac was also the epicentre of this disease. And this is why John was living there surrounded by patients and their families, and... and just above the village there was the graveyard which he took me to, and there a gravedigger said, 'My sister’s here and there’s a cousin and there’s her cousin’. And... and one saw that the whole family structure, all the families in Guam, had been affected by this disease.
These – I’ve spoken about house calls metaphorically – but I literally went with John on his house calls. In a way it reminded me of how, when I was 12 years old, I used to go with my father on house calls. And though this time I didn’t wait downstairs, I would… I didn’t... I didn’t wait downstairs, I went with John to see the patients. And the… all this was deeply interesting me... all this was deeply interesting to me as a neurologist because, indeed, in terms of symptoms a lot of these people were very much like my own patients, my own post-encephalitic patients. And like my own patients some of them sometimes responded to tiny doses of L-DOPA, which someone with ordinary Parkinson’s would never respond to, and showed very striking changes. But it was also very important at a human level because my patients had been put away for decades, had lived in hospital, whereas people with Lytico-bodig, as this disease was called, were still with their families and with their villages. Part of the family, part of the community and... their personhood was fully recognised and with them to the end. I'm... this made me think how barbaric our own medicine and our own customs were in the civilised world, where we put ill or demented people away and try forget them. And, I think, not the... not the least tragedy of being chronically ill or demented is that one has become an un-person, an object in a nursing home. I will say that this does not happen with the Little Sisters of the Poor, where there is wonderful, human caring and a sort of, community. But it can happen.

When I… so I spent a week with John on the road, a week so extraordinary that I felt this must be filmed. It’s insufficient to describe this. These people, this situation has to be seen. And there was another odd thing, somehow I got babbling to John about something I’d heard, namely that there might be a place in the world or an island where there was a congenital total colour blindness. And John said, 'Yes, I know the place. It’s Pingelap', and he said that he had worked for some years on Pohnpei which was the large volcanic island... the larger volcanic island surrounded by coral atolls and that he had seen some of these people with congenital achromatopsia. So this was a second thing which excited me. And I talked with Chris Rawlence, who had written the libretto of The Man who Mistook his Wife for a Hat and was now doing a series of films with me, and I said, we have to go to Guam again and also we have to go to Pingelap.
 
And so I returned the following year, this time with my ophthalmological friend, Bob Wasserman, and my totally colour-blind colleague, Knut Nordby. And we spent time on Guam and time on Pingelap and Pohnpei.

So here, I now had two modes of presentation. I wrote a book called the Island of the Colorblind. I refer to Guam as Cycad Island. It was really a double book. Robert Louis Stevenson has a book called Travels on a Donkey [sic], but this is a twin book and my Island of the Colorblind was a twin book. There were two experiences. And at the same time there were two films. I confess I was infuriated when Picador, my publishers in England, said on the book cover, 'The book of the film'. I thought, ‘Fuck them!’ No, it... the book of the film, it might have been the film of the book. But, in fact, the book and the film were... were quite different in character and nature and I think the verbal and the visual may... may have to be. I think they’re... they are equally important and this goes back to my Awakenings days when as I said, I would carry a notebook in one hand and a... and a little movie camera, a Super 8 camera, in the other. People often say to me, 'What’s your favourite book?' I say, 'I don’t have favourites'. It’s like saying, what’s your favourite element? Or, what’s your favourite child?  What’s your favourite student?  But, in fact, I have a soft spot for the Island of the Colorblind, and more than any other of my books, this takes me back to Micronesia, to my love of islands, to other peoples, to travel, to adventure. 

There’s the special fact that I love islands, I’ve always loved islands. And, of course, the book is about two islands and island life. John himself is an island lover. He tried to stay in Toronto, he tried to live in metropolis. He had to move to islands. Well, England is an island. I lived for 20 years on City Island which is part of New York, part of the Bronx but it is an island with a narrow bridge connecting it to the mainland. I liked the... the compactness and the self-sufficiency. When I…
 
[Q] How did you move to City Island?
 
I... I discovered City Island, or I find... found my house in City Island in an unusual way. I... I love swimming and at that time I would often go to Orchard Beach in the Bronx and go for long swims. And sometimes extra long swims in which I would swim round City Island. This would be an eight-hour swim.
 
One time I was swimming round City Island. I... I’d been at sea for about four hours when I spotted a charming gazebo. Incidentally gazebo is a word I love because it reminds me equally of gazelle and placebo. Anyhow, so I landed and I walked up the street and I saw a little red house for sale. In fact it had been occupied by a neurologist from the [Albert Einstein] College of Medicine but he was leaving it. He showed me round the house and then I walked up City Island Avenue in my swim trunks, I went to a realtor and I bought the house. I should say the realtor had seen me before because earlier that year, in a more conventional way, I’d looked at one or two houses and had expressed my interest in living in City Island. But this time, almost naked, I walked in, I bought the house, she conducted me to her house on the other side of City Island and I continued my swim, having acquired a house in mid-swim.

I spent 20 years on City Island, almost enough to become a so-called clam-digger, although the clam-diggers are the people born on City Island. City Island has a long nautical history and – rather like Nantucket – and boats were made there and whale ships looked in and there was the sense of a village. I... I knew all my neighbours, I lived on a little street, I never locked the door and it was a very different sort of life. And one I miss now although for various reasons I had to move in to Manhattan. First, I maintained an... an office in Manhattan and would drive in every day. I would come in at five in the morning when there was no traffic, but it was awful getting back in the evening when there could be huge traffic jams and I always saw accidents on the road. I thought sooner or later something will happen to me especially as I was often dead tired when I was driving back. So with mixed feelings I moved from City Island, here, to the Village, in 2000.

Other islands: when I was in Peru I swam in Lake Titicaca. This lake, at 14,000 feet, the highest navigable lake in the world. I saw the floating islands of Titicaca. These are islands constructed of reeds and people live on these islands, these floating islands. They fish, they... they catch fowl and they... and they bargain with people on land to get other supplies. Sometimes, if... if there has been a love affair, if someone on one island falls in love with someone on another island, the islands will join. If on the other hand there has been a bitter quarrel, you can’t have two people at loggerheads on the same island, the island will divide in the middle. So, these are amoeba-like islands with an ancient culture and their own language. I’ve... I found this very, very extraordinary, though now, one shouldn’t be judgemental, but I want to say, alas, television has emptied… has entered their lives, the young people no longer want to live on a... an island of reeds in the middle of Lake Titicaca. And, I think, probably this mode of life will become extinct. I, myself, stayed with Kate and Allen on an island, a real island, in Lake Titicaca.

I used to be very fond of going to an island in Lake Huron – Manitoulin – and I fell very much in love with Manitoulin when I went there in '79. I was trying to write then and was writing some of my Leg book. I was listening to music a lot, I had a cassette, I had two cassettes. One of them – both Mozart – one of them the great Mass in G Minor, one of the Requiem. I tend to get fixated on pieces of music sometimes and I will play it again and again and again as I’m fixated on Bach Choral Preludes. Which reminds me, this morning, I heard a horrible orchestral version of one of the great organ preludes and… but that’s neither here nor there.
I wandered a lot around Gore Bay which was the chief town on Manitoulin. I talked to a lot of people, I was in a strange mood.  I normally never start a conversation, I’m rather shy and rather diffident. But I found myself opening conversations, I even went to church on Sunday because I enjoyed the feeling of the church and the singing and the feeling of community. And as I left after six weeks I was approached by some of the elders in Gore Bay with an astonishing proposition. They said, 'You seem to have enjoyed your stay here, you seem to love the place and to love us. And I think we love you'. They said, 'Our general practitioner for 40 years has just retired. Would you be interested in taking his place?' They said, 'The province of Ontario will give you a house. How would you feel about being a village doctor in Manitoulin?' I was moved to tears by this and thought about it, though when I was realistic rather than romantic I thought this... this can’t work. The… in a recent… recently when Eric Kandel introduced me to an audience, he introduced me as a public intellectual and I said to the audience, 'That’s absolutely wrong', I said, 'basically, I’m a village doctor'. And the notion of myself as a village doctor is there even though I couldn’t become one in reality, to Manitoulin.

I’ve mostly spoken about medical work and neurology but two… but there were outside interests and opportunities and invitations. And in 1993 two of them came my way. One of them came from Bob Silvers, the editor of The New York Review of Books. He had sent me books over the years to review, I’d always excused myself from doing so, although, of course, one of them, When the Mind Hears, had led to a book of my own. But this book he sent me, A History of Chemistry [sic] by David Knight fascinated me very much. And in particular I was deeply fascinated by Knight’s portrait of Humphry Davy. Humphry Davy had been one of my idols in my own chemistry boyhood. It was Humphry Davy who was the first to use a battery and an electric current to isolate elements and this way he had isolated and discovered sodium, potassium, calcium, strontium, barium. He discovered more elements than... than anyone else. He… I was intrigued by his life, by his relation to Faraday who was one of his students at first. And David Knight’s book…  I don’t know that, yes, I don’t quite know whether I reviewed it, as such. I think my review of the book turned into an essay on Humphry Davy. And my favourite period in chemistry, really, a wonderful period in science and art… Richard Holmes had recently written about this, that period between about 1790 and... and 1820. It also caused me to think of some of my own boyhood in chemistry. And so this piece on Humphry Davy, which was partly a review and partly reminiscence and partly just a... a sort of, lyrical remembering of Humphry Davy, came out and Bob Silvers presented me with an early copy of it on my birthday, my 60th birthday in... in '93.
 
At about the same time, I had another invitation from a magazine – I think... I think it was Discover Magazine. They said they were devoting an issue to museums and would I care to write about this? And since museums, like public libraries had been crucial for me growing up, much more so than any formal schooling, and since I had spent hundreds of hours in the South Kensington museums, in the Natural History Museum, the Science Museum and the
Geology Museum – at that time the Geology Museum was separate, it wasn’t fused with the Natural History Museum as it is now – I... I had spent so many... so many hours in museums including, on one occasion, hiding when the Natural History Museum closed at night and spending a spooky night there, where...  where dinosaur skeletons suddenly loomed up in front of me. I can’t say which of those museums was my favourite, I... or rather I should say that the Science and Geology Museums were at first my favourite because my love was in chemistry and the physical sciences and mineralogy. And then, when I was 14 plus and turned towards biology, then the Natural History Museum became my favourite. And I actually, when I was 16, got a ticket which enabled me to go into what they called the New Spirit building because, in any museum, behind what’s actually shown, there is the rest of the iceberg, the 6/7, the 99% of specimens which are not on show and all the research which goes on. I still have that ticket and I was able to show it to the director of the museum when I went there with you, Kate, a couple of years ago. So, I wrote about the South Kensington museums.
 
So, one way and another, in these two articles in '93 I was both looking back to early adolescence and also the years just before adolescence. And what meant most to me at that time: chemistry, Humphry Davy, history of chemistry and the museums.

It was at that time, also, that I read a remarkable book called Chemistry Imagined [Reflections on Science]. This was by a chemist, a great chemist, a great theoretical chemist, Roald Hoffmann and his collaborator, Vivian Torrence. There are lovely illustrations in the book. I was deeply fascinated by this because it was really an amazing portrait of the chemical imagination, the creative imagination of chemists. Roald himself had this to a supreme degree. If Neils Bohr and others had come to understand the structure of the atom, Roald Hoffmann had worked out the nature of the chemical bond and how molecules are kept together for which he got a Nobel Prize. And so, he was well equipped to speak from the inside about the chemical imagination but also, himself being a considerable historian and knowing all his forerunners and precursors, he could speak about them. And so I wrote a letter. I... I often write letters to people if I read a book by them and love it. And I... I wrote to him: Dear... Dear Dr Hoffmann, Dear Professor Hoffmann. We had some correspondence and then I met him when he came to New York. I think in '95.

Roald and I corresponded. At first it was ‘Professor Hoffmann’ and ‘Dr Sacks’, but very soon it was ‘Roald’ and ‘Oliver’. This was in... in great contrast to when I met Auden when he was ‘Mr Auden’ and I was ‘Dr Sacks’ for nearly two years, but we… that was the 1960s when we were both British, whereas here in the 1990s, and... things have changed. One... one gets to first names, I think actually, a little too quickly.
 
In '95, Roald came to New York to give a lecture. His title was The One Culture. And... and this was partly an attack on CP Snow’s notion of the two cultures, and Roald’s feeling, which he embodied strongly in himself because he was also a poet, an essayist, and a playwright, as well as a chemist, that there should be one culture, and that art and science were just different aspects of the one culture.

The following year, it was actually in '97 – I... I'd spoken to Roald a certain amount about my early days – and in 1997, at a time, interestingly, when I had a… I was contorted almost double by a backache. A... a parcel arrived for me, a very small, very heavy parcel. And when I opened it, out rolled a heavy grey bar, which I immediately recognised as a bar of tungsten, because I know what tungsten looks like, what it feels like, what it sounds like, what it smells like, and this instantly reminded me of my uncle who had manufactured lights with tungsten filaments, and who... whose factory produced bars of tungsten and who himself was surrounded by tungsten paperweights and bars and cubes and everything, and whose forearms were blackened with tungsten powder beyond the ability of any washing to remove. And as I opened this bar, I think it happened in seconds, a vision of my Uncle Tungsten came to me, of my chemical boyhood, and this was really a Proustian moment. That bar of tungsten was my madeleine. In the ecstasy of that moment, I completely forgot that I had a backache and I straightened up. I don’t think the backache was psychosomatic, but there was the most amazing therapeutic power in... in the joy which came to me.
And this bar of tungsten started me writing. Especially, and almost exclusively, with an emphasis on the chemistry of those days and my love of chemistry and the laboratory I'd had at home, and the experiments I had done, and how, at my uncle’s suggestion, I would always go to original accounts. He told me never to look at a textbook. He said… I’m afraid a word is escaping me. At that time, original accounts by Humphry Davy and Faraday and others were available, yes, Alembic, as Alembic [Club] reprints. These cost almost nothing, and so I became acquainted with all of the chemists through these Alembic reprints, and I wrote about this and much else in a... in a peculiar book. It wasn’t clear what it was going to turn into, and some of it was vastly out of scale.  In particular, I’m very fond of elements called the rare earth elements. All of these originally came from Sweden and these were obscure elements, and... lighter flints are made of rare earth elements. And I, in fact, wrote something like 50,000 words on the rare earth elements, and Kate said, 'You can’t do that', you know, they’re not that interesting'. I said, 'They are that interesting!' But there was a sort of strange imbalance because, as yet, there was not very much about... on the personal side and all the other aspects of being a little boy growing up in England before and during the Second World War.
 

Some of what I’d written was condensed and published under the title of Brilliant Light in The New Yorker. But at that point I couldn’t see my way much beyond an article or perhaps a series of articles, and... and now by one of these strange fertilising cross-currents, I have to bring in something else. One can’t tell a linear history, history isn’t linear. Natural history isn’t linear, personal history isn’t linear, military history isn’t linear. They’re... they're all full of innumerable interacting cross-currents and contingencies.
 
One of my loves, as I indicated when I spoke of the cycad trees in Guam, one of my loves has been botanical and particularly not flowering plants, which I regard as rather vulgar and trendy sometimes, but more primitive plants like mosses and ferns and cycads and ginkgos. I had become a member of the American Fern Society, which I encountered quite by accident in 1993. I had been wandering around one of the buildings in the [New York] Botanic  [sic]Garden with a friend of mine and we blundered into a meeting in progress. And it was very extraordinary. It was like a timewarp. I suddenly felt this was a meeting of the Linnean Society in 1855 or something. There was an extraordinary wonderful old-fashioned quality and enthusiasm about this meeting. Andrew [Wilkes], my friend, said to me, 'These are your people'. And... and he was right. And I became a member of this amateur fern society which had branches all over the States, in fact, has branches all over the world. The fern society would go on forays, on fern forays, perhaps to the wetlands in New Jersey, or... or to some other place where there were unusual ferns. And in 2000, there was a really big foray. We were to go, a number of us, perhaps 20 of us, as a group to Oaxaca in Mexico which has an extraordinary rich fern... an extraordinary rich fern flora. There’s something like 700 species of fern in Oaxaca. And other people from the West Coast and... and the Midwest would be converging, and we would... we would all converge in Oaxaca.

Well, we converged in Oaxaca. I didn’t know whether I would write anything about this, but I had a notebook with me. In fact, the notebook… actually, on the plane, which first went to Mexico City, I didn’t have a notebook, but I started keeping notes on... on the flyleaf of a book I was reading. The beginning was rather extraordinary. This was a Mexican flight and as we took off, everyone... got up and started talking and picnicking. This would absolutely be forbidden in any real plane where you would have to have your seatbelts on, but one... one had the feeling of being in the middle of a... a Mexican zócalo, an arena, a marketplace, while we were in mid-air. I loved that. The man next to me, seeing that I had run out of flyleaf, gave me some sheets of yellow paper, or some sheets of paper, to write on, and then later I got out my notebook.

When we were in Mexico City where people converged from Los Angeles and other places, I retrieved an as yet empty notebook from my case and I started writing. And at that point I had a certain feeling... I felt it was all of us together, but I felt they're them, and there’s me. They are my subjects, I am the writer. In fact, I wrote and kept a journal almost non-stop, and in front of people. Sometimes they would see their name on the page upside down and in front of them. Shamelessly, I kept a detailed journal.
 
And when I got back 10 days later... the... the meeting was beautiful. The farewells were sometimes rather painful, you know. There were people who...who were aging sometimes, and one felt one wouldn’t see them. And they’re going away in different places and it was almost like the breakup, I want to say, of the crew and the actors in the filming of Awakenings, or the breakup after finals at Oxford when we all went out into the world in our different directions. I transcribed the journal and... and it got published as a little book with a minimum of changes. There are whole pages of the published Oaxaca journal which are identical with the manuscript.

But I spoke of cross-currents, and one day, when I was in the zócalo, or the central square, of Oaxaca city, I got a bus back to the hotel and there were two people on the bus who were speaking... a dialect of German, a sort of Swiss Deutsch. And this immediately brought to mind how, in 1946, just after the war, my… well, of course, '45 would have been just after the war, but in '46… take that parenthesis out, I’m wrong... how in '46, just after the war, my parents went and took me and my brother Michael to Switzerland, and how we had been picked up at the railway station by an electric vehicle and how I heard people speaking this Swiss Deutsch. So, suddenly I remembered this forgotten incident of arriving at Lucerne when I was 13 in 1946. And this in itself insignificant thing then opened out into many of the personal aspects of childhood and boyhood and growing up, and this led to the other half, the personal half, of Uncle Tungsten. So Uncle Tungsten… I’ve spoken of the Island of the Colourblind as a double book. In another sense, Uncle Tungsten is a double book. But here the two parts are ‘Siamesed’ together. They... they are both me. And it’s me, and chemistry, and growing up, and London, and family, and being Jewish, and being neurotic, and being exiled to a school in the country, and going a little mad. It’s all there. It’s all in Uncle Tungsten.
 
And so this was a radical departure for me. This was a... an autobiography, a memoir, hinted at by the two pieces I had written in 1993, the Humphry Davy piece and the South Kensington Museums piece. It gave me great joy, although I shouldn’t conceal the fact there were also great difficulties, but there was great joy writing Uncle Tungsten, although just as the rare earth metals had to be cut down from 50,000 words to 500, so the manuscript was almost a 1,000,000 words and was cut down to 100,000.

The... the book was slated for publication in October of '01. When 9/11 happened, we wondered, I wondered, Kate wondered, the publishers wondered about the sense of publishing a book three... three weeks after this catastrophe. But for better or worse the book was published then. I’ve never been able to tolerate delays in publication. When Colin wanted to... get excerpts from Awakenings put in newspapers and delay the publication date, I said 'No, it has to be published before my 40th birthday'. Well, there was no particular birthday here, but I... I always feel that any minute and any moment and any year may be my last, and so I want to see something as soon as possible when it is finished. I don’t hurry it, and production is like pregnancy. I’m gravid and turgid for a long time, but when the baby is delivered, I want to hold it in my arms, I want to look at it, I want to smell it, I want to feel it. It is very much like having a baby, and one wouldn’t want that to be delayed, no indeed.

You may be running, but I’m... I'm not quite running yet. I’m having to get myself going with some coffee. Handsome mug. I got it in the botanical garden in Tallinn, and that’s a remarkable garden because it has a special section devoted to mosses and lichens, most of which are indigenous to Estonia, many of which are indigenous. And although I’ve been to botanical gardens all over the world, this is the only one I’ve seen which... which honours mosses and lichens properly. They’re often looked down on. That makes me very angry. Gowers, a neurologist, a 19th century neurologist I revere, wrote a monograph on mosses. Unfortunately, it has been lost. When I say it has been lost, this doesn’t mean that it can’t be found. I hope so. I’m sorry, I’m... I'm in a silly mood.

Botanical gardens. One of the…the other great place for me in my youth, beside the South Kensington museums and the public library, was Kew, the great botanical garden at Kew. Both my mother and a sister of hers – a favourite aunt of mine, Lenny – were keen on botany and on gardening and on ferns and fern-like things in particular. But I would often go with my aunt to Kew. We would take a... a train from Brondesbury to Kew Gardens. This is one of the oldest lines, I think, in... in England, or lines of its sort. I think it had been built in about 1870, or something like this, long before the tube. I had many favourite plants in Kew, but I think probably the two fernhouses, one... one for temperate ferns and one for tropical ferns, were my favourite. I loved the gold and silver ferns. Oh, if I start on what I loved, I’d go on forever. In New York – now I’ve lived in New York for 45, 46 years this month – the botanical garden here has been a major part of my life. When I worked at Beth Abraham, which I did for 40 years, from '66 to '06, I would walk in the botanical garden every day. It was just opposite.

I think it must have been in 1958 that Jonathan Miller gave me a book of poems, The Sense of Movement by Thom Gunn. He said, 'You’ll like these, and you should meet him some day'. I did like the poems very much, and also a book of earlier poems, Fighting Terms, and... I learned that he was living in San Francisco. And when I got to San Francisco in 1960, I immediately made inquiries for him. They said, 'Too bad, he’s just gone to England'. He... I think he had a fellowship at Cambridge or something for a year. So I think I didn’t meet him till '61. But we got on well and I didn’t disguise my admiration of his poetry, and I shyly solicited his opinion on some of my writings. And, as I... as I’ve mentioned, when I went round the country on my motorcycle, I sent my motorcycle diaries, volume by volume to him. I realise I’ve made a mistake with... with the dates. Thom was away in England but he must have been back because I was on the road with my motorcycle from, I think, probably from December of 1960, or perhaps it was early ‘61, I don’t know.

Thom liked some of my writing, and some of it he hated, and told me so, and why, in no uncertain terms. He liked my travel writing, and the description of landscapes and events and... and people as they passed. He did not at all like the portraits, the verbal portraits, I made of various people in San Francisco. And he upbraided me for what he called my sarcasms and grotesqueries. To jump ahead a dozen years, when Awakenings came out in 1973, I sent a copy to Thom, and he was astounded. He said, 'What was most conspicuously absent in you a dozen years ago – sympathy, humanity, feeling for other people – is now the very centre and foundation of this book. What happened? How did you change?' He said, 'Was it drugs? Did you fall in love? Was it your analyst? Or did it just occur as... a form of maturation?' I... I was obsessed by this letter of his and these questions, and I... I finally wrote back and said, 'All of the above'.

When I went to UCLA, I often on a weekend went to San Francisco. I’d always see Thom. Come to think of it, the very first time I went to visit him, I... I almost killed myself.
He lived at that time on Filbert in San Francisco, and Filbert is a street which goes ‘brmm’ like that, as some people do. I had my motorbike. Fortunately it was a scrambler motorbike, very high off the ground. I didn’t realise that Filbert was like a cliff, and I went over the edge, and... and really did a ski jump. I did 15 foot in the air and came down with a crash which would have ruined any ordinary motorbike. The scrambler somehow took it, but I think when I arrived at 975, Thom’s door, I... I was ashen and shaking. The... some of his early poems, one of them in particular, some of his early poems are about doomed motorcyclists and so I certainly played... played the part.

At that time, when I went to San Francisco, I thought I needed a... a new name, so I dropped my first name, Oliver, and I became Wolf. And Thom and others at that time always called me Wolf.
 
When I came to New York in '65, I continued to see Thom fairly frequently because I would go to the West Coast, and he would come to New York, and I somehow have the feeling of an almost continuous dialogue with him which touched all sorts of things, and a dialogue 40 years in length.
 
The last time I saw him, I... I had no impression of any failing of energy or optimism or intellect. We... we had a dinner, we had lunch together and then a bottle of wine and talked. A lot of the talk was rather nostalgic. We had both been born in London near Hampstead Heath, and Hampstead Heath had been our playground and our favourite places... one of our favourite places, and there were also some people we knew in common. But we also talked about future work. Thom’s previous book, Boss Cupid, I think had been published in 2000. My previous books, Uncle Tungsten and Oaxaca Journal, had been published in 2001 and ‘02. And I was astounded as well as greatly shocked and saddened when I heard of his death three or four months after this... He... and further shocked and saddened to hear that he died of a drug overdose. At least he had a heart attack, and at autopsy high levels both of... of morphine and cocaine were found in his blood, or... or so I... I am told. I... he had much good work and much good living still in him, or this was my belief. Although Wendy Lesser, who knew him very well, Wendy publishes the Threepenny – oops, I’m forgetting the name – magazine.
 
[Q] Review.
 
Sorry?
 
[Q] Review. The Threepenny…
 
Oh, right. Wendy Lesser founded and publishes the Threepenny Review, which is sort of the West Coast equivalent of The New York Review of Books. And Thom was a founder member and a frequent contributor. Wendy told me that she thought Thom had been depressed and hopeless, did not look forward to anything, and increased drug doses towards a fatal level with... with his eyes open and knowing what he was doing. I... I hope she is wrong. I don’t like that picture, and it was certainly not my own picture.

Thom’s combination of extreme poetic rigour and purity combined with a subject matter, street life in San Francisco, was unique. It... and he... he never lost that purity and rigour. Although his poems are also often full of wit and sympathy, but he never departed from... from the high form of standards of his poetry, nor did he ever, on the whole, occupy himself with... with the elevated matters, which... which perhaps poets are supposed to do so... which perhaps poets are supposed to do. Although I think many, many mythical images came to mind. He had a poem called Byrnie... Byrnies chainmail, but this was in fact also a poem about motorcyclists and the way they dressed and insulated themselves from danger, and so chainmail and armour for him had its modern equivalent in... in motorcycle kit.

Thom was, I am told, was a very good teacher. He would teach one semester a year at Berkeley. He... they wanted him to teach more, but he didn’t. He said he could provide for himself and make a living, and that was enough. Otherwise he wanted no impediment to his poetry. But he was chronically… I think... I think he had to live and did live very austerely, although he was extremely generous personally, and I was very delighted, as I think he was, when he got a MacArthur. So in his last years he was able to travel and he enjoyed a sort of ease which... which he had never had before.

I... I miss him very much. I... I have many, many files of letters to and from him. I wrote about him briefly in the Threepenny Review; perhaps one day I’ll write at more length, I don’t know. But, although Thom was never a formal mentor in any way, I think his sharp criticisms of some of my writings, or some sorts of writing, and his liking other sorts, and the example of his own writing and his absolute dedication. He would never let a sloppy line get in. Things had to be right. Of course they do have to be absolutely right in poetry. One has more latitude in... in my sort of writing, but... but not all that latitude.

Jerry Bruner was, and is, a legendary figure, because in the 1950s he was one of the founders of the... what is usually called the cognitive revolution. At that time, behaviourism and BF Skinner and conditioned reflexes were all the rage. One looked at stimulus and response. There was no reference to the inside of an organism. There was no concept of organisms having an inside. It’s really bizarre how something so counterintuitive could have... could have had such power. One of the great early critics of BF Skinner was Chomsky, and beside Chomsky’s first book on syntactic structures, he wrote an... an annihilating review of Skinner and Skinner’s work, and that whole orientation – very audacious, not to say chutzpadik, thing for a young man to do. Kick... kicking the god on his pedestal. And at the same time, Jerry Bruner and his colleagues were looking at mind. The word mind did not exist for Pavlov and BF Skinner.
I think at that time Jerry was in Cambridge. His life on the whole was spent – well, what one would have called his life had he died at a normal age – would have been spent between Cambridge and Harvard. But at, I don’t know, but at 95 plus, Jerry is still going strong. I first encountered him because he wrote a wonderful, generous review of A Leg to Stand On. And that gave me a leg to stand on. It hugely encouraged me. It enabled me to go on when I had been hamstrung by a hateful review of the book in England. Jerry and I became friends. The generational difference between us didn’t seem to matter that much, and now I’m approaching 80, it... it matters even less. Jonathan Miller was a very close friend as well, and there was one wonderful dinner, I think, when the two of us were there with him.

Jerry has one of the most spacious, thoughtful minds I’ve ever encountered. I wouldn’t use the word polymath of him. I don’t very much like the word polymath – it somehow suggests a... a pecking thing. But there is a vast, vast base of knowledge of every sort which is... which is integrated and balanced in that great mind of his. The... until very recently he published a book every year, or... or every two years. One feared for him when he lost his wife about five or six years ago, who died in a... a surgical accident which should never have happened. It’s not so easy to lose a partner when one is in one’s late 80s, but Jerry seemed... seemed to… I think we, Kate, we went and visited him at that time and we went to a restaurant together. I think I was very struck then by how everyone on the block knew him.

At one level and another, Jerry has been a sort of father figure for me and... and a guide, and a sort of implicit mentor. When I say implicit mentor, as with Luria, as with many others, my head is filled with voices now. I say: what would Jerry say, what would Luria say, what would Crick say? Some of the voices living... what would Edelman say? And so he is very much there inside me.

He was also a man of great physical strength. He rowed... I don’t know whether it was rowing or canoeing or sailing, no, I’m sorry, he sailed across the Atlantic, single-handed. Very remarkable. I remember his 80th birthday, hugging him, and it was like hugging a... a robust man, a strong man of 40. He was very robust at 80, although I think a... beginning to get a little frail in his 90s. He gave a lovely talk at my 75th birthday. I think he himself was over 90 then.

There’ve also been some specific things. Jerry was born with bilateral cataracts. And he had surgery, but this was done at a time before lenses were implanted, and so he wears immensely... very thick glasses with sort of 30 dioptres or something like this.

Normally we can’t see anything beyond violet in the spectrum, but this is partly because our lenses cut out shorter wavelengths. There is in fact some retinal sensitivity beyond the violet, but you have to lose your lenses to see that. Now... nowadays when one has cataract surgery, you have an implanted lens, the implanted lens is made... is given the same cut-off as the natural lens. But of course, Jerry never had that, and he once told me that he could see some way into the ultraviolet, and in particular, that he could see the honey guides on flowers which guide bees to the nectar. And so I said, 'What’s... what's ultraviolet like?' And he said, 'I can no more tell you...  I can no more convey it to you than you can tell me what stereoscopy is like'. Jerry has no stereoscopy. And this brought home the fact, well, it brought home what Bertrand Russell often talked about when he contrasted knowledge by description with knowledge by acquaintance. There is no way you can know what it is like to see ultraviolet if... if you don’t see it, no way in which you know what it’s like to see stereoptically. And this is something I think I’m going to enlarge on when I speak of... of Stereo Sue and... and my own loss of stereoscopy.

Jerry is a very extraordinary man, and quite recently, I was so sorry, I think it was soon after my hip surgery and I wasn’t too mobile. There was a celebration of... was it of 50 years work, or 75 years of work? I don’t… it was… I mean, he has been the... the intellectual grandfather of... of so many people in cognitive science all over the world. Great man.

Perhaps not having a family of my own, friends and contemporaries and colleagues are... are more important, and people who are voyaging through life at the same time and in... in a different yet parallel way. For me a very important such person was Bob Rodman. I... Bob and I met in ‘62 when I went to UCLA where I was doing a neurology residency. Bob was doing a psychiatry residency, but this involved spending three months in neurology. Curiously we met… the common interest, a common interest we shared, and the first one we discovered, was photography. I was very much into photography, especially having the facilities of a darkroom at my disposal, and... and Bob was an ardent photographer as well. He was also a... a pretty good drawer and painter, but photography drew us together. And then the discovery of intellectual... shared intellectual interests and the fact that we were both drawn to writing.

Bob continued to live in Los Angeles, although there was a period when he did his military service, I think up in... up in Oregon. I came to New York in '65, but Bob continued as my closest friend, my oldest friend and my closest friend in America. The... he went on after his army service to do psychoanalytical training and to start practice as an analyst.
And he… when we didn’t see each other, we often wrote. And Bob was a grand letter-writer. I have four huge volumes of correspondence between us and, I fear... I have a real need to write about Bob.

He lost his wife to a cancer in 1973. This was a terrible time for him, and Bob, for all his sophistication, went down to Mexico and was looking at wild outsider drugs for cancer. You know, in such extremities a man, otherwise rational, will do anything. I... I would do the same, I think, if I were in that position. I said to Bob at one point, 'You... turn your anguish into art'. It sounds rather crude put that way, but I... I think it spurred him to write a remarkable book, which he called Not Dying, which is a book about dying, and... but with an affirmation all the way through which echoes in the title.

Bob was... Bob’s idol was Winnicott, Donald Winnicott, the great analyst in England, and Winnicott was much more than an analyst and was really much more human than most analysts. It was Winnicott who used phrases like 'a good enough mother'. It was Winnicott who was the first analyst, really, the first psychiatrist to pay attention to play. Freud had never really written about play, or transitional objects. Bob had met Winnicott several times, and after Winnicott’s death, he was to become Winnicott’s biographer. And he did finally, after many years’ work, probably 15 years, he put together a magnificent volume, a magnificent biography of Winnicott, but those 15 years, I think, were subtracted from what he might have been writing himself. He was a very, very good clinician and he wrote very beautifully of his patients. Some of his clinical writing was published, but not enough. I speak in the past tense because Bob died, in a way which shouldn’t have happened a few years ago. And when he died, he left a treasure of assorted manuscripts. One book was published posthumously, but... but the rest is, I fear, maybe in limbo. And the business of having a voice and having some effect, it... which matters intensely to me, and it mattered no less to Bob. And it doesn’t just matter to me, you know, in a sort of narcissistic way; I like to think when I am gone, I will have said some interesting things about other lives and other people. And... and Bob Rodman certainly felt the same thing. And... I’m not giving an adequate picture of his life. He remarried, there were many children, and sometimes I would join the family, almost as an honorary member. There was one such time in Hawaii. I was very close to Bob and his second wife and all the children, one calls them children. The youngest one is a godson of mine, and Nick was only 16 or 17 when he heard an awful noise one night, rushed into his parents’ bedroom and saw his father convulsing and then falling on the floor with a... what proved to be a catastrophic cerebral haemorrhage. A cerebral haemorrhage which happened, I think, because the anticoagulants he was taking after some heart surgery were not properly monitored. I’ve had a horror of anticoagulants since that time, and if I go on anticoagulants, I have my blood tested every... every five minutes.

Beside more serious reading, Dickens and Thackeray and Trollope and Pope – I loved Pope as a poet, I... I had huge swathes of Pope, The Epistle to Arbuthnot [sic], and whatnot, and The Dunciad by heart – but there was also lighter reading of one sort or another. Although, maybe this isn’t a fair word, but like Eric [Korn] and like so many of my generation I was enamoured of HG Wells, or I should say the early HG Wells. The HG Wells of The Time Machine, of The War of the Worlds, of The Invisible Man, of The First Men in the Moon, and of wonderful short stories, Pollock and the Porroh Man, The Moth, The New Accelerator, the…  I’m blocking on a title. Not... ah, The Country of the Blind.
I have in fact referred to many of these things of Wells in my own work. In The Country of the Blind – I may have the title slightly wrong there – an intrepid traveller gets separated from his companions.  I think they are all killed in an avalanche. He survives, and somehow or another he ends up, to his own surprise, in an inhabited valley – a rather puzzling valley. He looks around. He notices that the houses are parti-coloured with patches of... of indiscriminate colour, and he thinks to himself: these people must be as blind as bats! Bats aren’t blind, by the way. Anyhow, when... when he meets them he finds they are indeed blind, and... and that there had been an eye disease.  He realises – he puts things together – that there was an eye disease 300 years earlier when the valley was first inhabited, and bit by bit and generation by generation, the eyes atrophied and so did the idea of the visual and the visible.
And he... on the other hand, these people have preternaturally sensitive senses of... of hearing, of touch, and so forth. He imagines that he, as a normal human being, can take over, and... you know, and rule the village, but he soon finds that things are absolutely… he is absolutely mistaken, because when night comes the blind people move around with their usual facility, and of course, there are no lights anywhere and he is totally helpless in the dark.  And the story... so he is regarded as a sort of pathetic invalid by the blind, but there is one girl who loves him, and marriage is considered. And the elders say they will permit the marriage if the traveller allows these... these pathological organs, which are producing hallucinations and delusions – these strange twitchy organs, tumours, these soft things which he calls eyes – if he consents to have those removed then he might be sane like the rest of them.
I didn’t mean to tell the story, but... but this was very much in my mind when I went to Pingelap, and at one point found myself surrounded by people who were born colour-blind, and who said very strongly to me that far from having a sense which they didn’t have, they thought that I was markedly defective in my appreciation of texture and boundary and contrast and... and movement and depth and all that.

Many of Wells’ stories are... are in my own work. When I spoke of L-DOPA and its power to accelerate movement and thought... I thought of, I quoted The New Accelerator. Now in my current book on hallucinations, I... I have a footnote quoting Wells’ short story, The Moth.
It’s actually a wonderful short story in many ways, because it’s about the monstrous way in which scientists can behave, and how they can attack one another, and in particular it’s about two zoologists who are always... attacking each other. One creates a species, another extinguishes the species. These two zoologists reach international eminence, basically through quarrelling with one another, and then one of them happily makes a... a particularly vicious attack and an annihilating attack on the other, and the effect of this apparently is, well, he’s very taken aback.  The other man dies, and suddenly he’s left without his rival, without his enemy, without his motivation, and then he... one evening he... he sees and hears an enormous moth, which comes in. He hears a ping against the lampshade. I think that ping is the first thing, so he starts by listening, then he sees it, and he goes after this hallucinatory moth and he chases it outside. He doesn’t realise it’s a hallucination, and he breaks a leg, and he... he wonders if this is the ghost of his deceased rival. 

I loved almost everything Wells wrote at that time, including his visions of the past, of... of the grisly folk, who were Neanderthal. This was an unusually sympathetic view of Neanderthals.  Neanderthals in the 1890s, you know, were often regarded as, you know, as... as grim, ugly, ape-like creatures, whereas, Wells shows them, I think, as rather fine, and driven to extinction by, sort of, a nasty little... nasty little Cro-Magnon man – nasty little Homo sap.

There were his visions of the future. Of course, Wells... predicted tanks, escalators, all... all sorts of things, but that was at a relatively low level. He was obviously a man, I think, deeply ambivalent about the future.  One sees this in... in The Time Machine, where the human species has split into two, these infantile, childlike Elois on the surface, and these lemur-like Morlocks down below.
 

My love of Wells made me want to see Wells, and at the end of the war in '45 he was still living in Hanover Terrace, in Regents Park. And... loitering and following is... is not in my nature, but I did often come, hoping to catch a glance of Wells. I did once see an old man come out on a balcony. Whether it was Wells or not, I don’t know, but... but I like to think it was Wells.

The... his last book was called, Mind at the End of its Tether.  It was a rather grim book. After the early stuff, which now would be called science fiction, but the term science fiction, which I dislike, didn’t... didn't exist, I think, at the time – Wells moved into all sorts of social novels. I never read those, or if I read them I was bored. There was Ann Veronica, and Tono-Bungay, and Kipps, and a lot of them, but he also wrote, either as sole author or co-author, some really wonderful encyclopaedic works. One of them was The Outline of History, and the other, which he wrote with Julian Huxley and his own zoologist son, was a... a wonderful biology book. But in the end he... he became ill, and... and I think rather depressed and pessimistic, but he was... affected me very much, and so too did another writer, who was Olaf Stapledon.
One of Olaf Stapledon’s novels, Sirius, is about a dog, which through neurosurgical manipulation was given human intelligence, and I think it’s a very, very moving description of being torn between animal instincts and... and human sensibility, which of course, we all are, but it was embedded in a dog. There’s also an amazing book of Olaf Stapledon's, Last and First Men, in which he imagines, I don’t know, something like 20 generations, 20 future species of man – huge range.

Wells and Stapledon were briefly friends, but then I think Wells turned against him. It’s not easy having someone in the same field. Wells had written about this sort of... Hapley and Pawkins, I mean this could have been, and perhaps it was, Darwin and Owen.
Owen was a great anatomist and a very important describer of fossils. The... the term ‘dinosaur’ comes from Owen, and he and Darwin were very friendly, up to a point.  Up to the point when The Origin [of Species] came out, and Owen was a... a biblical literalist and he... he couldn’t bear Darwin’s way of thinking. First, anonymously, or pseudonymously, and then in other ways, he attacked Darwin in really vile ways. Darwin never replied to him directly, but Thomas Huxley, who used to be called Darwin’s bulldog, sort of, went... went to the fight. Now if you go into the Natural History Museum, Richard Owen, I think founded the museum, but you see the statues of Richard Owen and of Darwin, and you see them as great contemporaries, whereas, in fact they were... they were mortal enemies. Darwin was not a hater. Owen was a hater. I think haters are hateful. I... I hope I’m not a hater myself. I... I don’t think I am.

My... my love of... of fantasy, in particular fantasy which takes off from existing science and existing humanity, remained with me into my 20s and 30s, and early 40s, and I had at one time…  this was before we met, Kate, but I had at one time an entire bookcase full of science fiction. I... I think I read, I don’t know, six science fiction novels a week. I fed on them. I was a voracious reader. I was very fond of Arthur Clarke, and Heinlein, and some of the older writers, and I became very fond of Star Trek when it appeared. It had characters. It had real characters one got to know, Spock, and... and Scotty, and beam... and beaming up, and actually, 25 years later I met Spock. It was rather nice meet... meeting him in the flesh. I think, however, that I slightly preferred the next generation to the original Star Trek, with Jean-Luc Picard, and of course, magnificently acted. One got to know them all.
I never missed a Star Trek, or very rarely.  I would put off important engagement – I don’t think there was easy recording at that time – and I’d put off important engagements because I needed to be by the television at 8 o’clock, and that was that. On one occasion, I went... when I was in Los Angeles I went to the studio, because I wanted to... and I met Brent Spiner, who was Data.  And I told him he... he was the icon of autistic people everywhere, and I think he looked rather puzzled and he wasn’t quite sure what... what to make of my comment, which was meant to be a high compliment. 

I loved, and still love, books of scientific travel.  The greatest one, of course, is Darwin, and the Beagle, but there’s Humboldt's narrative, there’s Bates on the Amazon, there’s Wallace in the Malay Archipelago, Spruce’s travels in South America, pushing back the new and unknown, and again, perhaps partly based on that, sort of, Conan Doyle’s Challenger novels. The... The Lost World, a plateau somewhere in South America, with... with prehistoric life there. In fact, in Venezuela there are these strange things. I don’t know how to pronounce the word, tepuis, which are really vertical hills, which are quite unclimbable. The only way to…  and which all have extraordinary endemics... endemic species on top, and you can only get on top by helicopter, but maybe these tepuis were behind The Lost World.
But, I think, when I grew up, as I was a boy, I think, I... I loved reading about William Beebe, and exploring the ocean depths. Incidentally, a remarkable short story of HG Wells, probably written in the 1890s, imagines a Bathysphere, very much like the one which Beebe used in the 1930s. The... but maybe some of that 19th century spirit of exploration, and seeing new worlds and going where no man has gone before, which then, because of political correctness, had to be turned into where no one has gone before, which… and Edelman laughs at this political correctness thing, and occasionally he says, perhaps he should change his name to Edelperson. But, yes, here is a team of people who are, sort of, colleagues and friends, and... and they are investigating the universe, and I... I liked that very much, whereas, Star Wars bores me stiff. It’s... it's sort of, cowboy and Indian stuff.

A friend just gave me the whole collection of Star Trek for my 78th birthday, and here I am, an old man who should have better things to do and more serious things to do, and I... at least I don’t have to put off appointments now, I just put on a disc when I want. 

The interest in science fiction, I think, sort of, in some way evaporated when I was in my early 40s. I gave away my science fiction library, and... and I’ve not read any science fiction for... for decades. However, I have to say this, that my book, Musicophilia starts with a quotation from Arthur C Clarke, in his novel, which I love, called Childhood’s End. He…  in this... a... the earth is ringed by [a spacecraft full of] super beings of great intelligence, and apparently benign disposition, who are keeping an eye on the earth. They have a special reason for doing so, which does not emerge earlier in the book, but there is a scene when one of the super beings descends to earth and goes to a concert. And he listens, and he is... he is very puzzled, but he comes up to the composer and he congratulates the composer on his great ingenuity, while entirely failing to get what music is like or what music is about.
The supermen have no music and they all, if you want, suffer, almost. Not suffer, they all have amusia. They have no idea what music is like. And anyhow, I quote this at the very opening of Musicophilia, and also partly by way of saying that we, as a species, with very few exceptions, are all geared to music. That there’s no culture where music doesn’t exist and doesn’t have a central role, many central roles, and that clearly this goes back tens of thousands of years, because one has found bone flutes, and things from... going back to 40,000.

Kate, you’re lying on a sofa and asking me questions sometimes, sometimes making comments – a sofa, which is covered by a periodic table quilt. I am surrounded by periodic tables in different forms. You also have periodic table cushions there. I have periodic table T-shirts. I have periodic table socks. I wish I were wearing them. But when my gaze strays, I see an unobscured portion of the periodic table, with arsenic and selenium and bromine and tellurium and iodine there, and as I look I think of stories associated with all of these elements.  For example, how... how Humphry Davy, who discovered chorine and iodine, realised there must be an element in between them. In fact, he... it was discovered 15 years later. And... but one of the things I wondered about writing about, as I was writing Uncle Tungsten, was a... a child’s book of the elements.
For me growing up, a book I loved was by Mary Elvira Weeks. It was called Discovery of the Elements. And the properties of elements, but the lives of their discoverers, affected me greatly, and it still affects me greatly. I... when I gave my sister-in-law... I had her sent a sample of thulium for her 69th birthday, I thought of a story of Mary Elvira Weeks, of how Auer von Welsbach, realise... who discovered and worked on many of the rare earth elements, on his last day…  I don’t know what happened, maybe an aneurism had started leaking inside him. He... he knew he only had a few hours, and he walked slowly up to his own laboratory. And Weeks describes how he pulled the cover over the spectroscope, looked at his samples of thulium, which were the last thing he worked on, which he would have to leave unfinished, came downstairs, gazed at a portrait of his father for a minute, and then went to bed and died.
I mean, so that is a thulium story. There are many thulium stories. Perhaps, some time when I don’t feel there are things I need to do more urgently, I should write a child’s book of the elements. It’s the only sort of children’s book I have any impulse to read... I’m sorry, I have any impulse to write. That might have been a Freudian error.

I wasn’t quite sure what direction I would go in after Uncle Tungsten, and Oaxaca Journal.  Both of those were... were non-medical books. They were not written so much by... by the neurologist as by someone, well, looking back on his... on his childhood, and by a fern enthusiast on an excursion, a... a fern foray in the wilds of Oaxaca. What... what should come next?  What did come next were, as I had done earlier, the writing of long case histories.

In '99 I received a letter from a very eminent pianist, whom I had heard of, and she described how at a concert in 1990, when there was a sudden change of programme to a different Mozart piano concerto, she... she wanted to refresh herself and glance at the score, and she glanced at the score and found it unintelligible. She... she could see that there were the marks of notes, and the clefs, and the ornaments, but she... it didn’t have any meaning for her. She rubbed her eyes, and... and then, since she had a flawless memory, she played it anyhow, but this, her ability to recognise music fluctuated. At the time this happened, I think she may have had a cold, or whatever. It fluctuated, but by '95 she couldn’t read music at all, and had started to have difficulty... and had started to have difficulty reading print.
But she had no difficulty writing, so she wrote me a letter describing this, and wondering... she was puzzled by it. She said, if she went to an ophthalmologist she could clearly see and copy the tiniest letters on the chart, even though she didn’t know what letters they were, but she could describe their shape. So she came to see me. At that time I was working in an epilepsy centre, which my friend Orrin Devinsky was running, but we saw all sorts of patients, epileptic and otherwise.  I spent a lot of time with Lilian Kallir, and so did you, Kate. And I... I really grew to love her. It did not enter my mind at first that I would ever write about her.  I’m not sure, but I don’t think it entered her mind, although she had read some of my work.
And after that first consultation I couldn’t find my reflex hammer. It’s over there, the one with a red handle. And I... I looked everywhere, and then I couldn’t find my medical bag. And then Lilian came back, breathless. She said she had taken my medical bag by mistake, and it was only in the taxi, when she saw the red tip of the reflex hammer that she realised this was the case, and so she said, I was the woman who mistook the doctor’s bag for her own handbag, or something of the sort. She could laugh at herself, which was fortunate, because she was in a... really a grim situation, in which her power to recognise anything visually was eroding. I... I wrote about Lilian, and this was in fact the first case history, I think, I’d written in 10 years or so, perhaps since... since Temple Grandin.

Then there was a patient at hospital, who had had a stroke and was aphasic, profoundly aphasic, and... who at first had been absolutely devastated, and horribly isolated, as people with aphasia can be. They may have all their intellectual powers, but they can’t…  they don’t have language to express themselves with, or sometimes they can’t understand language, or both. Both were impaired with Pat, but one way and another, she found and was helped to find an extraordinary facility in gesture, in pointing, in understanding other people’s gesture, and also using a lexicon of words. She knew the individual meaning of words, or she got to know it, although she couldn’t get syntax, she couldn’t put a sentence together. But, Pat, although there was no, or very little neurological recovery, really had the most extraordinary personal recovery – became a very vivid figure. She had very good daughters, who took her out, and she went to art shows. She had herself been a... an entrepreneur of art, and had art galleries of her own before this happened, and she went to theatres and films, and she went swimming. This hemiplegic woman went swimming.
She was full of life, and I felt I couldn’t appreciate the fullness of her life sufficiently in a hospital room. What can you do in a hospital room? So one Saturday afternoon I arranged to go for a walk with her. She was in her wheelchair, one of her daughters was wheeling. We went down Allerton Avenue, which is a busy shopping avenue in the Bronx. It was obvious that Pat knew everyone, and... and they knew her, and that somehow she could have a pretty full communication with people, despite being profoundly aphasic. I found all of this extraordinary, and inspiring, and I wrote about Pat, and I became very fond of her too, and in fact, her photo is still up in the office, just above my desk, as... as some of Lilian Kallir’s CDs are with me, including one very special thing.
Once Lilian played a piece, which puzzled me. I said, 'It’s familiar, but... but it’s not familiar.  You know, I don’t understand'.  And she said, 'It’s simple'.  She said, 'Last night I heard a Haydn quartet and I arranged it for piano in my head, overnight', and this was the piano transcription of it. She... as her ability to read music and look at printed music diminished, she got more and more heightening of her power to deal with music in her mind. So, I... but anyhow, to go back, I wrote about Pat as well. I think this may have been published a year or two later.

And then, I think it was perhaps in 2005, I got a letter. So many of my... I don’t know what to call them, house calls, neurological adventures, have come, as they came for Sherlock Holmes, when there’s a knock at the door, or a letter arrives. Of course, for me it can also be a phone call, which I don’t think it could be for…  I don’t think the telephone ever exists in the Sherlock Holmes…
Interestingly, of course, the Holmes stories started to be written at the end – the long novels – at the end of the 1880s. They were written into the mid 1920s, by which time telephones did exist, but Conan Doyle remarks this in his preface to the collective works, that you cannot date them, and in fact, they are all in a changeless London of the 1890s. Where was I? I’ve lost my train of thought. Yes, so I received a letter from someone whom I had met nine years earlier. Her husband was an astronaut, Dan Barry, and at that time – and still I was – very, very interested in... in astronauts, and the shuttle, and spaceflight. I was going to write about this, and in a way which I still find heartbreaking, my big notebook, which was full of notes I took at the multiple launches and landings, got lost. Actually it got stolen. It was in an attaché case with other things of mine, and it got... there was a break-in to a hotel room in London and it was stolen – useless to the thief, disabling for me.
But anyhow, it was at a launch party for Dan Barry. He wasn’t there, of course, because he was preparing to go in the capsule, but his wife, Sue, was there, and... I don’t know how we got on to this, I think she came up to me and said, 'You’ve been looking at me'. I said, 'No, I haven’t,' and she said, 'Yes, you have'. She said, 'You think there’s something askance with my eyes'. Well, she was right, I did think so. She said... she says, 'Cosmetically they’re perfect, but they are not quite in alignment, are they? And I said, 'Well, now you mention it I agree, they are not quite in alignment'. And she told me then that she had been born with a squint, or strabismus, cross-eyed, that there had been surgery to correct vision when she was two, and again when she was four, and again when she was seven, or whatever, but functionally the eyes were independent. Both were good eyes. Sometimes, if people have a squint the brain suppresses information from one eye, which becomes effectively blind. This hadn’t happened with her. Both eyes were good, but she was either using one eye or the other, but never both of them together. And this meant for me, that she did not have stereoscopic vision, which depends on using both eyes together, and the brain’s... computation of distance from the disparity between these two images. And I asked Sue... I asked Sue whether she could imagine stereovision? And she said, 'I think so'.  She said, 'I’m a professor of neurobiology'. She said, ‘I’ve read Hubel and Wiesel’s papers'.  Hubel and Wiesel had written groundbreaking papers about the elementary vision, including stereovision, in the 1960s, and she had, you know, she had studied these when she was in college. She said, 'I think I can imagine it'. I said, 'Okay'.
  Nine years later I got a letter from her, in which she recalled this conversation, and her saying that she could imagine stereovision, and she said, 'I was wrong'. And she went on to say that in fact – and she described in detail how it had happened – in fact, to her own amazement, she had acquired stereovision in her 50th year.

She said she had acquired stereovision, to her own astonishment, in her... in her 50th year, and it was the most wonderful enlargement, and heightening of vision. She found the world almost intolerably beautiful, and enriched by this. The only analogy she could think of, she said, perhaps someone who had never seen colour, and then was suddenly given colour, and how much richer the world would be for them. But she also said she was very surprised, because it was her understanding, and the understanding of her doctors, and of the profession generally that stereovision had to be acquired by the age of two, or thereabouts, or it could never be acquired. One would be past the critical period, but her own experience had been contrary to this. Well, I was fascinated by the letter, and I turned to my visual team, to Ralph Siegel, and Bob Wasserman, who had been with me on other visual adventures, and we drove up to Massachusetts, where Sue was, and we saw her.
I was a little bit suspicious, I have to say, I’d never heard of such a thing, I wondered if she was deluding herself. And I had brought along with me some special stereograms, containing print at different stereo levels, but one could only judge this if one had stereo. But anyhow, it was quite clear that Sue did have stereo, although she herself called it shallow stereo. There was one interesting thing. I brought along some of these red and green glasses, as well, so that all of us could look at some of the red and green anaglyphs, as they’re called, and there was one anaglyph of a geometrical figure, and Sue looked at it and she said, 'That’s where the apex is'. And for her the apex was about four centimetres, an inch and a half above the surface. For Ralph and for Bob it was six or seven centimetres above the surface, and for me it was 12 centimetres above the surface. And I was very, very surprised at this, because I thought, you know, by simple trigonometry almost, a given disparity would be interpreted as... as a given amount of depth, of stereo depth.
This actually confirmed my feeling, which I had had since boyhood, and which I shared with my fellow members of the New York Stereoscopic Society, since stereoscopy had been a lifelong passion for me, that I tended to see the world in exceptional depth.  That I was very strongly, and... and perhaps too exclusively attuned to stereo clues, but there’s no doubt that Sue had developed this, and, well, there is a long story. She sent me her visual diary, and I wrote a long article about her, an article which was actually, partly autobiographic, because I relived my own passion for stereoscopy, and... so that too was published. So then I had had long articles on Lilian Kallir, the musician, on Aphasic Pat, and now on Stereo Sue.

My article on Stereo Sue had the title, Stereo Sue, and just as almost 20 years earlier The New York Review of Books used colour for the first time, with regard to Isaacson the colour-blind artist, here The New Yorker printed a pair of stereo photos for the first time to illustrate the article on Stereo Sue.
My thought, at that point, was to put these three case histories together and just have a little book called Three Women. It had occasionally been said that too many of my patients were male, although when I wrote about Temple Grandin that was altered a bit, so I... I wanted to show that I could be equally sensitive to the plights and predicaments, and... and resources, and personalities of women, and so... so this was going to be Three Women.

I was especially fascinated by Stereo Sue because the business of... of stereoscopy and how we construct depth... was a lifelong interest of mine, and very... and also was very strongly developed in me. I had spent years with stereo photography and stereo cameras, and all that. But... so in the summer of '05, I think, I wrote my piece on Sue, but in December of '05 something happened to me. It was a Saturday. I had gone for a swim – my usual swim – and then I thought I would go to the pictures, to the movies. But I had barely sat down, the movie, the main movie hadn’t started – there were previews – when I became aware of... of an incandescence and a, sort of, scintillation to my left... very, very brilliant, and I first thought it might be a migraine scintillation.  I’d had visual auras, but it was unlike any migraine phenomenon I’d ever had, and I soon realised that it was not something in my brain but something in my eye, something in my right eye. I realised too that part of the visual world was missing for me, that there was, a wedge of vision, was missing at about 10 o’clock.
I was very, very frightened. I... I wondered if I was having a... a haemorrhage into the eye. I wondered if I’d detached a retina. I wondered if I might go completely blind in that eye, if something might then happen in the other eye. And at the same time I said to myself, ah, it’s nothing, it’s just one these things, and I sat at the cinema for a while, although I couldn’t attend to the film. Basically, I was testing my visual field the whole time, and then I burst out, hoping that the real world would give me full vision, but there was still something missing. And I phoned my ophthalmologist friend, Bob, who had always been my colleague in all sorts of visual adventures, and this time he said – he lived far from Long Island – he said, 'Get yourself to an ophthalmologist pronto, ASAP!' And I got to an ophthalmologist that afternoon, and he was at first very genial, and sort of collegial, and then he looked into my eye and I could feel him stiffen a little bit. And his voice was a bit different, and he was now seeing me as a patient and not a colleague.
He said he saw some darkening in the retina, and something behind the retina. He said, 'This could be a haematoma, it could be a tumour'. He said, 'Let’s think of the worst-case scenario' – the worst scenario, of course, being a malignant tumour. Well, I... this diagnosis was confirmed two days later when I saw a specialist in ocular tumours, and especially ocular malignancies. When... the diagnosis... the diagnosis was made for me, or was presented to me visually, there was a big model of an eye, and the surgeon, Abramson... Dr Abramson, put an object like a wrinkled black cauliflower, a little black cauliflower, into the model of the eye. And that for me stood for melanoma, and melanoma in my medical student days was sure and prompt death, the most malignant of malignant tumours, and I felt at that moment… in England, judges put on a black cap when they are going to give the death sentence, and that black cauliflower meant the same for me. Abramson immediately read my mind, and said that melanomas in the eye did not have the malignancy of melanomas elsewhere.
Well, anyhow, this was the start of a fight to preserve vision, and to kill the melanoma, or at least render it dormant. There was radiation to the eye, and later there was lasering. Some vision was preserved, but... but relentlessly, the melanoma itself and the procedures to deal with it took away more and more of my eye. I sometimes felt I had a sort of an agreement, a contract almost, with the melanoma. I had a good talk to the melanoma. I said, 'You can take the eye if you must, but you leave the rest of me alone'. So far, the melanoma has taken my eye, but it has left the rest of me alone. As I lost vision in one eye, so among other things I lost stereoscopy, what I prized so highly and what I had written about in [Stereo] Sue. I, the chronicler of stereoscopy, an active member of the New York Stereoscopy Society, was himself being rendered... being reduced to two-dimensional, flat vision. I kept a journal of my vision, and of all sorts of procedures for, I think, probably two ... two or three years.

At the same time as all this was happening, I had occasion to see a remarkable patient in England, a very eminent musician, and a pioneer in the rediscovery of renaissance music, who had himself developed a crippling amnesia following an attack of encephalitis, of herpes encephalitis. Jonathan Miller had told me about this man, and had made a wonderful film [Prisoner of Consciousness] with this man. A film which brought out the contrast between his perfect preservation of musical abilities, his ability to conduct a concert, to turn to... to every member of the orchestra and, you know, bring out their things appropriately, who could play the organ, and improvise at the organ, but who couldn’t… but who within five seconds of ending a symphony would have no memory of having ended it.
A man with perhaps the profoundest amnesia of anyone ever recorded, and I had not seen this man, but I had had some contact over the years and some correspondence with his wife. And it... I think it was in the summer of 2005, when I was in England, that I went to see Clive, Clive Wearing, and coming back I wrote about him, and writing about him combined a lifelong interest in music with my interest in... in amnesia. I had already written about two people with amnesia. The Lost Mariner in The Man Who Mistook his Wife for a Hat, and Gary, The Last Hippie, the hippie musician in Anthropologist on Mars, and now I was seeing someone highly intelligent, a cultivated, witty man, with the profoundest amnesia anyone had ever seen. 

I came back, and wrote about Clive, and at that point, I think I had written two other pieces about music, and if I thought of one little book, Three Women, I thought I would have another little book containing Clive and the two companion pieces. There were two little books... but, what had been envisaged as three pieces, or three chapters and a little book on music, started to expand. And even while I was... keeping terrified notes about the loss of my vision, even while I was waiting to go in to hospital, I was at the same time seeing patients, or subjects with various musical problems, and writing about them, and to some extent, I think, writing about music, and musical disorders and musical gifts, and... and the whole mysteriousness of music, and wondering, you know, what’s music doing in human nature? Why has it evolved, if evolution is the right word? I was... I was joyfully absorbed by... by music, at a time when I was trying to deal with what was perhaps a... a mortal disease in my eye.
The music book, which was going to be a little three chapters, expanded and expanded, finally to 29 chapters, and... it took me in many, many different directions, and it was published, I think in '07. Was it '07, Kate? Probably '07. The… whether one could call it a book or not, I don’t know, but at least every piece was about music. There were 29 quasi-independent chapters or pieces, and two of them, at least, the one on Clive and I think perhaps another one, were published in... in The New Yorker.

At that time... the book was already written, and two already written pieces from the book, which was then going through proof stages, and things, two pieces were offered to The New Yorker, or maybe one piece. I’ve forgotten.
[Q] There were two. There was the Tony Cicoria...
Oh, yes, two pieces were offered to The New Yorker. One was about Clive, the amnesic musician, and the other was about a... a surgeon who had never been too interested in music, certainly had no interested in classical music, who had been struck by lightning, and had a cardiac arrest and almost died, but when he was revived he had had one of these extraordinary near death experiences, out of body experiences. He seemed... he was hurled back by the bolt of lightning, and then he said he seemed to be floating forwards, and looking down, and he could see his own motionless body on the ground, and people, and someone trying to resuscitate and to do cardiac massage, and then he moved on and he was in a... a tunnel of light. And he described this experience, and he felt he was a different man afterwards, but in particular, he had a sudden, and still has, an overwhelming passion for classical music. He wanted to hear it, he wanted to play it, he wanted to compose it, and he continues to do all of these.
So these two stories then were published in The New Yorker, and then in '07 the book itself was published.

I was immediately inundated with letters. The book did very well. It became a... a big best seller, in its way, even bigger than the Hat book, which surprised me, because it was a very big book. It was close to 100,000 words, but then everyone is interested in music, virtually everyone. Unlike the Overlords, whom Arthur Clarke describes.
In particular, many of the letters said: I’ve read your book and I was fascinated, but I have some musical experiences or some musical problems, which you haven’t touched on, as follows… and I would often read these letters, and I would write back and say: You’re quite right, and I think I made... I’ve never heard of what you told me, but now you tell me I would like perhaps to include this in a future edition, and can I... can I quote you, with due identification, or concealment of identity? And, in fact, when the paperback came out it was 40 pages longer, which was perhaps 20,000... 15,000 or 20,000 words longer than the hardback, entirely as a consequence of receiving letters from readers who mentioned new musical problems. So that fat paperback came out in 2008.

But writing about music and not only problems in music, writing about musicians, writing about the joy of music, the mystery of music, I wanted to revive my own piano playing. I’d played the piano as a boy, but my music teacher had died when I was about 13 years old, I think in 1946. And... and now after a gap of 62 years, I was to look for a piano teacher, a new piano teacher and through... this was partly through the good efforts and the insistence of a... of the piano tuner, a fine musician himself called Patrick Baron. I have a lovely piano which you can see in the background. It’s an 1894 Bechstein. It was my father’s piano and he loved it and when he got too arthritic to play it himself, he sent it to me. Patrick would come and... now, I would, sort of, often dash off a piece in a... in a sort of, careless way, but my... any piano technique I had... had vanished. And actually, I didn’t touch the piano all that much. Patrick Baron would come and tune it at intervals and say, 'This piano needs to be played and you need to play'. He gave me the names of some piano teachers and I never acted on this, so one day in 2008 he said, 'Look, I can’t trust you'. He said, 'Can I phone, right now, one of these piano teachers?' He phoned piano teacher number one and left a message, but piano teacher number two was there and in the flesh, a woman called Faine Wright, actually, a great-great niece or something of the Wright brothers. And Faine is my beloved piano teacher who’s... who has really made me work hard and now I think I appreciate Bach fugues and intricate contra counter music as never before. I think one can’t appreciate music fully without... without playing it. You can love it, you can swoon over it, but it’s... anyhow, the piano has become very important for me. I play it and practice, after a fashion, every day.

Here I am, basically having... having taken up music... taken up piano again at the age of 75, 74... 75 and I think Faine is a marvellous teacher. She’s really too... too good for me. I’m just not musical enough and not pianistic enough or, at least, I feel I’m not, but she somehow feels I am. And the only time she gets upset with me is if I don’t practice and if I say, 'I'm sorry, I was lazy, I was feeling depressed’, she... she says, 'It’s unacceptable, absolutely unacceptable!'  She said you must practice whatever your mood is and however you’re feeling. And the... she allowed me to not practice for a while and fairly recently I... I had a wrist injury, but... but otherwise there are no excuses. And my neighbour here won’t tolerate piano playing after nine at night, but I usually try and play between eight and nine and also to have a little practice period in the morning. So, music has added to my life very much. It was always part of my life. I grew up in a musical household. My father was immensely musical and so was one of my brothers. Indeed, there are some compositions here by David Sacks my brother, who I think, had he not become a doctor, would’ve become a professional musician. He was a wonderful jazz pianist and facile in the best sense, a gifted improviser in almost any idiom. He was deeply at home in music, and all the scales, and all the modes in a way which, alas, I am not.

While writing Musicophilia and afterwards, I myself was going through all sorts of interesting visual predicaments, but I was also thinking about... especially, I think, about visual imagery and how it might be for someone who lost their sight. I had earlier, I think right back in 1990 or so, read an astonishing book by a... a professor of theology, an Australian who then came to England. This book consisted of notes and thoughts which he dictated after he became blind. He had lost some of his sight as a teenager and... and he lost the rest of his sight in his early 40s. His name was John Hull and the original title of his book was Touching the Rock, although I think he later changed it to... to something else. But one of the things which struck me was Hull’s description of how, after a temporary and almost hallucinatory enhancement of visual imagery, so that when people spoke to him, he would suddenly envisage them or envisage someone who might actually bear no resemblance to the person he was talking to, he then lost his visual imagery so he could no longer imagine the faces of his wife or children. He said he couldn’t imagine what a three was like and he had to do it with his hand. He had to use motor, or what Joey Bruner called ‘enactive memory’ because he had no iconic memory anymore, no power of visual imagery. And how paradoxically this enabled him to turn fully to the other senses and... and live in them and stop repining nostalgically for irrecoverable vision, and... or substitutes for this in the form of visual imagery. So he speaks of his blindness, the phrase he uses, he calls it ‘a dark, paradoxical gift’. Amazing book. And I wrote about this book, I... I wrote a preface, I wrote a review about it and when this was published in The New York Review of Books, I got lots of puzzled and indignant, and sometimes outraged letters, especially from blind people, who said they found John Hull’s story very peculiar. But for themselves, although it was decades since they had seen, they still lived in an intensely visual world and indeed, a world of heightened visual imagery and imagination. And it came to me... and indeed, a whole sub-species of blind people exist who are called the visual blind. I... I was very, very interested in these reactions to blindness and in the powers of adaptation and changes in the brain which might occur with blindness, all this at the same time as I was losing my own vision, at least in... in one eye. And this led me to write another very long piece called The Mind’s Eye, which was really especially about visual imagination as it existed in everybody and especially its strange, seemingly paradoxical, but, in fact, a very natural heightening in blind people.

So then it came to me that it was time, having written a book on music, to put some of these many visual things together. There was Lilian Kallir who... who could see the smallest things, but... but could no longer recognise them. There was Stereo Sue who had got this wonderful third dimension at a time when it seemed against the rules to get it, and even Pat was somewhat visual because for her, seeing people’s gestures, was crucially important. I had my Mind’s Eye essay and I was also thinking about hallucinations. And again, I had what had then swollen to 90,000 words of my own melanoma journal, my own visual journal which (unlike any other journal I’d kept before and I... I’d been keeping journals since I was 14) was full of funny little drawings or diagrams of what was happening to my vision. For example, at one time with the right eye – but this bled even into... into both eyes – this, sort of, distortion. People turned into immensely elongated, angular figures tilted to one side. They looked like, sort of, strange... people started looking in this way like strange insectoid figures or, in particular, the Selenites whom HG Wells describes in The First Men In The Moon, so I had a little picture in my notebook of a, sort of, plump human being, being attenuated and tilted into one of these things. The distortions were so gross that it was actually a relief to lose all vision in that eye, because what vision I had, had become grotesque.So I felt I might have a book putting all of these things together plus hallucinations which I had been writing about, the hallucinations of the blind... which was something which had interested me very much, which I had been going to write about in The Man Who Mistook His Wife For A Hat and perhaps would’ve written about had I not had my accident. I had the name of this blind patient written on my hand, I was going to see her. In 2006... so many things happened at the same time. I saw another patient at the Little Sisters, whom I continue to see, I still go to the Little Sisters. This woman is now, I think, in her 98th year, a... a very bright blind woman who... who has hallucinations. Sometimes blind people develop very heightened imagery and sometimes they may develop visual hallucinations. The... the visual brain won’t die quietly, it’s got to be active.

So, I had a lot to write about. I had too much to write about and, I think, it must’ve been in, I don't know, about in '09 – some of the years start to collapse for me and more so now than in the past, I clearly distinguish ‘73 from ‘74. I less clearly distinguish ‘08 from ‘09, even though it’s... one would think it would be the other way round – I decided, or we decided... it was a sudden brainwave... I was... I was struggling with the thought of a book which was getting uncontrollably large and one day, in fact, I was coming back from a medical appointment and we were caught in a traffic jam, because the United Nations was in session as, indeed, they are today again, and in this intolerable traffic jam, Kate and I got talking about writing and together we had a brainwave. Why not extract the hallucinations, they needed their own book, and put together what remained: the three case histories, my own visual journal and The Mind’s Eye. This would form a tidy little book. We showed it to my editor at Knopf. He said, 'I love it, but it’s too short'. He said, 'Knopf made you quite a handsome advance and they expect more for their money than this'. He said, 'This is only 40,000 words. It’s got to be 60,000. We need two more case histories’, or whatever, and it was then that I added two case histories, one about face blindness and one of a Canadian novelist who suddenly, as a result of a stroke, lost the ability to read, although he was perfectly able to write. The... so all of these came together in the book The Mind’s Eye.

I was very close to at least two of the people there: to Stereo Sue, who is a highly intelligent person, very creative, very funny, very generous and... and whom I incited to write a book of her own on the subject, which is absolutely first class. And the Canadian novelist [Howard Engel] has also written a book of his own on the subject and I feel like a, sort of, godfather to... to these books, the books which have been written by my subjects about themselves. Temple Grandin has many such.

So now, The Mind’s Eye being out, I’m left with the subject of hallucinations, mostly visual hallucinations, but there are hallucinations of smell, of hearing, of touch, of taste, any sort of hallucination, hallucinations of being out-of-body, hallucinations of being in heaven, hallucinations of seeing God. They’re all okay with me, although I am excluding psychotic hallucinations, schizophrenic hallucinations, because this in itself is such a vast subject that it needs to be part of a book, in a book on schizophrenia which, sooner or later, I may write, I don’t know.But now, not in a steady way, alas, I am not a steady writer. I have sudden bursts and block. I proceed in jerks, but the jerks add up and now I’ve jerked out most of the 15 chapters of a book on hallucinations. It’s going to... it’s going to have to be smoothed over, it’s a bit rough at the moment, but I would like to see it. And... a morbid anticipation of death and of something or hopeless decline and deterioration has, if anything, increased with age although, on the one hand, although it’s been somewhat diminished by seeing my good analyst for... for many years. But each time I write something, it’s a stake in life and I... I want to see it and say, ‘Here, I’m still here. I don’t know whether I’ll be here tomorrow, but I’m here now’. I wish Ralph could’ve seen his book.

So here I am now in September of 2011, having completed my 12th book, or rather, the 12th book which will see publication, because of course, there have been the books which have been lost or destroyed en route, the myoclonus book which may still be in someone’s drawer, the autism book which, alas, consists of ashes somewhere up in the stratosphere, the Tourette book which was never written. But this will be the 12th book to hit the public and I am not sure what comes next.Auden always used to say, I know what comes next. I never quite know what comes next until I do know what comes next, but there are frightening gaps in which... in which I’m in a, sort of, limbo and don’t know what comes next. I feel I could fill the gap with... I’ve... I've written biographical studies, I’ve written some memoirs, I’ve written occasional pieces on everything from herrings to ferns. There’s... there's plenty of material which could be clapped between book covers, but the real challenge is going to be a new subject. Whether it will be the book on schizophrenia or whether it will be a book of essays on memory, imagination, creativity, consciousness, you know, the big C, I... I don’t know. And this is where I stand at ten past five on September 23rd 2011.

A foundation figure for all of us in biology and, indeed, for everyone on the planet, is Darwin. I think one of my first encounters with evolution came when I was about 10 or 11 years old in the garden of our house in London. It was high summer and bees and butterflies where everywhere, bright coloured flowers everywhere, but there was... but there was... but we had two magnolia trees and they weren’t being visited. They... they had large, slightly ill-smelling flowers and my mother told me that they weren’t being pollinated by butterflies and bees, but that they were pollinated by beetles. And I said, 'Why aren't bees and butterflies?' And she said, 'This is an ancient plant, 80 or... they started 80 or 90 million years ago and at that time, bees and butterflies didn’t exist, but beetles did'. And a, sort of, vertigo took hold of me at the idea of 90 million years, an unimaginable figure, and... and the notion that there had been worlds which didn’t have bees and butterflies, worlds quite different from our own. That... that episode sticks in my mind.

Another encounter with the deep past which stays with me was that I had often been taken to Kew Gardens and shown plants which existed and covered the earth, ferns, cycads, ginkgo trees, long before there were flowering plants. And if one went to the Natural History Museum in the Fossil Botany Department, you would see the bark and trunks, roots of trees which had existed... which had disappeared 300 million years ago, giant horsetails, giant scale trees.

There was also a book which my mother had been given by a colleague of hers, Marie Stopes, in the 1920s as my mother moved towards gynaecology and obstetrics. Marie Stopes had become famous – or maybe infamous – for very frank books on human sexuality and contraception and enduring love and passion and all that. But she had given my mother a book from one of her earlier incarnations. The book was called Ancient Plants and this, again, gave... gave an extraordinary feeling of time far, far beyond the human, biblical, historical scale. Marie Stopes herself was a... an intriguing figure. Women scientists of the first rank were not common in England in the 19th century. She had to get her doctorate in Germany, but she then became very eminent in the field of fossil botany. I think a special chair was made for her in Manchester. And she wrote many books including Ancient Plants and I actually use the frontispiece of Ancient Plants in my own book, The Island of the Colour Blind. And then... well, I once went... I once went to a meeting of fossil botanists in Seattle and there was a lot of talk about Marie Stopes who was very much a founder figure of the discipline. And people said, 'What happened to her?' They said there were her great monographs on the cretaceous flora and then she disappeared. Well, she disappeared into world notoriety as a champion of women’s rights and open sexuality.

People wondered what had happened to her. They said there were her... her great two volumes on the Cretaceous flora – I’ve got them here – and they said, then she disappeared. Well, of course she disappeared, which the fossil botanists might not know, into world notoriety as a champion of women’s rights, of open sexuality and all of that. There had been a, sort of, transition period. She herself was a great expert on the sexuality of cycads, these primitive trees, and had shown that cycads had motile spermatozoa... like lower plants. And there was a Japanese botanist who had shown that ginkgos had motile spermatozoa. And they were drawn together by their shared interest in motile spermatozoa in low plants and also because they fell in love with one another, but the Japanese botanist was married and there were big ethnic differences and this was a heartbreaking affair for her which she wrote about. And then in one swoop, she moved from cycad sexuality to human sexuality. I don’t know why I’m telling this story, but it is a story I heard. But my main point is that some fairly early... and especially in relation to plants changing and evolving, but also their pollinators, this gave me something of a feeling for evolution. And this, really, blossomed for all of us, I think, when... for Eric Korn and Jonathan and myself, when we were with our favourite school teacher, Sidney Pask, at St Paul’s.Curiously, though, the Darwin which was presented there was not so much the Darwin of The Origin or The Descent of Man. It was the Darwin of the six or the five-and-a-half botany books, the Darwin who wrote about the fertilisation of orchids, about insectivorous plants, about climbing plants, and an amazing book on the power of movement in plants. And we... we absorbed evolution through the plant world very much. And... and in a way, this had been Darwin’s own rather quiet... yes, he used the phrase... it was Darwin... Darwin spoke of his own 'flank movement'. If he spoke about human beings and apes, he would run into Richard Owen, he would run into, sort of, tremendous antagonism at the notion of... of human beings having... having ancient roots and lower origins. But with plants, plants were in the garden, somehow people allowed the idea of evolution in the plant world, I think, before it came into the animal world and to some extent this was what happened with us. My interest in plants and ancient plants, in primitive plants, in the evolution of plants still continues and, in fact, I wrote a piece about it just a couple of month ago, because out here in New York on an old railway line which is now being converted for public use, there is a marvellous display of horsetails and so I wrote a piece about this. But then horsetails reminded me of the fact that there used to be giant trees called calamites back in the Palaeozoic. And I can’t look at a horsetail without the present becoming transparent and like a window looking into these huge vistas of past time.

I think I felt deeply at home as I read more Darwin. Thomas Huxley wrote a book called Man’s Place in Nature, and I started to know my place in nature. I was... I was happy to be a mammal and to be a vertebrate and... and to belong in a zoology book. The notion of my continuity with the animal kingdom delighted me and still delights me and the continuity, the idea of continuity was central in all of Darwin and also the idea of change by... by infinite gradation, by an infinite number of infinitesimal changes. I... I wrote a piece about Darwin and flowering plants a couple of years ago, maybe it was a bit more, and I at first thought of two other pieces. I wanted to write about Darwin and earthworms. Darwin’s last book was on earthworms. And I was doing this, I filled my kitchen with earthworms. My neighbour Neil I would bring up buckets of soil. I had worms everywhere. I... I was enchanted when Darwin has a chapter on the psychology of worms and... and how their modesty may be overcome sometimes by the force of their sexuality and then they actually couple and copulate, which is rather dangerous, on the surface of the earth instead of safe underground. And Darwin also has this amazing picture of the earth’s geography and as having been largely reshaped by... by worms. What can one worm do? Well, but if it’s a million worms or a billion worms or trillions of worms over millions of years, and it’s very difficult for human beings to grasp the idea of the infinitesimal and of slow change. But... the worm book brings this out very much, also like... like the coral reef book. One... one coral reef polyp is nothing, but you have... when you have the Great Barrier Reef in Australia, that’s a different matter. But Stephen Jay Gould had written such a beautiful essay on the Darwin of infinitesimal changes of... of worms and coral reefs, that I, you know, I... and I didn’t have a primary knowledge there, whereas I’d been immersed in botany and in fossil botany almost since boyhood.

And not only the origin of species, but the origin of individuals, and this is where [Gerald] Edelman came in and why I felt that meeting him and really absorbing his ideas must’ve been... was like... was as it might have been, reading The Origin and meeting Darwin in 1859. And, of course, Edelman’s book was called Neural Darwinism. And... and there’s a whole vast theory with much experimental and clinical support about how individuals are formed in a Darwinian way. Of course, there are all sorts of travesties of Darwinism, social Darwinism and so forth which Darwin was deeply embarrassed by in his lifetime. When Karl Marx wanted to dedicate Das Kapital to Darwin, Darwin with great courtesy but... but extreme firmness said 'No, no thank you'. I also love to read of Darwin’s life and especially recently in 2009, there was a double anniversary, this was the bicentenary of his death and the sesquicentenary of The Origin. So there’s a lovely sentence at the end of The Origin when... The Origin itself is so tightly organised. Sometimes Darwin says it’s... it's one long argument, really an unanswerable argument, because of the implacable richness of data and evidence behind it. But it also has some very beautiful lyrical passages and at the end he... he speaks of the planets and the stars and the inorganic world in its orbits and its cycles, and of life as... as assuming ever, ever new forms and entering ever, ever new niches in the world and the grandeur of this vision, and for me a mystical, an almost mystical feeling of at-oneness in the world. Really, it takes a sort of, Darwinian rather than a supernaturalist perspective. I... I feel deeply at peace with the Darwinian notion of the world. And it’s... and if it humbles one, one should be humbled.

In my Oxford days, I got very attracted to the figures and the writings of the... of Cambridge people in the early part of the 20th century and the Bloomsbury Group. Maynard Keynes was one of my heroes. I quoted him in the preface of Awakenings and I’ve just quoted him in my latest book. I... I love Keynes’ writing. I was also fond of Lytton Strachey’s writing and his famous or infamous book, Eminent Victorians, which really pokes elaborate fun at the posturing of many eminent Victorians. Strachey had intended to write another book about Darwin and Herschel and various Victorian scientists for whom he had the most positive feeling, but... but he didn’t do it.

Darwin was an exemplary figure in so many ways when one considers the enormous volume of his work done in the face of... of illness. When you go to visit his house at Down, which is a must, you feel his presence there and you think that familiar figure in the black cloak is going to come around the next aisle in the garden. But you also see that in the corner of Darwin’s office there was a little receptacle, because he would have to vomit and take care of his bowels many times a day. Whether some people have put this down as a, sort of, psychosomatic feeling, because he... he knew he was upsetting the apple cart and doing something revolutionary, other people say this may be Chagas’ disease which he picked up in... in South America.

Darwin is also very fascinating about the qualities of his own mind. He... when he compares himself to Huxley, he says he has none of the quickness or wit of people like Huxley, but he talks about his own tenacity that, once something occurs to him, he won’t let it go. And of a rare honesty that when he finds a counter example to his theorising, he is sure to make a note to it otherwise he will... he will forget it.
 
So outside the specifics of Darwinism, Darwin seems to me to exemplify the integrity of science and scientists at their best. One can’t imagine Darwin consciously falsifying anything or committing a fraud. And one of the things which I find astonishing and disquieting now is... is how much scientific fraud there seems to be going on.

In all the botanical books, in the orchid book, the word ‘delight’ appears again and again and you feel Darwin’s joy in description and understanding. Victor Weisskopf the physicist wrote a book called The Joy of Insight and you feel the joy of insight all the way... and also this flexibility... Darwin would... would entertain what he called ‘fools’ hypotheses’, absurd hypotheses of every sort, all the while they would crowd on him. But then, as he said, he would always test them and he would throw out the fool’s ones. One has to be able to have a multiplicity of ideas, even knowing that some of them must be absurd, provided you test them afterwards. I... I wrote about another aspect of Darwin in Musicophilia, which was his inability to recognise any music. I don’t know what Emma, his wife, thought about this, but she had been a pupil of Chopin, no less, and she played the piano every evening. Darwin enjoyed music, but he couldn’t recognise it, he... he had amusia. But anyhow, Darwin is a very beloved figure. I think I have dozens, maybe hundreds of books either by him or, of course, about him. There was a huge burst of such books a couple of years ago at the double anniversary and my friend, Eric, who... who was at first an academic zoologist, then became an antiquarian bookseller specialising in 19th century biology and especially in Darwin. And, in fact, it was Eric who was asked if he could reconstruct Darwin’s own library at Down House and which... which he did do with... in a remarkable way.

The young Darwin who could ride for hours along with the gauchos in... in South America, although he... he was infinitely energetic, he was not always skilful and on one occasion, I think, using a lasso or some bolas he managed to catch the forelegs of his own horse and brought it and himself to the ground. But when Darwin came back, he had a period in London and then he settled in Down House and never moved again. But, as has been brought out in a rather beautiful book, Down House with its gardens became his Galapagos, his South America, and... and if he was voyaging all around the world in The Beagle, then he was voyaging in his garden. He maintained an enormous correspondence. He thought it very important, for example, to speak to breeders, horticulturists, pigeon fanciers, about artificial selection which, of course, has been so strong with... with dogs, with all sorts of animals. He introduces The Origin with artificial selection. And if that can occur and produce such striking changes, look at the huge range of dogs which has been produced in whatever... 20,000 years, then what can nature do given infinite time.

Darwin was an indefatigable letter writer and correspondent. He wrote well over 500 letters a year, some of them very long letters. Some of them going to people, whether it’s a pigeon fancier in London or a naturalist at the other end of the earth, he was always enquiring for information. He himself was in the centre in his study at Down House, but he solicited information and knowledge from everywhere and it flowed in on him. And I... I have to say, though, alas, I’m not like Darwin  in any other respect, being now the recipient of hundreds or thousands of emails a year, many of which I answer, I... I too am nourished by a... a huge scientific correspondence, and I don’t think I could write my books now without them.

I think another foundational figure for anyone, certainly anyone in neurology and psychiatry... psychology, is William James. In the... (although I should add in parentheses that I’m also quite fond of reading Henry James as well, but...) I think it must be every eight or 10 years, I read the Principles of Psychology from beginning to end and... and I always emerge with a new perspective and new insights. In 1890 then, when he wrote this, James was... was very aware of the science of experimental psychology, which had only got going in the last 10 or 15 years before him and he speaks incomparably about consciousness, the stream of consciousness as a... as a Jamesian in term and memory and attention and will and everything, and not dryly. James could not write a dry sentence. You feel the warmth of the man everywhere and also, the book is full of anecdotes, almost little case histories, if you want, of every sort. If I got lost on a desert island, I think I... and allowed a few books, that would be one of them. Another one by the way, I think would be the OED, the big Oxford English Dictionary. I’m a... I’m a great dictionary lover and I think all the thought of humanity, in a way, is... is somehow there in... in a dictionary, in the meanings of words and the examples.

The... well, that was James of 1890, but then in 1902 or 1903, whatever it is, there are his Gifford lectures which he gave in Edinburgh on the varieties of religious experience, which show his enormous sensitivity to religious experiences and emotional states of mind. In a way these two books are at opposite poles, but there are many, many other books of James which mediate. But what I somehow want to bring out, or what is crucial for me and all other James lovers – and I think all good neurologists and psychologists have to be James lovers – is the mixture of objective rigour, a sense of physiology, how the nervous system works, how the sense organ works, with a tremendous respect and honouring of the subjective. This got lost later, because a... forms of behaviourism followed James and the notion of mind and subject of states disappeared altogether.

There’s no gulf in James, I think, between... between body and mind. He is... he is hugely sensitive to both. It’s true that what is sometimes called the hard question, how is activity in a particular part of the brain experienced as redness? This is either a hard question or perhaps it’s not a question at all, I don’t know, but James doesn't rush at conclusions. He doesn’t offer so many answers but he opens all the questions and he... and one feels his warmth and his love all the way through. He used to be called 'that adorable genius'. You know, adorable and genius are not... are not commonly linked, but I think... I think James was that. I daresay Darwin was that as well. And also, when Darwin was on The Beagle and among his reading had Humboldt’s narrative, he said... he said, ‘Formerly I admired him, now I almost adore him’. And I think adoration, but not worship, is perfectly legitimate in science. There should be love figures. And... and among other things, one loves their integrity and their openness and their dedication, not their dogmas. And on the whole, the loved figures don’t have dogma. Dogma doesn’t belong in science. The opening chapter of [The] Varieties of Religious Experience is entitled Neurology in Religion or is it Religion in Neurology? I forget, but that very chapter title brings the... neurophysiology and the transcendental together where they belong.

I’ve been enjoying unusually good sleep in these days of filming, I think because of the feeling of bringing out all sorts of things and connecting them and putting them on record before I am deprived of my mind by... by some catastrophe. It’s a very satisfying feeling, and has allowed me good sleep, but... but last night it didn’t work, and I had a nightmare and I woke up. I don’t have tricks for falling asleep, like counting sheep; I think counting sheep would keep me awake, but when I read lying in bed at night, there comes a point when I’m either forgetting… losing the thread of the argument or forgetting sentences, or interpolating sentences and scenes of my own. A particular one stays in my mind, although it was 30 years ago when I was working on sign language on my own book, Seeing Voices, and I was reading Gibbons’ autobiography, and at one point he gives a fabulous description of seeing people signing, and seeing sign language in the streets of London around 1770. I thought, gosh, that’s beautiful, must use it as a footnote in the book. But when I looked again it wasn’t there. I had invented it or dreamed it.
There is a brief period when I am dreaming for a moment, or having hallucinations, hypnagogic hallucinations for a moment, or possibly getting, you know, what are sometimes called REM intrusions, dream intrusions, and at that point the doors of sleep, the portal of sleep, is wide open. It only lasts about 15 seconds, at that point I must stop reading, stop everything, and I will fall asleep instantly. If I miss it, if I feel I need to go on to the end of a paragraph, I may not have another opening for... for two hours. It’s a very, very delicate thing. I don’t know whether this is common or not, but anyhow, that’s a little thing.

I met many, many people in... in the old piano factory in Gloucester Crescent. This was Duckworth’s publishing office and Colin Haycraft had his office there; he was the editor, the founder, the publisher. And among the people I met was Richard Gregory. I met him there in the summer of '72, this... this ebullient, bulky, irrepressible, spontaneous man, very boyish, and... and the limitless curiosity and energy. And I... I took to him at once; I’d read and admired some of his stuff, and now to... to use that phrase Darwin used of Humboldt, and now ‘I adored him’.

Whenever I went to England I would spend time with him, we had many letters, and there were phone calls. I’m afraid I sometimes phoned him in the middle of the night. There was one occasion… I used to do… I used to cycle at night at one point when I lived on City Island, I would cycle at night because there was no traffic, I would get up at two o’clock and cycle for a couple of hours. And I noticed an odd thing, that sometimes, if I looked at the spokes of the wheel as it was revolving, there might be a moment when it was suddenly still, like a sort of strobe photograph or still photograph, and I was fascinated by this.
And I... and whenever visual things happen or other things, I instantly phoned Richard Gregory, I mean, there’s no hesitation. I think I failed to realised then that it was still in the middle of the night for Richard, but we discussed what this meant: was it due to the oscillating current from my dynamo? Was it due to the jerking movements of the eye one has? Or did it indicate that, in fact, the brain might construct a sense of motion from a series of... of stills. He didn’t mind me phoning him in the middle of the night, and I think he would go straight from... from sleep to sort of, full blaze intellectuality.

An enchanting place was his Exploratorium, no, I’m sorry, it was called the Exploratory in Bristol, whereas it was the Exploratorium in San Francisco, and here you’re invited to play, to invent your own experiments, to… and play was... was at the heart of... of Richard’s mind, both intellectually, but as a method in science. He would... he would play with ideas. And he felt that the senses played with ideas, that what one called perception were perceptual hypotheses that brains had, it could be this, or this, or this, or this, and which... which we favour.

You can’t see how the… a human being, an animal, the brain, the organic machine works, as it does normally in health. It’s seamless, you can’t break in anywhere. There are various ways of breaking in. Of course, the... the physiologist sort of isolates an organ or puts in an electrode, the clinician, the neurologist, looks at an experiment of nature, something which is knocked out or activating a particular system. For Richard, the portal to understanding, was illusions, and he really showed that illusions made a major… was a major way of understanding all sorts of neurological functions, especially perceptual, especially visual functions. And he... he was endlessly inventive with... with illusions. He also sent one Christmas cards which were often full of illusions or... or they were stereo Christmas cards, or... or they had random dot stereograms.

He bubbled with ideas, he was ebullient, but there was this... this bubbling, this ebullition of ideas all the while. I don’t think he ever stopped thinking until that... until the final day, alas, last year when it happened. Kate, you and I had dinner with... with Richard. I think he’d had a small stroke then, and lost a little bit of visual field, but it... it made no difference to him. And... and I think that the two of us were both a bit bubbly, and... and we sort of, played ball together all the while. I have many, many letters to and from Richard, and I would... I would love to write about him some day. I miss him greatly. Not only that, there is no one like him, I couldn’t imagine anyone like him existing anymore. And of course, he came from a great, great line, Galton, Darwin’s cousin, wrote a book called Hereditary Genius, and here he mentions the Gregory family going back to James Gregory, who was Newton’s contemporary, and invented a... or devised, improved, the reflecting telescope. Interestingly, all the Gregorys for 300 years were interested in light, sight, vision, optics; Gregory’s, Richard Gregory’s father was an astronomer... was an Astronomer Royal. I think the interest sort of, sometimes went outwards to telescopes in the sky, or it sometimes went inwards to vision and visual imagery.
But I... I do think Richard was a sort of genius, and his very inventiveness and ebullience, I think might have retarded recognition in some ways. It... he did get his Fellowship of the Royal Society, and I think a Chair at Oxford, but this came later, later than it should be, but I certainly think his works will be read and absolutely memories of him will be... will be cultivated. Just as I used to make phone calls to him at any time, whenever I have illusions, and I have many of them now my own eyesight has become a bit questionable, I think: what would Richard have said. I don’t have anyone now to talk to about that except... except the still living, still bubbling ghost of Richard.

Studs Terkel was someone whom I read for decades, I think, before I met him, especially his book, his early book, Working. Studs really invented oral history, in a way, I mean what we are doing at the moment is a Studs Terkel-like activity, although of course... no, not quite, because here I am doing more or less a monologue with a little printing, whereas Studs… Studs was as ebullient as Richard Gregory in his way. He was so... so imaginative, he was interested in everything. I... I did many radio shows with him, and I think Jonathan did many radio shows. He... he knew, or he was known by, I think, everyone in Chicago. He and Bellow may have been there, and Saul Bellow may have been there in their young days. Bellow moved, Studs didn’t. I don’t know whether he spent 80 years or whatever in Chicago; he certainly became an institution. Everyone recognised him, I think everyone... everyone loved him.
He was very… a very bold figure on... on the left, and was not taken in by any double talk or... or political contriving. He… and I think he was... he was a pretty good writer himself. In his mid 90s he... he wrote beautifully about hope, and he seemed to me, at that point, to exemplify that a full human life was still possible in the mid 90s and after losing one’s... one's wife of 60 or 70 years. He became very, very deaf, but he wore hearing aids, but... but he would come right up to one. His deafness caused a sort of, intimacy; it made one physically very, very close to him. I loved Studs, and I think he was a very important figure indeed, because he gave voice to so many others who didn’t have a voice, and to give voice to others is... is something of vital, vital importance.

Dear Studs... he’s probably giving voice to the angels now.
[Q] You don’t believe in angels.
Sorry?
[Q] You don’t believe in angels.
No, I mean it’s sort of, child’s stuff, fairyland, I don’t believe in fairies, I don’t believe in angels. It… I half regret – half is too strong. There... there is some minimum of regret that there was never a time when I did believe in Father Christmas and angels and... and the sort of, nursery world and the fairyland world, because it would be nice to have believed in that once, but then given it up. But I don’t think I ever believed in it.

There is a book called Flaubert's Parrot, which has parallel columns, Flaubert trying to define himself and say who he is, first in the most negative, self-deprecatory mode, then in a rather positive, vainglorious mode, and somewhere in the middle. I... I am shy, I am curious, I am tenacious, I am ravenous sometimes for information, but also, as you saw yesterday, a dangerous eater at the dinner table, things have to be removed from me. I am… no, I... I can’t give a portrait of myself, it’s up to other people to give their portraits.

I... I never did any self portraits, visual or verbal, although, as you say, portraiture is... is implicit when I write, and Tolstoy once said that everything he wrote was fragments of one great confession.

My brother, Michael, was schizophrenic. He had his first psychotic break when he was 15, in his 16th year. I had just… I was 10, 10... in my 11th year, I had just come back from the country, and I was terrified at hearing him stamping and shouting, and talking about things of one sort and another, which was like the stuff of nightmares and dreams. And I was very frightened for myself. I loved Michael, I revered him, and I thought, if this is happening to him, is this in store for me? And in a way which reflects no credit on me, I think I partly insulated myself, or tried to insulate myself from all this, by locking myself in the little chemical laboratory which... which was being made, and thinking... thinking of chemistry and doing chemistry all the while.

In retrospect, it’s said sometimes that people will suddenly... that schizophrenia may present rather suddenly in someone who has been almost ostentatiously normal – friendly, gregarious, open, and then... and then they change.
Others, like Michael, have been dreamy, and perhaps a little withdrawn, and the term schizoid is used from the start. Though... though Michael was very widely read, an aunt of mine left her entire library to Michael, and to leave one’s entire library to a 15-year-old, you know, implies how... how deeply she thought of him. Michael had… went through… had a lifetime of all the medical treatments. In the 1940s, there was an insulin coma, hideous thing, you are rendered unconscious. I’m not sure that this is too good for the brain. When tranquilisers came out, thorazine, or it was called largactil in England, Michael was started on this in the early '50s, he spent a life on these things, in and out of mental hospitals, although at the same time able to hold a job, a modest job. He was a messenger and would take messages and parcels from one firm to another, although I think the very word, messenger, somehow became for him, to use the title of Galileo’s book, ‘the celestial messenger’.
Michael, as a teenager, he felt that he was the Messiah, and there were very grandiose feelings, but he also felt that he was a… always felt that he was a doomed man, and the darling of a flagellomaniac god. This was a phrase he used. Sometimes he said, 'a sadistic providence'. I think these phrases had something to do with a sadistic headmaster in Brafield who had beaten us both; the sadistic, and indeed, flagellomaniac headmaster. Michael was deeply, deeply masochistic, but he was absolutely reliable when he worked, and he had a prodigious memory, much more than mine. I think he knew Gibbons’ Decline and Fall by heart. He knew Oliver Twist by heart. Sometimes I think a single reading would... would suffice for him. But, he never had a home of his own, he never acquired social skills, he never really had much contact beyond the narrow circle of family and work, and he died about five years ago. But especially I think, since his death, I mean, I think he had a miserable, impoverished life, although whether one human being should ever say that of another, I don’t know. Who knows what rich compensations there might have been in fantasy, though I am inclined to think that feeling you’re the Messiah or feeling you’re God, and these grandiose compensations, are... are just the clothing of despair.

I have wondered whether, if Michael had been differently treated, things would have been very different. This thought has been very much on my mind since I have been visiting various communities where schizophrenic people are supported and richly integrated. One of these, which is of great antiquity, is the little town of Geel in Belgium. In the 13th century a woman was raised to sainthood, there’s a whole story here, and became the saint of the insane, and around 1280, people started to come to Geel hoping to be cured by the saint. Well, whether or not they were cured, they were taken into the homes of people in Geel, and Geel, for more than 700 years, has become a special communal home for the mad. At the end of the Second World War there were 15,000 inhabitants of Geel, and 5000 people with mania, schizophrenia, or whatever, all of whom had a family life, all of whom worked in the fields. You saw in the streets of Geel, deeply regressed or manneristic schizophrenic people, whom one felt should be in a back ward, and yet they... they were playing chess in the cafés or chatting in the streets, or working... one of them had opened a bi... a shop for bicycle repairs, and one saw what a full life a deeply schizophrenic person could have.
I have also seen some of the power of communal support. I visited a... a Gould Farm up in Massachusetts, which originally started as one of these quasi religious sort of moral regeneration places, it’s now become much more secular, but when you... when you go to Gould Farm, and it’s a real working farm which is almost self-sufficient, I think, economically, sometimes it’s hard to distinguish staff from patients. [Erving]Goffman wrote famously about asylums and the, you know, the infinite gulf between staff and inmates. It’s not there in a place like Gould Farm, moreover, there are friendships there, and there is work for everyone to do. The cows have to be milked, you can't say, 'I’m sorry, I’m regressed, Christ told me not to milk the cows’. The others will... will say, 'Go fucking milk the cows'. And the... the work and the friendship and the community hold people together wonderfully, and prepare them for the real world, so-called. So, a place like Gould Farm comes between acute hospitalisation and the real world. And you need also a place like Gould Farm to teach you how to cook, and how to work the washing machine or whatever, how to look at a map. It’s not just the hallucinations and... and delusions, it’s the lack of social skills, of worldly knowledge, which can be so destructive to people with schizophrenia.

I think we are very over-invested in medication and medical models of schizophrenia, although as a neuroscientist, I am very well aware of what may be going on in the schizophrenic brain, but I’m equally aware of the power of community, of work, of friendship, and... and of love, combined with... with the right medication and perhaps the right sort of psychotherapy. I think places like Gould Farm, and what’s it called, the North Carolina, Riis?
[Q] CooperRiis. 
And, oh, an extraordinary place called CooperRiis, which we visited in North Carolina. I think these represent deep hopes, and should be... and should be very much supported. I don’t think all the money should be poured into the pharmaceutical and physiological research. I think it’s very important to have this communal support as well. I mean, in a completely different way, one sees how miserable and isolated one deaf man is, but if you have a deaf community, it’s totally different. And... the... also in Gould Farm, but also in some of the state hospitals, one must find another identity, a real identity other than being a patient, a schizophrenic. You... you have to be a writer, a – whatever it is – a meteorologist, a carpenter, you need a social role, and one which you’re good at, and one which will be recognised. And I fear this was never the case for my brother Michael – it should have been the case. He was a gifted man, sensitive, loving, he should have had a much better life, and perhaps one day I will write about these things.

If an infant doesn’t have love and care, it will be dead by the age of two. This was shown in a terrifying experiment or description of an orphanage in Mexico. [Rene] Spitz wrote about this, and there was no love and no human attention of any sort to the orphans. They were mechanically fed and toileted. They stopped eating, they became thin, and they died. One sees the same with some monkeys. A monkey needs mothering, if there is no adequate mothering, the... the monkey becomes isolated, withdrawn, asocial; so things have to start with mother love, and perhaps mother and father love, but especially mother love. One of the things which worries me now is to see mothers wheeling babies along but blathering along on cell phones all the while. I don’t think they’re attending enough to their infants, I fear something awful may happen.
But… but one needs love at every stage of one’s life, to love and to be loved, and the love must be unconditional. You can’t say: I love you provided you’re a good boy and don’t make a mess. It has to be: I love you, even if you’re bad and make a mess. Perhaps love becomes more important as one gets older and frailer, and more dependent on other people. It’s also perhaps the only thing which can give a certain feeling of... of warmth.

Loving is very different from being in love, which is an erotic fever or passion which can seize hold of one, but can’t last. Being in love is transient, but love can be lifelong, and you certainly see this in... in people who have been married for 70 years, but also love of one’s friends, of one’s sibling, and at some level one has to love oneself, even though one may accuse oneself of all sorts of things. I… though I can’t help wondering whether some very disturbed and depressed people are... are deficient in self-love. You have to be able to love. The ability to love is somewhat compromised in autism, and I remember with… when I made a film some years ago with Jessie Park, a young autistic artist, I remember saying to her father and to her mother, I said, 'You love her very much, does she love you in return?' And they said, 'She loves us as much as she can'. I liked that answer.

If it’s not a human being, if love with a human being is too dangerous, love an animal, love a plant. I think New York is full of alienated people who are... who are kept sane by... by having dogs which they love. This means that the sidewalks of New York are continually stained and soiled and stinking, however, that may be a reasonable price to pay to keep melancholy people alive and relatively happy.
When I am at my lowest, I still water or fondle my ferns, I don’t know that they can love me back. But... but it’s important to love, perhaps even more important to love than to be loved. And of course, this love can go for... one can love mathematics, or philosophy. One must love. Love is the essence of... of connection.

I come more in the open sort of progressively, and... and in the present book... or rather the forthcoming book, although it’s basically written now, on hallucinations I have a chapter on drug hallucinations. And the mad idea occurred to me in the course of that otherwise somewhat academic chapter to tell some personal episodes myself, all related to heavy, and sometimes crazy, drug-taking in the '60s, really between 1964 and 1967, and so... I have outed myself there.

One of the strangest drug experiences in California was when people at the beach prevailed on me to take a drug called Artane. This is a drug which I knew, as a neurologist, because it’s used in small doses for people with Parkinson’s disease. And the group – it belongs to the belladonna-thorn apple group – are deliriants, and I wasn’t sure that I wanted to become delirious.
I... my drug taking was always solitary, I thought I might be a little dangerous being... I had a little house on a hilltop in Topanga Canyon. I thought it might be dangerous getting delirious by myself. So people said, 'Well, look, just take 20 tablets then you’ll still be in control'. And so I took 20 tablets and I developed a very dry mouth and dilated pupils, I couldn’t read, but I didn’t notice anything else. Normally if you take acid or cannabis or something, the world, the subjective world, changes, whereas everything seemed the same.
I heard a car stopping outside, these people coming up the path, and my friend Jim and his wife, Kathy, would often come on Sunday mornings. I shouted, 'Come on in, the door’s open', and they came in. I was in the kitchen then, and I said, 'How do you like your eggs?' and we chatted. I had little swing doors between the kitchen and the living room as I was preparing the breakfast. And then I went into the living room with the tray containing three breakfasts, and there was no one there, there was no one there. And I realised that I must have hallucinated the entire conversation, or rather than I had invented their voices or those spoken in my own voice, and I... I thought: I’d better watch this.

I found myself talking to a spider on the wall. I think the spider opened the conversation, and it didn't seem to me in the least extraordinary that a spider should open a conversation. And, in particular, it was a very academic spider and it said, what did I think of Russell’s explosion of Frege's paradox? And I sort of tried to muster an answer. The... the spider had a very English, very aristocratic voice, I thought it sounded very much like Bertrand Russell, though... though partly the Bertrand Russell who’d been parodied by Jonathan and others in Beyond the Fringe. But, anyhow, many years later, in fact, about two years ago, I told Tom Eisner the story about the academic... the philosophical spider with a voice like Bertrand Russell, and he said, 'Yes', he said, 'I know the species'.

I found I loved seeing patients by myself as much as I'd hated the neuropathology and neurochemistry. I found the patients extraordinarily interesting and moving. And I'd originally thought, you know, what can be duller than migraine, a headache, but it was an enormously rich... and, indeed, I still feel this love more than 40 years later going... I've gone back to the subject a little bit in my present book.
But none of the published papers satisfied me, and then one weekend I went to the rare book section of our library and I took out a book on megrim, as it was called in the 19th century, a book by a man called Edward Liveing, which was written in the 1860s, published in 1873. Weekends were my drug time, in particular my amphetamine time; I was heavily and dangerously into amphetamine then. I think I'm lucky to be alive because, you know, I would throw down 100 tablets, or whatever, and that would triple one's pulse, I'd run a pulse of 200 for the weekend – double one's blood pressure.
But I would be in a state of... in a sort of ecstatic orgasmic state, and... which I would devote to sexual fantasy. I had to go in for sexual fantasy a lot, because there wasn't much in the way of sexual reality. But that weekend, instead of my usual fantasy, I opened this book on megrim, and with a sort of catatonic concentration you can become very emotionless sometimes on amphetamine, I read this huge book and the feeling of drug ecstasy somehow flowed into the book. I... I thought it was perhaps the most interesting book I'd ever read. I started to think that this was mid-Victorian medicine and science and... at its best, along with rather beautiful writing, and, also social conscience that made me think of Mayhew's books on London's Labour and [the] London's Poor. And... and as I was reading this book, I got a sort of hallucination or vision, an absurd one, of migraine shining like a star, or possibly an archipelago of stars in the neurological heavens. I can't explain this or make sense of it now, but I also got a strong feeling that a book... another book like that should have been written.
I thought: now it's the 1960s, who will be the Liveing of our time? And... a dozen names came disingenuously to mind followed by a very loud internal voice which said, 'You silly bugger, you're the man'. And previously, whenever I'd taken a huge dose of amphetamine, I'd always sort of become manic and ecstatic, I would come down feeling terrible and with a sense of great folly and with nothing to show for the experience. This time when I came down the feeling persisted. I xeroxed Liveing's book, and I started on a book of my own, and in a way that launched me.
I think one of my reasons for turning to amphetamine was that I... I felt that mental life and creative life had... had ceased, in fact had ceased for 20 years. But then writing Migraine things started up again, and basically apart from a little pot once in a while, sort of the drug, the big drugs, the heavy drugs have... are long in the past. But I do feel... I think something like this would have happened anyhow, but I think it was more dramatic and acute with the amphetamine.

[Q] So was that... that was your first book, Migraine?
Yes... well, no it was my first published book. I... I had thought I had a little talent for writing, I certainly enjoyed writing. I kept journals from the age of 14. They didn’t have poems or plays or novellas, I was just a chronicler and a describer, as I still am. And... although in one of my notebooks, when I was about 24 – Bill [Morgan] fished this out – I said I had in mind five books, five novels as well as a memoir about a chemical boyhood. The five novels were never written, 40 years later I wrote the memoir of a chemical boyhood.
