peter.mayer

Peter Mayer (1936-2018) was an American independent publisher who was president of The Overlook Press/Peter Mayer Publishers, Inc, a New York-based publishing company he founded with his father in 1971. At the time of Overlook's founding, Mayer was head of Avon Books, a large New York-based paperback publisher. There, he successfully launched the trade paperback as a viable alternative to mass market and hardcover formats. From 1978 to 1996 he was CEO of Penguin Books, where he introduced a flexible style in editorial, marketing, and production. More recently, Mayer had financially revived both Ardis, a publisher of Russian literature in English, and Duckworth, an independent publishing house in the UK.

I came to the United States when I was four, having been born in North London.  My parents… my mother was German, my father was from Luxembourg, but the culture of both was German.
And… we lived at 51 Fitzjohns Avenue, and when I was four, we came to the United States.  I think ostensibly the idea was to visit the United States.  Storm clouds were brewing, we weren't particularly British, although my parents had lived in Britain probably for six years before I was born, something like that, and we had cousins in the United States. They're not around [any longer] for me to enquire, but I think they came to visit the United States, and I believe war broke out while we were there. And I think we, to enter the United States legally, had to leave the United States and go to Canada and come into the United States again on a Canadian quota, or something like that. 
At four, I wasn't very interested, and I don't remember.  But after the war my father wanted to come back to England, because there was no question of going to Germany or Luxembourg, so it was a question of England or the United States.  My mother loved the United States, my father loved England: we stayed in the United States.
I think my mother liked formica or things like that, she could wipe things easily and she liked the convenience of America, I think.  My father really loved England.  Curiously, when I went back to England as a 17 or 18-year-old, to attend Christ Church at Oxford, I came to love England also, so that when I left Penguin which was in '97 or '98, after nearly 20 years running Penguin, I missed England extraordinarily.  And I think it led to the current situation where I actually have a flat in New York and London.
I did, during those nearly 20 years at Penguin, get in the habit of transatlantic flight backwards and forwards and backwards and forwards and I never got jet lagged, but I sure got tired.  But it was part of my rhythm, and so when the opportunity arose to acquire a grand, but fallen on bad times company, Duckworth, I leaped at it and bought Duckworth and then I was able to formalise, if you like, going backwards and forwards.
I'd been able to do it at Penguin, because we had interests, or Pearson… Penguin had interests all over the world and I travelled all over the world, but more probably between England and the United States than any other.  That became my habit and I think after a couple of weeks in either country I said, why am I not going to the airport tomorrow?  And… I picked that up again.

I left Penguin in, I think, in '97 or '98, and I really left because my dad and I had started the Overlook Press, a small company in the United States, before Penguin, and I never was very much interested in whether a company was large or small or...  Yes, I certainly liked making money, but that was never especially a goal.  One sort of has to make money in this world, but I wanted to publish books.  I still, am nearly 79 now, I still just want to publish books.  Nothing has changed, I like the activity.
So Overlook existed, it's now in its perhaps 43rd year or 44th year, and when I went to Penguin in '78 my father took over the running of it and kept it going until he died.  And then it occurred to me, I think when I was 58 or 59 or something like that, that 20 years in a job, much as I loved the job I had at Penguin, it was enough, and I did still want to publish books, and I was perfectly glad to run a small publishing company.  Overlook was small, it's larger today but it's still small, and will always be small compared to the titans in this agglomeration of publishing companies; in, I think, nearly every country… it's five large, five or six, sometimes four or five, large publishing companies and then 'the others'.  I'm one of 'the others', both in the US with Overlook and with Duckworth in the UK.
But I am very happy, I publish books, and I think I can do that till I drop.  I think that's what I'd like to do.  My daughter is someone who went into publishing, I think entirely on her own; I didn't care whether she went into publishing or not, I thought actually maybe it would be better if she didn't, but after her university time she chose to be in publishing. She is a wonderful editor, great girl, and she's at Scribners, which is part of Simon & Schuster.  I don't know if she will want to do either the Overlook Press or Duckworth, that's up to her, everything's up to her and always has been.  Maybe, I don't know.
I am not very dynastic orientated. You should have fun doing what you're doing, and hopefully do something good.

[Q] Did you have a happy childhood?
I did, I had an extremely happy childhood with a fantastic father and a quite difficult mother.  And I had difficulties with my mother because she was very strict and very Germanic.  But I gave her some slack in her later years when I realized that she was worried about me.  She had her own sense of what was normal.  What was normal was always something that was defined by her own life, not by the life of somebody she was describing or worried about. 
My father was a bear of a guy, not very large, but he was huggable and he hugged me a lot.  My mother did not hug me a lot.  After a certain age… I mean, she did hug me as a child, but I think at the age when I was becoming difficult, probably at seven or eight, she stopped hugging me so much and started criticising me a lot.  And she never stopped that. 
But I did think that it was a very happy childhood because it was extremely secure. They got along very, very well, they did everything together, sports they did together, holidays they did together, they liked the same friends, we had a home that was open and tons of friends, relatives were always coming, they were always visiting.  I had a great childhood.  But childhood ends, doesn't it?  And my father was rather… I think my mother and father were quite strict moralists in the sense that at a certain age you should do everything yourself, and I got that message, actually at the age of 16 because I was lucky or fortunate, I don't know what, reasonably talented, and I won a university grant from the Ford Foundation to go to any one of four great universities: the University of Chicago, Yale, Wisconsin or Columbia, before finishing high school.
So I never graduated from high school and I was off at the age of 16 to university, and I think this had both good and deleterious effects on me.  Deleterious in the sense that I was independent of my parents at the age of 16.  I think probably some longer period of longevity or dependency would have been very good for me, but it made it possible for me to say no to almost everything that my parents thought was appropriate for me, because the Ford Foundation was paying for everything, not only the tuition but my room and board.  I did have to go to Columbia because at the age of 16, I needed my parents' permission to both leave high school early, but also to enter university and they did not want me to live any further than Columbia, which was in New York City. I did board there, but they didn't want me to go Yale or Wisconsin or Chicago, as I was 16 years old and they worried. 
Well, I chose or was or… Columbia was chosen and it turned out to be terrific, and I don't think any of the other choices would have been any less terrific.  I think too much is made by what school you go to, what university you go to, what public or private or whatever it is.  I think a lot of the students either have it in themselves or they encounter good teachers who inspire them, or they come from a home that honours what you have to learn or what you do learn.  And I think this very middle class vying for what school you get into, which is a feature of American and British life, putting kids down for enrolment in this place or that place because the mother or the father went to this place or that place, because you will get some preferment if you go to this place or that place, I think it's all sort of nuts. And I think it leads to great anxiety in a lot of kids.
I didn't have that because I never finished high school and I never was put down for anything.  I went to Columbia, had a great time at Columbia, and had, since you've asked the question, a happy childhood, a happy growing up and when I was 20, I was already a university graduate.  I was going to go to Yale Law School, but decided [instead] to become a writer.  And of course I had no money.  My parents' generation or my parents themselves didn't believe in giving any money to children whatsoever; at a certain age you had to do it yourself.  So I joined the Merchant Marine and said I would go to Yale later, to law school, and I earned my living as a sailor, as an engine wiper in fact, on ships going to Panama mostly.
And I lived with a very rough bunch of sailors for some considerable time. Also in the course of years, I jumped ship in Barcelona and lived in Ibiza as a 20-year-old, 21-year-old I guess.  I acted in a movie, won another grant to Indiana University for an MA in Comparative Literature because my professor from Columbia had gone for a year to teach at Indiana University, his name was Richard Chase, he wrote a great book called The American Prose Romance, which found a line which he could draw, I think correctly, with a Freudian analysis of American writers, which seemed very sensible to me and he suggested I go to Indiana University because he was there.  I won a fellowship and was there a year and then applied for a Fulbright, which I won, and went to Germany from Indiana, to the Freie Universität in Germany. 
This upset my parents who were not – especially given the fact that we were Jewish – pro-German, wanted to know why I couldn't have gone to the Sorbonne, why… and I applied to France. I said actually, I wanted to find out what I might have been, or what my life would have been, had there not been Adolph Hitler and the Third Reich, I would have been German, I wouldn't have been English or American, I would have been German.  I was curious about that, and I spoke German reasonably well.  I had an extraordinary year in Berlin.  It was still four-power occupied, so I lived in a city that was Russian, French, American and British, and the different sectors. I spent a lot of time in East Berlin, which was communist, and learned a lot as a young man. 

I loved studying, I loved school, I couldn't get enough of it.   I particularly loved reading.  We had a home that was a book home.  My mother was not a great reader, she read popular fiction, but my father read seriously and my grandparents read seriously.  Because we didn't have very much money, we came to America without means, I was taken early on to the public library in Richmond Hill in Queens, very close to Kew Gardens where we lived.  I remember that we were allowed to take out on our library card five books a week, and by God I took out five books a week; outside of whatever one I had to read for school, I read five books a week.  I was a great reader.
But my mother, who was not, as I say, a great reader, and she was a great athlete – she had been a runner and jumper in Germany before the war – and she was a great encourager of sports, and I was a skier and tennis player and baseball player and all of that, and my mother was always saying, why do you study so much? The answer was I loved it.  I never thought of it particularly as work.  Why don't you go out and play more baseball?  So I had… I had both.  I was a lucky guy.  I was a very lucky guy in every respect. 
[Q] I have a feeling you were an only child, is that right?
And I was an only child, too, so I wasn't spoilt materially, there was nothing… there was no material to share particularly, but my parents, or my father, did quite well after the war.  He was a glove manufacturer, but they had lost everything in Europe.  So I wasn't spoilt materially, but I got a lot of attention. I got a lot of attention. That's more valuable than being spoilt materially.

I had a lot of friends, they were the kids with whom I went to school. The school was about a mile… public school, the school up to the 8th grade, was about a mile from where we lived, and high school, where I went to until Columbia, was also in the other direction, about a mile and so we had some sequence of the boy who was furthest walking to school and picking up the next nearest to the school and finally we were five or six kids walking to school, and I did that in grade school and I did that in high school. And… and we played sports and chess, quite a bit of chess after school.  I shot baskets in the schoolyard too, I liked basketball, I wasn't particularly good at it, but I liked it and we did that too.
[Q] Were you a very… it sounds like you were an immaculately behaved child?
No, I wasn't, I was actually a very naughty child and I'm a very naughty man.  But there is some gyroscope in me that knows when to stop.  In other words, I always understood méchanterie. I could be naughty, but I knew when to stop the naughtiness just short of my mother being called to school to see the teacher or the principal.  I somehow understood limits, and I was aware of that.  Where you can do this and get away with it, it's wrong, but it's not very wrong, and you won't be punished very badly for it, and I just went to the edge of the mischievousness.  I was naughty, but not a bad boy. 

Well, the books are very important, as I think I've mentioned, I was born in England, and we had relatives in England, my father's family, the Luxembourg side, and for reasons that I don't know and I've never bothered to look up, you could export from England during the war – England had very little to export and everything was necessary for the Home Front in Britain – but you could, for some reason which I have never looked up, export books, you could send books to America.  So my English relatives couldn't send anything to this boy in America and they sent English books.  So I grew up with AA Milne and Kenneth Grahame and scads of others, Nesbit, all of them, when American kids were reading completely different books.  So I grew up with English… I don't want to call it literature, but well, yes, English children's literature, before I finally, probably peer pressure, gravitated to American books which I probably did in sort of sub-teens, and I read The Hardy Boys and the Buddy books and... I think there may have been some Uncle Wiggily, which was an American children's book written by Howard Garis, I think.   I think that squeezed in among… in the midst of the British books.  Oh yes, Arthur Ransome was very important to me as a boy.
I've had the pleasure, in my old age now, kind of Gerontion, of republishing some… either at Overlook or Duckworth, some of the children's books of my youth, which, for the most part, have gone out of print.  For example, in the US, we published the Freddy the Pig books, which I loved very much, by… this is a senior moment, because there were 23 of them and I've published all 23 of them, just at the moment, it will come back either today or in the next session, if there is a next session.   But the Freddy the Pig books were all out of print and I had the great pleasure of not only republishing them, but finding a new readership for them.  We've just done that with Swallows and Amazons, and Swallowtail, and it's just a great pleasure to be older and find new readers for old books that one liked.

Rediscoveries have been part of my publishing life.  I don't know that anyone should be interested in what I was interested in as a publisher; of course I was and am interested in new books, but new or old, does not seem to me to be a useful distinction.  You have to publish new books as a publisher, because that's what gets the media attention for the most part.  But the real issue ought to be: is the book readable, is it valuable, is it good, and who cares if it's old or new; if you haven't read the book and it's an old book, it's actually a new book, it's a new book to anyone who hasn't read it.
So this issue of rediscovery is almost a publishing or a journalistic concept; they're just books to me.  I probably have restored to availability 30 or 40 books in my life, maybe more, if you include my Penguin years, where not only I, but wonderful editors that I had at Penguin also discovered older books and brought them back to print.  But at both Overlook and Duckworth I've done the same, and will always do it because, as I've said, I don't know what old or new even means, I only know, does it have a role for readers or doesn't it?  Sometimes I'm wrong, and an old book is reissued, and sometimes nobody cares.
There's one book, a very good book by Crawford Power called The Encounter, a Catholic… an American Catholic novel, which I've reissued three times, thinking it's a great book, nobody has ever paid any attention to it whatsoever!  I think it's great and I keep trying, I think Irving Howe, an American critic, no longer alive, thought it was a wonderful book, but I don't think anyone else did, and he never wrote another book.  I did meet him once.  But other books like Henry Roth's Call It Sleep, which was probably the first book that I ever – I don't like the word rediscovered, but ever brought back – which made the front page of the New York Times Book Review, and sold much more than a million copies since it was reissued.  That was probably the first book that inclined me to think that there was newsworthiness and a contribution to readers in something that was just good and was not available any more.   And I've always liked that role, but you can't build a publishing company on older books, but you can have it as an ad mixture, as part of an ad mixture. 
And you very often get cultural kudos for just doing that, and sometimes the attention leads people to read it again, and then there's word of mouth.  We've never spent, I've never spent a lot of money marketing an old book, but just making it available, somebody notices and my God, that book is back again, I loved it 20 years ago when I read it, I'm going to write a review about it.  So it's not money, it's somehow getting it right, because just to bring back a good book doesn't make it work.  It's got to be a good book, published at the right time, when the circle has come around again.  And as we all know, publishers often get it wrong, including me.

There are… I don't know what the proportions are, but perhaps one out of five New Yorkers, I don't know the proportions, are Jewish, so one doesn't feel very special in respect of that.  One is part of a large minority.  And the majority was not particularly what are called WASPS, they were also the minority because there were a lot of Italian Americans, there were a lot of Irish Americans, a lot of blacks, later on a lot of Hispanics.  So probably one of the larger minorities were Jews.   Perhaps they were a majority, I don't know, but there was nothing very special about it. 
However, I was aware, because so many of my relatives perished in the Holocaust, since we came from Germany, and I knew the stories of my uncles and aunts and cousins, not cousins – well, I guess second cousins or third cousins.  I knew about a great-uncle who at 95 was taken to Auschwitz to be murdered.  At 95, he could hardly walk to get into the truck that took him there, that took him to the train station and… I knew all these stories, and I knew the stories of all different parts of the family who perished.  I knew of parts of the family who escaped to Brazil, others who escaped to England, others who escaped to Switzerland, others who escaped to all sorts of places where… Jews were glad to get a visa anywhere, it didn't really matter, you had to get out. 
And I think the German Jews were actually fortunate for two reasons. They were very assimilated into German life, and they were not poor.  I mean, obviously some were poor, but they were middle class or better, and educated, and many of them spoke foreign languages.  They were to the West, so about half of the German Jews escaped, some of them to have horrible lives wherever they were exiled to, others to successfully make new lives. The other half perished.  But the Eastern European Jews, where could they escape to?  They would have escaped to Germany, because they were coming from the East, and trying to get out West. 
So the famous and horrific number, or the notorious number of six million Jews who died, who were killed, or who perished, they were mostly Eastern European Jews, and I was, to your question, I was aware of that much more than my friends were, my American friends, some of whom were Jewish, some of whom were not Jewish.  The full awareness of the Holocaust was not in 1945, when I was nine years old; it came out in the years after that.  American soldiers who had visited the camps, 'visited' is hardly the right word, stumbled upon or entered in or liberated the camps.  The Diary of Anne Frank was turned down by publishers almost everywhere, including England, for quite a few years before it was finally published by a very small, and I think, Jewish publishing company.  It did not become famous, because people didn't really, almost believe the horror of the Holocaust.  It was almost inconceivable that a modern industrial nation, which was Germany, even during wartime, would practise genocide of this sort, the industrialisation of death. 
I was aware of this, so in answer to your question, it was not being Jewish, as an anomaly in New York, that was not where it was. It was being Jewish at all, as being some special person who people had tried to kill, just for what they believed or what they were born into or whatever it was.  It was a kind of monstrosity that had happened, that the knowledge of it, for all of us in the West – Christian, Jewish, whatever – kept growing, with more and more literature being published about it, more and more photographs that were made of it.  Then there was the significant horror of Holocaust denial, which goes on to this day, which Deborah Lipstadt wrote a great book about, which Penguin published.  People who, including the last president, or whatever title he had, of Iran, who claimed that it was all a hoax or a fraud or something like that. 
That was a kind of vulgarity that not only had this happened, but that it would be denied that it had ever happened, and that people would seriously discuss this, so that the discussion itself became a vulgarity.  Because if you discuss it and you are a sane, liberal person, you say well, perhaps this and perhaps that and you argue it. There are hundreds of thousands of photographs and German – the Germans are always very great at documentation – documents showing that this had all happened. The camps were still there for anyone to visit, there were perhaps not millions of survivors but there were thousands of survivors who could testify.  So I was aware more of the Holocaust than I was of being Jewish and what that meant. Religiously, my parents weren't religious, we were like most Christians, most Christians today in the secular world celebrate birth, death, perhaps a confirmation, perhaps Christmas and perhaps Easter, that's about it. For most.
Well, the Jews are… most modern Jews are basically secular, whatever they ascribe to, they do Yom Kippur and Rosh Hashanah and there's birth and there's death and there's bar mitzvah and so on, which they have now extended to women, because sometimes at least, modern religion, we have to accept the fact that half the population are female.  This was not the significant thing for me, it was that I was a member of a minority worldwide that someone had tried to kill everybody.  It's incredible to me to this day.

When I went to visit Auschwitz, which I would recommend to everybody who has a serious concern for how… what the extremity of the proposition may be of discrimination, we're sort of against discrimination, we're against prejudice, we're against bias, but the furthest you can take the proposition of otherness can be, that's as far as you can go.  And there was genocide as we know, in Cambodia it was of a class sort, there was the genocide of the Armenians; genocide is not reserved for the Jews. But this was a modern nation – Germany – that was involved in this.  We also know that many of the Eastern European countries that Hitler invaded took part, before they were attacked, took part in the genocide.  This is something for a nine-year-old or a 10-year-old or an 11-year-old or a 12-year-old, who hears these stories, at the dinner table, to take in.

There have been other books, and there are German books as well, that tried to make fun of the Third Reich and the experience of the Holocaust.  But their purpose, in almost every case, is more serious.  The question for critics or readers or people, is whether the public, the general public can comprehend the seriousness behind the humour.  It may be very patronising to think that large sectors of the public can't, but maybe it's the truth. There was movie called, Isn't Life Beautiful [Life Is Beautiful] or something like that, I think it was an Italian film, which also took up the subject and was a funny movie; well, the intent of the filmmaker was clearly not funny.  But maybe you need some sophistication and a critical sensibility to encounter serious subjects when they are made fun of.  I don't know the answer to this, but as I'm a real fighter or believer in the First Amendment that there shouldn't be any censorship, I am for the publication of anything, including Mein Kampf, which is forbidden, I think, in a lot of countries.  I think if we don't believe in a democratic principle that all ideas have to be open and available, then you can't have the debate over ideas which I would like to think, the truth or fairness or justice will come out.   So I don't like the notion and I do like the American notion that virtually everything can be published. 
I don't like the idea that a special case can be made so that some things can't be published, can't be read, or become sort of cult objects because they are hidden and made illegal.  They usually exist under some other rubric. 

In the case of the famous book that I had some significant involvement in, Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses, there were many people who told me that I should stop publishing the book, and as there was loss of life connected with its publication, and might have been more, including our own staff at Penguin, you had to balance that, or try to.  The kinetic possibility that people would lose their life in defending a principle that was honoured until it was not in the interest of a very vocal minority, minority certainly in Western countries.
I took the view that we live in the West, and the principles, not only of the French Revolution, but all those principles that emerged from the freedoms that were won then, that are part of our patrimony, they all had to be preserved, that our liberties would be curtailed.  If any particular minority could forbid any book, then some Catholic book would offend the Church, and Catholics might say, if you continue to publish this book, we will kill you, it should be banned, or some Jewish group would be offended by something, and some Jewish book was not published or some book about Judaism were not published.  I think it's easier to publish everything, and to have a debate.
But at least 70 people died, as a result of The Satanic Verses, some in India. I think there were attacks in Japan and Italy and Norway and Belgium and I don't know where else.  So these are terrible decisions that I never thought I would ever have to make.   But I wasn't personally involved in the question of Salman Rushdie's life, I of course didn't want him to lose his life, and when we published it, published the book, did I ever imagine what would ensue after we published the book.  Nor did I entirely understand how upset Muslims would be by the publication of the book; I didn't have a background in Islam.  In fact, when the Ayatollah issued his fatwa, I knew he hadn't read the book himself, he didn't read English and the book hadn't been translated.  So there was a fraudulent aspect to the attack on the book. 
But it was the book and the concept that I believed one had to defend, because once you give in to terrorists you are finished. They will do more, that's the argument behind the non-ransoming of hostages when they are kidnapped.  Everybody would want to have these hostages freed, but if we pay for this, there will be more kidnappings and more hostages.  Well, once you say, I won't publish a book, because someone doesn't like it or someone threatens you, you're finished. Some other group will do the same thing, or the same group will do it more. 
So I took the view that I did, and Penguin followed that lead or was with me, however you want to put it, for a basic social civic, political intellectual reason.  It was the freedom of ideas.  Obviously, since I knew Salman, I had all sorts of positive feelings for Salman and his plight, but the issue was even bigger than he was, and he is a very good writer. 

When I chose not to go to Yale, which had accepted me, I recall writing to whoever it was at Yale, Director of Admissions, or whatever the proper person was, asking for a one-year delay in their acceptance, could I come a year later.  And I think they said yes, I can't even remember now, but I went into the Merchant Marine.  What actually had happened was… well, of course that, but I had decided I wanted to be a writer.  I didn't know much about what that would entail, I wrote always in college, short stories and poems, but I didn't know what kind of a life one would have, but I thought that's what I would like to have as a life. 
I didn't ask myself, why would one at 20, how do I finance this and so on.  But I knew in the short term I couldn't do it, so I joined the Merchant Marine, which meant hanging around the Brooklyn waterfront and trying to buy the right beer for the right guy, because you had to have a promise of employment to get seamen's papers.  So I got a promise of employment on a ship, and I was told the ship was going to the North Atlantic.  So I… with this piece of paper saying if I had my seamen's papers, could board the ship, and work on the ship, I got my seamen's papers and then went and bought used clothing for the North Atlantic. 
And as we sailed out of, I think it was on the HMS Gibbons, or not HMS, it wouldn't have been, it would have been USS Gibbons or something like that, past the Statue of Liberty, I leaned over the rail and saw the Statue of Liberty and said in my most proletarian voice that I could imagine to a big guy who was standing next to me, 'Sure is going to be cold up there', or something like that.  I don't know what I said any more.  He was a white guy and he said, 'What you talking about? We're going to Panama!' and all this clothing that I'd bought for the North Atlantic was useless.  But fortunately you could either throw it away, I don't know what I did with it, just take it off, you didn't need much clothing in Panama. There I suddenly was, in Panama. 

I was reading Nostromo and Lord Jim at that time, and I don't know any longer… it's very hard to find romance in Lord Jim, it's a rather tough moral story, but I was seeking to find romance in Conrad's own experiences of what he was writing about, if not the heart of the story, and Nostromo, which is a story about revolution and civil upset in, I think, Central America somewhere, is not exactly what I was pining for.  But it was something about Conrad and the sea, and maybe just by accident I was reading those books at that time.  I don't know.  But I thought I was a pretty romantic guy for going to sea. I could have had some miserable job in New York to earn some money for my keep, but there was a good thing about the Merchant Marine: they gave you food and board on these ships!  And so what little they paid you, and it was very little, you could save it.  So there were some attractions, and you could see the world, but I only took, I think two or three trips with the Merchant Marine before I jumped ship in Barcelona.

[Q] Were you consciously setting out to learn about life and the world and yourself and so on by doing this?
I think, unconsciously. I mean I think I told you that my father thought at 20, one should begin to take care of oneself.  This was not the way most other middle class – I was a middle class kid – this was not the way most middle class parents dealt with their middle class kids.  I came from a very tough background in that respect.  I tried to say that I was not materially spoiled at all, but I was… I got a lot of moral candy, and personal attention and so on.  But very, very strict, and I remember when I lived in Ibiza, in that year after college and the Merchant Marine, I wrote a letter to my father and said, my four years of university didn't cost you anything, would he give me $5000 to buy some beachfront in Ibiza, Talamanca I think it was, which I thought would be a great investment.  And my father wrote back saying not one penny for fascist Franco's Spain. Come back to America, and if you want $5000 for some good purpose, you will have it, but I don't even like you being in Spain. 
So I come from a very principled background, and I think those principles, they are not the same ones, but they were part of me when the Rushdie case came up.  It would have been very much easier to forget principles and just can the book. Many publishers since The Satanic Verses have cancelled books because of threats made on them by Muslim groups or Muslim individuals or whatever it is.  I come from a very strict background in the family about being tough for what you believe in.

Well, it was wonderful, I had an apartment, a house, a little house, for $10 a month, in a section of Ibiza called Figueretas, and I wrote a novel there, which I got an advance for.  It was never published because the publisher thought it was a very unusual book, the publisher was the Dial Press, Jim Silberman was the editor, I didn't know him. I got the news that they wanted to publish the book while I was in the army, because after the Merchant Marine, I was in the army, I was in the army twice, after the Merchant Marine. Once to do military duty and once I was called back, during the Berlin Crisis, when the East Germans or the Russians were building the wall, 250,000 former soldiers were called back, I was one of them; some computer in Washington spilled my name out.
I wrote this novel there and I came back and found a publisher and wrote a lot of short stories in Spain, acted in a movie, which the… I think I've got a… I think I've got a tape of the movie, which was never edited. The cans of film went down in the Red Sea, but I found the photographer I think in… somewhere, not Nigeria, Mohammed Amin, somehow I got the footage, the unedited footage and I've got it at home, somewhere.  I was a terrible actor, but the reason I got this job was because I looked Spanish, I didn't have white hair then. I have a darker complexion than most people and I had black hair, and I spoke German.  And the film company was German. So this was before dubbing was… I go back a long way, this was 1956 I think, it's 44… 57 years ago, 60 years ago, I've still got the film somewhere.
And I have a lot of stills from the film, but my God, I was bad. But anyway, the film was never cut because I think the film equipment had been stolen by the photographer whose name was Klaus Krieger, and Interpol was after him and he escaped on a yacht from Ibiza, and the ship went down somehow in the Red Sea, but the film was saved. This Klaus Krieger, somewhere from South America or Africa, Kenya I guess, wrote me and said the film… the footage is still there, do you want it, or something like that.  I said yes, and I've got it somewhere.  God I was terrible.

Oxford was in the middle of my Columbia years, because I was a bit of a… very much of a wild kid, I did very well, I had done very well in high school and I also did well in college, but college bored me, and my father, who had a very mistaken sense of England, he loved England but he didn't really understand it, he was, at the end of the day, German.  And he thought Oxford was very conservative and he thought that – in fact it's quite the opposite of very conservative, a pretty wild time for most young people, who go up to either Oxford or Cambridge – but my father didn't know that, and he suggested to me that I apply. And I did apply, and I didn't want to go to Cambridge because my uncle was a don and fellow, I think he was a fellow of King's College at Cambridge, so I didn't want to go to Cambridge, I didn't want to be near any relatives.  So I applied to various Oxford colleges, and got in.  Christ Church accepted me, and I had a wonderful time there, and had a couple of girlfriends, too, but they're probably still alive somewhere, we will leave them out, but they will be in their 70s or 80s or whatever. 
[Q] Okay, so where have we got to then, I suppose, you're going to… the Berlin thing would have been later on?
That was later on, that was after Ibiza, that was after Ibiza – Indiana University was after Ibiza and Berlin was after Indiana University, and then I came back to America and started working for small publishing companies as a reader.  My French was much better then than it is now.  I've never lived in France, but I'd been a good student of French in high school and college.  I did reader's reports for American publishers, French and German books and wrote reports, and got an offer, curiously, on the same day from Knopf from a man named Bill Koshland, and I was supposed to be a reader for Alfred Knopf himself.  I got an offer from a man named Howard Greenfeld, who was the head of a very small company called the Orion Press, like the constellation, not like the Irishman.
And I took that job, the latter one, because I thought in a small company I will learn much more than I will in a large company, and that was true. We were only seven or eight people at the Orion Press, and I did some editing, I did some proofreading, I did some copy editing, I did some publicising, I did some remaindering.  We all had to do everything in a small place, and I remember Roger Strauss, who I knew, someone, my friend Milton Glaser had introduced me to Roger Strauss.  Roger Strauss screamed at me on the telephone when I told him the decision I had made.  He said to say no to Knopf and say yes to this tiny little company. 'Schmuck!' he said, 'if Tiffany's wants you to work for them, you go to work for Tiffany's.'
But I didn't go to work for Tiffany's, I went to work for this small company where I learned a lot.  And I did it for that reason.  I thought I would learn more. The pay was just as miserable in both places, but I thought, I'll be more important in a company with eight people than I will be in a company with, I don't know, hundreds, and it proved to be the case.

[Q] So by now, at some point, you'd… you, had you changed your mind about being a writer?
No, I don't think I had changed my mind, but I… I was interested in publishing, I had enough ego to want to be validated in what I thought was interesting reading.  One of the first books we published at the Orion Press in the period I was there was Primo Levi's If This Is a Man.  I don't think there's anybody in the world except you, now on tape or video tape or whatever it is, who knows that Primo Levi was first started by the Orion Press. 
There are other books, not so famous, that we published there.  So I started to get interested, and I thought well, you can make a living at this, and I will write on the side. But finally, publishing became a larger and larger part of my life as I, I suppose the phrase is, advanced, got better jobs, and it took up more and more of my time. I found myself getting some satisfaction publishing an author, somebody else, and making his voice well known, rather than my own, or my own in respect of having chosen this book, and published it correctly. 
So there was a shift in my ego, and I found I could satisfy my ego needs as a publisher.  Maybe not as well as it might have been had I continued writing.

I always had this issue, vis-à-vis my mother and father, of paying for my own way.  My father had, he was not wealthy when he married my mother, my mother came from a family with means.  My father had proved himself to my mother, in both financial ways, but also by saving her family by his instincts about what was happening in Nazi Germany.  And my mother perhaps over-praised my father, and in a kind of Oedipal situation, I wanted to be like my father: paying my way and I hoped, doing some good.
I came to admire my father enormously.  I always had some problems, as I mentioned earlier, with my mother, who was very moralizing and critical, but my father was a person who had a big heart and who accepted me.  My mother was the way she was out of concern for my welfare, and she was often wrong, or she didn't quite know that she had a son who had a rather different personality than her own.  But… so I took some pleasure in not so much not being a writer, but paying my way and winning my parents'… I won't say admiration, but acceptance, that I could pay my way in life.  That was very important to them both, that I could stand on my own feet.  And their view of that was that you don't help kids by helping them.  You help them morally, you are there if they are in a jam, you have good health insurance for them, but they should make it on their own entirely.
It was a tough school, because my friends were American kids, completely American kids, and American kids are very spoiled and they were very spoiled; I was not. 
[Q] Were you ever sort of… were you scared about all that, the idea that you were going to have to…
No.

I think, Christopher, you asked if at any point I was concerned or frightened that I might not be able to take care of myself and I said no, I wasn't. But I do remember a funny story, because I was as frightened as anybody else up to a point, and that point ended in this funny story.  I was sitting in the army laundromat at Fort Dix, New Jersey, the day before we were being discharged from my first tour of duty, although I knew we would be in the reserve for six years and could technically, theoretically be called back.  And I remember sitting in that laundromat and watching these 20 or 30 machines whirl around the clothing, whirling around because they had a door with glass in front, in fact I think that our washing machine has it even now.  I just saw this clothing whirling around, whirling around and I remember saying to myself, what are you frightened of?  And I was frightened at that time, at 20 or 21 or 22 or 23, whatever age I was.  And I thought, I am not frightened of anything, except some terminal illness.  In other words, I said to myself, what could happen to me that I could not recover from?  And I couldn't think of one thing that I couldn't recover from, except a terminal illness.  So I said if I got a job and I couldn't pay the rent, I could get some other job, I could move into the YMCA, I could become a dishwasher or a waiter or whatever it was, I could always support myself.
And when I suddenly realized that there was nothing that I was frightened of – anything – I was liberated, from the question you asked, and I have never been frightened since.  Obviously I've saved some money after my Penguin years and after, given my age and so on, if I had lost it all – It's not a great fortune – but if I had nothing, I wouldn't worry even today. I know that my brain is still good and I could be of some service somewhere and I can learn a living, and live in a little room – I don't believe any of that will happen – but I could, it wouldn't be the end of me.

[Q] So you're at Orion, and publishing interesting books like If This Is ….
Ah yes, that's true, that's true, and I was called back, that period at Orion, I was called back into the army, so I did a second tour of duty this time in Fort Hood, Texas, in an army post close to Killeen, Texas, about… I don't know, I'm trying to remember now, about 150 miles from San Antonio and maybe 70 miles from Austin, Texas, which is today a great college town and the centre of Texas politics.  Very interesting place. I went to Austin a great deal, it was 70 miles away and I did something very unusual for my unit: I took an apartment in Killeen, Texas, the town.  I have no idea why because I didn't have a girlfriend in Killeen. I lived in the barracks, but I could go to this little apartment, which cost almost nothing and read and write and be by myself, instead of always in the midst of – I had completely forgotten that – I'm so glad you asked whatever question led me to this.  But I was in this tiny apartment, or maybe it was a room, as part of somebody else's apartment, where I could be by myself and read or write.  And… because in the army you always had hundreds of thousands of people around you at all times, and that, I didn't mind that in a sense of being offended by it, I just didn't like it, I needed some privacy.  I needed somehow to discover myself in the midst of all these guys. 
I did have a girlfriend actually in Austin, Texas, who I visited in Austin, Texas, the daughter of a famous University of Texas professor, who was a sculptor, Charles Umlauf, was his name.  I remember he didn't like me going out with his daughter, some soldier from the nearby base.  So the apartment was nothing to do with her; it had to do with getting away for a few hours a day when we had time off, and just quietly being able to read and not be bothered or write or think or whatever.

I went back to the Orion Press, and either my job ended or the company ended, I can't remember which, or the company was sold. The job disappeared. And I was very fortunate, I had some friends with whom I went swimming with, to a pool in the Village, I think it was called the Carmine Street Pool, and I said I'm going to be out of a job in two weeks or something like that, and someone said to me, you should call Frank Taylor, he is going to be appointed, or he has just been appointed, the head of Avon Books, and he's looking for some editors. And I did call him and he did hire me. And there are some long, complicated stories about how I came to be hired which are very funny, but they'd just take too long to tell.
[Q] How about one of them?
If there's some time at the end of this, and you want some additional stuff on tape, I will try to remember it all, but they were very complicated.  He had some androgynous aspects to him and he thought perhaps I did, but I didn't, or I was unaware of them.  I think I've just about told the story now, and he thought that if I could make a nexus with him in this androgynous area, maybe I would get the job.  Well… how does one put it? Nothing came of it because I didn't have the interest, but he did. But I got the job anyway.  So, I think this is actually part of many things in life: stick to your guns, you may actually get what you fear you may lose. Don't sell out, don't ever sell out!

[Q] What was great about Orion was you did everything and learned so much. 
Well, I did bits of it, I never did everything in my life, anywhere, but I got some experience at everything, and I learned all this from my colleagues, and I was lucky to have these experiences. And this was very useful. I never imagined that I would be in charge of anything in my life, and I was in charge of three different publishing companies in the course of my life and… jobs I'd never asked for, but people offered them to me, and in three cases I accepted them.  It's a very great help to be the head of something, and know something about every department under you and every task that has to be accomplished in the making of a book.  Dealing with authors, writing contracts, dealing with agents, editing, copy-editing, proofreading, producing books, picking paper, picking prices, marketing.  If you've done all of those things, people can't bullshit you very much because you know something about it, and you can also, if you have any ideas, I sometimes did, you can also help people and suggest things that they might do, that you've had some connection with, or done yourself elsewhere.  So I think learning is all what it's about for people, especially if they're under 30. You learn things so quickly when you are under 30.

Well, I had some editorial responsibilities at Orion and did publish quite a few books. But somebody was watching over me, this man Howard Greenfeld and… who became a friend.  When I went to Avon [Books], I was now in charge of the company, well, first I was the education editor which somebody said, what does that mean, I said, well I'm in charge of the better socks and shoes, and I had this unexpected success with a book that I mentioned to you, Henry Roth's Call It Sleep, which led to my becoming the editor-in-chief and finally the publisher.
And I think I had to hire people now, and I knew something about what was required in every department because I'd had some experience in two places, Avon, where I was working, but also at Orion before that.  I had some friends in publishing as well.  I pretty much knew what I wanted, I didn't know if we would be successful or not, but we were successful.  We were very successful, we were the tiniest of publishing companies and we took on the largest. The largest company was Bantam and we were the smallest; there were about ten companies between Bantam, the largest, and ourselves at Avon, the smallest. But we had best-seller after best-seller.  Books got offered to us, just as they were offered to the other ten paperback publishers, and we sometimes won the rights for them at auction, sometimes expensively, sometimes not so expensively.  But we were right very often. I had wonderful colleagues, a woman named Judith Weber, who came actually from Bantam, Nancy Coffey who came, I think, from Putnam or Coward-McCann, I've forgotten, and more than anyone else, Bob Wyatt, who came from a book store where I used to buy books and I discovered he knew as much as I did about books and probably more.  So, get him off the shop floor and get him into my publishing company. 
We worked together for 10 or 11 years, we are still friends and he's not working in publishing any more, as I probably shouldn't be either, but I still am.  He's probably wiser.  And he still does a lot of editorial work though, but he does it not working for a company, he does it on his own.  I'm still a besotted publisher. 

At Penguin, where I was for nearly 20 years, I had a great team.  I did a lot of terrific things, I suppose, I don't know, I can't remember them all, but basically, we stayed together, we lost almost no one of our staff for those 19 years.  And so I had great editors at Penguin, Peter Carson in particular, but that's on the adult side, and I had great children's editors as well on the Puffin side – Tony Lacey, Liz Attenborough, Philippa Milnes-Smith.  You know, I… I got pretty good, I think, at picking people who could help the company and me.  I am not especially modest.  I think we did a great job, and I was thrilled to be the head of it, and I took Penguin in a lot of different areas. When I bought Frederick Warne, the company, I became the publisher of Beatrix Potter who had been under-published by the company we bought. 
That took us into merchandising which is an aspect of publishing.  We put Peter Rabbit on milk formula and I don't know what else, tablecloths and so on, but we also published… we tripled or quadrupled the number of Penguin Classics. There were about 400 Penguin Classics when I came to Penguin, there were about 1200 Penguin Classics when I left.
When we wanted to celebrate our 60th anniversary, I had found in Madrid some very small books, and they became the Penguin 60s [Classics], and we took them from our backlist and sold 29 million of these 60 books, which were sold for 60p, and they had, I think 60 pages in them, and that was our celebration of our Penguin 60s. Well we never thought we would make any money doing that, it was just a promotion, but in fact we sold 29 million of them!  And after the first group of 60 titles there was a second group of 60 titles, and a third group of 60 titles, it became an industry.  Well, that was my idea, but everybody in the company contributed to these books existing and to the marketing of them.  I remember I went into Smiths and sold the first 60 books because people in the sales department didn't quite believe that you could sell books for 60p any more. So I went into Smiths, and… I don't know if it was my particular abilities, or maybe just that I was the head of Penguin and they were willing to see me, but I walked out with an order for one million books, and that was the beginning of that working.
But we each did what we were best at or what we could do and I think that's what makes great publishing companies, then and probably now, and probably forever, it's not one person.  It may be one person who collects the people, and perhaps helps them to work together, but one-man bands are perhaps appropriate to tiny companies. Penguin was never a tiny company, it got much larger in my years there, but even when I came in '78 it was a good-sized company.

[Q] I'd love to know how you sold those books to Smiths, I mean, what one should imagine how that works.
Well, there was somebody that… our Sales Head, not our Sales Head, but the sales rep saw, I don't remember his name, and he came back and he said, they don't want any, because there's not enough margin in the 60p and they don't think they will work and it's basically a promotion for Penguin and Smiths is not in the business of promoting Penguin, but making money selling books. Well, this was a disaster for us, because I needed to get a big order from somewhere, and Smiths was then a bigger retailer in books than it is today proportionately at least.  I don't know the figures today of Smiths as a bookseller. 
So I said well, let me try.  Well, maybe I succeeded not because I was very good at it, but just because not too often at Smiths saw the head of a company come in as a rep.  So there may have been a novelty to it.  Anyway, I got the order and we were away and we were off and running. 
[Q] A million.
The first printing… the first printing was even larger. But the first order that we got was already a million copies, just for the Smiths stores.  And… it worked, the public liked the books, too.  Of course what was charming was that every book that we sold looked like a Penguin, so it was all an extraordinary marketing experience for Penguin.  
In fact, it's quite interesting. Private Eye and Richard Ingram took the mickey out of everybody all the years that I was in England at that time.  But they never commented on Penguin or me, until one day they did.  And… it was a very funny piece, I'd love to have it today, and of course one could still find it, but they took some exception to our marketing skills, and they said this American, Peter Mayer, had taken Penguin downmarket, but… and perhaps the emblem of his taking Penguin downmarket was his marketing.  And I remember, I went to Peter Carston and I said, what should I do? It was said not so nicely, after 17 years of being totally ignored by Private Eye.  Not that I wanted to be paid attention to by Private Eye because they nearly always said something awful about you. 
I suppose I was glad that they ignored us.  But the one time was… and they used the marketing abilities that Penguin had in a sort of invidious comment, the fact that we were good marketers was why we had gone downmarket, or something like that.  So I said to Peter Carston, who was my friend in all things British, who explained many things to me, and helped me, I'd like to think I helped him too, but I said, what should I do, and he said well, with Private Eye you just ignore them. But I didn't, because it was not my nature.  I said, dear Richard – I had met him – glad you noticed. That was the only time.  Something about our marketing skills, glad you noticed.

I left Avon for a very short interregnum at Simon & Schuster at Pocket Books. And although I'd worked 12 or 14 years at Avon, I discovered – something I've never told anyone, but why shouldn't I tell it now, nearly everybody involved in the story is no longer alive – I  grated… at Avon, which was owned by the Hearst Corporation, that… and I've mentioned that Avon was very successful in those days, we came up from nowhere, and I think we were twenty times larger at the end than when we began, and the only people who came to me for jobs were very young people, because it didn't look like Avon was going to be successful. And I had a lot of very wonderful young people, and I've mentioned some of them now, particularly the editors, but there were other people who were very gifted: Susan Peterson, who until very recently was the head, I believe, of Penguin in the US, and Barbara Bertolli, who was a great art director.  But in any case, what grated me was that we were owned by the Hearst Corporation which was largely a newspaper and magazine company, mostly magazines at this point, although its own origins were in pretty downmarket newspapers. And they had a lot of magazines, and I reported to the head of the magazine company, and I didn't like that; he knew nothing about books. And I've often had difficulty, not reporting to people who were hierarchically higher than I was – I had no problem with that, but I had a problem dealing with people who knew less than I did, and asking their permission. 
So the time for contract renewal came up, and the Hearst Corporation wanted to hire me for another five years, and I said, I was willing to do so, but I did not want to report to the magazine division.  And they said, after some argy-bargy, that would be all right, and I signed the agreement. And a lawyer came down, who was a friend of mine, from the legal department and said, they've lied to you, they've just created a structure called the Book Division, but the Book Division reports to the Magazine Division. 
And curiously, at that time, the man you mentioned earlier before we started this, Dick Snyder somehow knew about this having happened and that I was chagrined about being lied to by people I'd worked with for 14 years.  He offered me a job at Pocket Books, and I took it.  So that's how I left Avon. 
In fact, the head of the Hearst Corporation called my father and said, the boy's crazy, would I… would he, would my dad, have lunch with him, to get me to change my mind?  So my dad called me and said, what should I do, Peter? I said, well you'll get a free lunch out of it, you should have lunch with him.  And what should I do? he said. You will know what to do.  So my dad had lunch with the head of the Hearst Corporation, and the head of the Hearst Corporation said Fredy, your son's crazy, he's leaving us after 14 years, you've got to turn him around.  And my father said, well, I'll tell him what you said, but he will make his own decision.
So that night my father said this is what he said. I said thank you very much and I am leaving.  That was the end of that. 
But I was very young for all of this.  I don't know how old I was, in my 30s and not married so I thought it was quite an enterprising idea for them to have them call my father, who they'd met, but I knew my father would stay out of it.  I knew by then that my father respected me enough that he wouldn't advise me one way or the other: do whatever you want to do. 
 

So I left and I went to Pocket Books, which is where – and I didn't get along with Mr Snyder – so when the offer came from Penguin, I went for it and came to Penguin.
I took about three months negotiating my salary.  Britain at that time, it was the Callaghan period, did not pay salaries, proper salaries, they had all sorts of perks, but people were very heavily taxed, 80% or 85% 90%, I don't know what. And I said, you don't have to pay me any more than I'm earning in the United States, but you have to pay me the same.  I don't know how you do it, but I am not British, I am an American, and you want to hire me; just pay me the same, you don't have to pay me a penny more.  I don't want any free suits, they were giving free suits to chief executives at that time, hand-tailored suits and Jaguars and... You don't have to give any perks, just pay me plain and simple. Here's my contract, this is what I'm earning now, pay me the same, you've got me, don't give me any perks.  But Britain was a land of perks then, to get around this very heavy taxation. 
 

[Q] Is he someone you would like to have published, Philip Roth?
I did publish quite a few of his books at Penguin because we had bought the paperback rights and someone peculiarly, although not without some context… Philip, I'm pretty sure was introduced by me to my best friend who's my neighbour in Woodstock, a designed, the designer, Milton Glaser, and I believe Milton has done virtually every one of Philip's jackets and covers ever since then.
So, a) I was publishing him in paperback, but then also I had this second relationship with him through Milton Glaser on Philip's jackets and covers, and I think this was in both countries, the US and the UK. As you know the rights are territorially, generally speaking, divided. So although we were not his original publisher, we were his paperback publisher at that time. More recently I think the industry has become what is known as a 'vertically-based' industry and if you publish an author in hardback you generally speaking publish him in paperback as well and, as technology marches on, also in e-Book, but at that time the rights were split.

What I thought I wanted to do when I came back to Columbia after Oxford I thought I wanted to be a writer and I had to finance this in some way, or make a living more prosaically, and my parents, good bourgeois, didn't mind my writing, but they didn't think that was an enterprise which would lead me to be able to take care of myself; their concern was that I be able to do that. So I remember my father although he was very much a bookman he said, well, can't you write at night and earn a living at daytime. So I said, I suppose I can, but it was not my image of a writer. Having said that, many writers do exactly that and, in fact, a lot of writers teach at daytime and write on weekends and at nights and so on. It's not easy for writers to earn their own living.
But I took a different route, which I perhaps mentioned yesterday or the other day when we spoke, and I joined the Merchant Marine and I did it in the summer, the very summer that I graduated from Columbia. I recall that my parents went home. I got out of my cap and gown, went to my little flat which was underneath the barber shop and said what do I do now? And I didn't know and everybody had gone home to where they came from and my parents had gone home but left me there, probably by my choice. And I had been reading Conrad at that time and so I went down to the Brooklyn Navy Yard and hung around there for weeks and weeks and weeks, maybe a month, a month and a half until I bought the right beer for the right guy and got my seamen's papers, you had to have the promise of employment, and I worked as a engine wiper on ships going to Panama and, but...
[Q] What's an engine wiper?
Well, you basically didn't do much wiping, but you were down in the hold of the ship which was very hot and I don't think there was any air-conditioning. These were old ships that had fought in World War II and the heat was incredible and added to by the heat of the Caribbean as we went down there, and we basically checked gauges to see if that the pressure or whatever it is – it's too many years now, I don't know what I was even checking the gauges for – but for each gauge I knew what the tolerance level was. They explained it to me and I went from gauge to gauge checking them. I suppose at the time of Conrad the engine wipers did more than check gauges: they probably wiped. I didn't do very much wiping as a recall, but I did have to go every hour up above deck where it was just as hot as below or practically as hot as below, but there was a bit of a breeze, just to get some air and the fumes were pretty terrible down in the hold of the ship. That's the long answer to your short question what's an engine wiper. I was qualified as an engine wiper. I think that means that I wasn't qualified for anything except looking for gauges… looking at gauges.

When I came… I lived in Spain after that, I'd jumped ship in Barcelona and I lived in Ibiza and I had some adventures. And then I applied at the end of that year in Spain for a graduate fellowship at Indiana University because my professor, my… one of the professors I was closest to, there were two, one was Richard Chase and the other one was Fred Dupee. Richard Chase was the one who advised me by letter to Spain that I should apply for this graduate fellowship because he was visiting professor at Indiana University that coming year and he would help me get this fellowship. He couldn't guarantee it, but he would put in a good word for me and blah, blah, and I did apply from Spain and I did get it.
And I did come home from Spain which is also a very funny story, but… I was on a ship - I won't tell the whole story now - I was on a ship which I just missed in Barcelona that I think had started in Genoa, stopped in Barcelona, picked up passengers and continued onto the United States. And I missed the ship, and I somehow got the Spanish coastguard, I don't know how I did, to chase the ship out to sea, and climbed up the side of the ship. It was a very large ship to get onboard with, I don't know, with 300 or 500 or 1000 passengers looking to see why their ship had stopped and the Spanish coastguard must have radioed this ship which had already left Barcelona, and everybody was looking over the side while I was clambering up the rope ladder to be welcomed furiously by the captain.
And on that ship was a man named Henry Wilson, and if we have time, he saw me clambering up the deck. He was a Hollywood agent and he was the discoverer and namer of Rock Hudson and Tab Hunter; those were not their real names. I don't know what their real names were, but he saw me clambering up the sides and thought he had a candidate for screendom or filmdom or Hollywoodiana or whatever. I was, however, going to Indiana University to study German and American literature under Richard Chase, but the experience on that ship was a long story and for another day.
And while I was at Indiana I had enough money for tuition and so on, but I didn't have any real money. I had a Plymouth car which I wanted to make into a convertible. So I took a steel saw and I cut the top off of this Plymouth sedan, this ancient Plymouth sedan, and then when I had the rectangle that had been cut out of the top with jagged edges, it was something like a can opener that I used to open the top of the car, I put it on a hinge so you could open it and close it and I used it as a taxi charging other students I think $40 round trip or something at Christmas or Thanksgiving to go to New York and financing my trips to New York to see my parents. And at Christmas to work in the Post Office Department sorting Christmas cards, well, mostly Christmas cards - you assumed from their shape that they were Christmas cards. And I work in the Post Office Department in the Bronx for at least one Christmas, but maybe two. I think, I don't remember any longer and I earned some extra money that way and then at the end of the Christmas season I drove these students back to Indiana University and I had some dosh in my pocket. And I remember the air rushing in through the top of this confected convertible and it… leaked, I think I got some rubber piping which I split open down the side and put around the jagged edges as some form of insulation against water which partly worked, but not too well, and that was part of my graduate life after Columbia and Oxford.

I also don't remember exactly where this fits in, but I was a cab driver for years and years, two, three, four years and I remember I got my Hackman… first you had to get a chauffer's license which I did, then you had to get a hackman's license which I did, and I think in a safe in New York my hackman's license is still in that safe, but I've lost the key. I do pay the safe deposit charge every year, but I can't get the contents, but I think the hackman's license is still in there.
So that when I was in New York for the next years you could call a garage, I worked for George's Garage in Harlem, 125th Street, I don't know if it's there anymore, and you could call up and say I'm available for the next two or three days and if you brought in good money to them, which I did, they liked to hire you and… I did that. In fact, I was a very good cab driver, never hurt anybody or hit anybody and I worked the night shift, and it was the year or the time that Plymouth came out with pushbutton gears and this was a very exciting thing to people who drove cars. And I remember my biggest thrill was not literary at all, but that I was such a good cab driver that they gave me the first pushbutton Plymouth, and I was very young and all these older cab drivers didn't get the first pushbutton Plymouth, but I did. I think the buttons were on the left side of the wheel I believe. It worked pretty well. I was held up once during that period. Somebody put a gun or a finger in my back and asked for all the money. I never found out if it was a gun or a finger, but I gave him what money I had and he ran off. He took me out – it was somewhere in the Bronx – and he took me out there to an abandoned field and he said this is it, and I said what do you mean this is it? There were no buildings there. He said this is it and stuck something in my back. As I say he got the money.

The other thing was that there was somebody who worked in the garage with me who may still be alive. Eddie Adler was his name and he lived on the Lower East Side as did I. I lived on 10th Street or 8th Street between Avenue C and D, $10 a month was my flat, and he lived nearby on a street that I think was called Szold Place, S-Z-O-L-D, Szold Place. He was married and he drove a cab also for George's Garage in Harlem, and since we lived near each other when we turned in our cabs at night, well, at 4.00 in the morning I think it was, he was so rattled by this driving because people sometimes jumped out from cars and you, obviously, didn't want to hit them and didn't, but he was very rattled and he would always ask me to walk his dog with him, which I did. I think he was married, but I don't recall ever meeting his wife but I met his dog, and we would go for a walk and he would calm down from 8 or 12 hours of driving. I was perfectly all right, but very much awake.
And there was a place in my building, I think I lived at 394 East 8th Street, I think, and there was a bagel bakery in the basement and I would go in after walking the dog with Eddie and flip quarters with the bakers for the bagels. And if I was right I got four bagels I think, and if I was wrong I think I had to pay extra, double or something like that. And it worked out so that sometimes I got bagels and sometimes I didn't, or sometimes I got them free. I don't remember any longer, but they were very good bagels and it was one of the last bagel bakeries in New York. It was in the basement of my building.

Well, once when Eddie and I were walking with his dog after driving a cab and either before or after flipping coins for bagels he said, you know, Peter, a great novel was written about these streets. And I said, really? And he said, yes, it's called, Call It Sleep, by Henry Roth, and I hadn't heard of it. And he said, it's a great, great book, but it's out of print now. And it was a period when I wasn't going to school and wasn't working anywhere else. So at daytime I went to the New York public library and I read 40 pages a day or something like that in the library. So that at the end of one or two weeks, two weeks I think I'd read the novel and it was great. It was a great, great novel about the American immigrant experience or the immigrant experience of the Schearl family, I think his name was David Schearl, the main character. It's many years since I read it and I never forgot the book, but what was more interesting is that years later when I worked, after the Orion Press at Avon books, my job after the Orion Press was at Avon Books, I was allowed to buy any book I think for $2,000 without getting anybody's permission, or maybe it was $2,500. And I located this book and it was owned in the interim, between the period that I read it in the library and Eddie told me about it and my getting the job as education editor of Avon Books, which was, well, what does education editor mean, as I explained it to my father, I said I'm in charge of the men in socks and shoes, dad. And so I wanted to buy this book and I located it.
It was owned by a bookstore in the East Village or what came to be called the East Village. It was called the Lower East Side, but then real estate speculators thought you could get more money for an apartment if you called it the East Village, but it was the Lower East Side and toward the western edge of the East Village on 4th Avenue there was a bookstore called the Cooper Square Bookstore, owned by Sid Solomon and Chip Chafetz, as I remember, and an editor, the editor-in-chief of Avon Books became a friend of mine. His name was Alan Barnard and he's, unfortunately, deceased now, he went down with me at lunchtime to buy the rights to Call It Sleep from this bookstore.
The reason the bookstore owned the rights was because they had acquired the rights because people kept coming into this bookstore to ask for used copies of the book that had been published in 1934 by no less than Scribner's, and Scribner's editor was Maxwell Perkins. And Maxwell Perkins had read the book which was published I think 1934 by a man named Robert Ballou of the famous American family the Ballou family who go back a long way. And he was a publisher and he only published maybe five books before he went out of business in the depression. Another one was, Of Mice and Men, so he, obviously, had… by Steinbeck, so he, obviously, had a great eye because at least two of his books that were published before he went out of business were great.
And Maxwell Perkins had picked up the rights to, Call It Sleep, after the company that Mr Ballou founded and ran, and meant to republish the book after Henry Roth wrote a second book which was also commissioned, or not commissioned, signed up and by Scribner's and by Maxwell Perkins, but I don't think Henry ever finished it. And it was… it took place this novel, the second novel by Henry Roth, on the Brooklyn waterfront, and it had a very left wing orientation. We have to remember it was the 30s in American and I think it was sympathetic to the left, to workers, but I believe Henry got beaten up very badly on the waterfront by people on the left who did not know that he was actually in defence of them. He was writing about the union movement and workers.
He was living at that time with a woman named Eda Lou Walton who taught at New York University and he gave up writing. I don't think the pages that were destroyed, that he probably destroyed, were ever found, maybe I'm wrong. And he moved to Boston and then to Maine where he married a woman who I knew named Muriel, and he became a, as he put it, and as the signage outside his house stated, 'a wild fowl farmer'. He had chickens and ducks and geese and he taught mathematics I believe in the local schools and read the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists as I recall. And his wife taught music I think, Muriel, they had two children. One was Jeremy and the other one, Hugh, I think, and I actually went up to visit them in Maine.

I was working at Avon Books and I remembered this book that I'd read some years earlier when I was a cab driver, and I bought the book at lunchtime with Alan Barnard advising me – now you say this, now you say that – from these two chaps Sid Solomon and Chip Chafetz. And they had republished the book in the interim in a rather nasty edition with not one introduction but three or maybe four, and they were presenting the book as a Jewish book. Well, it certainly was about Jews, and Henry Roth was certainly Jewish, and I think all the introductions were written by Jews about the Jewish-American immigrant experience. But what the book actually is, well, of course, it's about Jews, and it has a strong autobiographical aspect to it in terms of Henry Roth's family, it really was about the American immigrant experience. It was sort of the classic tale. It could have been Italian, of course, it couldn't have been Italian, but it could have been Irish. It could have been anything. It was, in fact, Jewish, but it was about an immigrant experience in the new world, and it was written fantastically.

It was a great book and so I published it at Avon Books which was my first job after the Orion Press which we've talked about, and it got a front page in The New York Times Book Review and went on to sell, I think, over a million copies easily and was published in every country in the world and Henry and I, of course, came to know each other.
I went up to Maine with the ink still wet on the front page of The New York Times Book Review because a friend there at The New York Times Book Review told me that this was about to happen three or four days later and I said, can you run off a page of it because this wild fowl farmer in Maine won't believe this! So he did and I got on the plane and I arrived in I think Augusta, Maine. I think Henry and Muriel's home was somewhere near there and I arrived in a blazing – I'm sure that's the wrong word – a whirling snowstorm, and this little Jewish man in his red Maine mackinaw greeted me at the airport and said, my goodness, you're very young. Well, my youth – I was probably still in my 20s, I don't know even any longer what year it was – well, he was probably 65 and what he had written about he'd written about 30 years earlier in the 30s.
So there was no way that what the book was about in terms of historicity could have meant anything to me, and it didn't, except that I lived on the street where this novel took place and Eddie Adler, a cab driver, who later on went on to become a novelist, and a novelist published by Knopf, and his novel, which was a very good one, was called, Notes from a Dark Street. Don't know if he wrote a second one, but he went out to Hollywood, my cab driver, who shared the employer in Harlem, George's, and I think he wrote scripts for a television show called, The Nurses, but I don't think he ever wrote anything again. Poor Eddie, he may still be alive and I hope he never hears this, I don't think he ever wrote anything as good as this one novel that he wrote for Knopf and he's the one who told me about, Call It Sleep.

I was the education editor and a short time after that – because nobody wanted to work for Avon Books it was so tiny and looked like it was going out of business and it just had this one book that sold like crazy which I bought, and they made me the editor-in-chief of Avon Books. Well, it was a concours, it was a competition of zero, nobody else wanted this job, and I don't think anybody believed that Avon Books would be around a year later, but I took it. I remember asking, Alan Barnard, who had left before then, he said, Peter, I've got to leave and he took a job at Bantam Books. And I said, Alan, why are you leaving? You're a great editor-in-chief. And he said, listen, I've got two children and this company is headed nowhere and I've got to get out for my family.
So his job was open and I went out to where he lived, which curiously was very close to where my parents lived, and I said, Alan, you're gone, but I hope we're still friends and can you advise me should I take this job that they've offered me? Your old job! And we were on the Grand Central Parkway on a bit of greensward and with cars whizzing by us as I asked him this fateful decision about my career and he said, I would take it, nobody has ever heard of you, Peter, if you fail or if the company goes bust nobody will have heard of you either. You can start again, there's nothing to lose, and maybe you'll make a success of it, probably not, but take it – nobody's ever heard of you! And, indeed, nobody had ever heard of me and I took the job.
And I was mentioning yesterday if one is a success it is never one's own success at least not in publishing. I was very fortunate. I hired some wonderful young people to work with me, young people who probably couldn't have gotten the same jobs in larger companies. They were too inexperienced, but they were willing to take a chance and work for me or work with me at Avon Books. And they were they were people like Paula Diamond, who came from Farrar Straus and Bob Wyatt, who came from Doubleday Bookstore on 57th Street and a man named George Ernsberger, who worked at the bookstore on the Upper West Side, as I recall and Judith Weber, who was a publicist at Bantam. I don't think any of them were much more than 30 and we were a great bunch – and Nancy Coffey I should have mentioned who I've forgotten where she came from maybe Coward McCann and there were others, Barbara Bertoli and so on, and we were a great team.

Curiously, I think none of us were married or in very serious relationships so we were always there till six o'clock and seven o'clock and eight o'clock at night and we worked our asses off, and we did a lot of good. And we surprised some of the larger companies, and certainly surprised the Hearst Corporation because we published books that they had no interest in even knowing about. One of them was, Michael Gold's, famous book... well, famous, well, famous and notorious book at some level, Jews Without Money, which was published in 1929 by Horace Liveright. In fact, it was after Call It Sleep was published that I was looking for some other book from that period to rediscover, so to speak, and that book was out of print and I knew it. It was not a very good novel, but actually it was echt, it was authentic and there was something attractively unattractive about the title, Jews Without Money. It was counter-intuitive or against the grain or vulgar without being vulgar, and… So I acquired the rights and then I asked an unknown young socialist who I'd been reading in newspapers and magazines named Michael Harrington, who either knew the book or didn't know the book and perhaps I introduced the book to him, I don't know, if he would write an introduction to it because nobody knew this book at all.
But it was a great book as a sort of document if you like of the American Labour Movement of the immigrants as well. Unlike, Call It Sleep, which was a book of true literary merit, this book had merit also, but of a more documentary sort; Michael Gold was really not a novelist. And I remember publishing the book and it sold reasonably well. It got some attention, and then one day I was taking the subway to work, and I was a strap-hanger for years and years and I learned how to fold The New York Times and I folded it to the obituary page, because people dying interested me almost as much as people living, and there it was on Sunday, it said Michael Gold had died. So I read the obituary.
I'd never met him, but I had had some correspondence with him. He had died on the, if I recall, on the San Francisco waterfront. I think he was a retired longshoreman, I believe. He was a real working man. I think he also, in addition to being a working man in the language of that time, the proletariat, I think he wrote for Max Eastman's The New Masses at that time, not too sure of that any longer, but in any case it said his most famous book was, Jews Without Money, Horace Liveright, 1929, Hearst Corporation, 19 whatever that year was, the year he died, and it said that he'd been a communist in the 30s. But unlike other people after the Hitler-Stalin pact of '38 or '39, when so many communists in the United States renounced their communism because they couldn't believe that the Soviet Union, which was thought to be the wave of the future, could make a pact with Adolf Hitler. I could go on about that, but I won't. Well, Michael Gold had stayed a communist, the obituary said, and he'd been a steadfast communist, and he was till the day he died.
Well, I then turned to the sports pages and then I turned to whatever may have been happening that was awful in the world and I came to work.

Richard Berlin was the man who followed William Randolph Hearst in the Hearst Corporation, he was the president of it, very conservative, to say the least. I, of course, didn't know him and he didn't know me. I was just working for his company, but he would like to see me. I couldn't believe why this man wanted to see me. It just didn't occur to me at all, but I told the messenger I would be in at two o'clock or sometime when I was supposed to see him, and I came into his office which was an enormous office, only it wasn't his. It was his secretary's office.
The secretary's office was so large and all wood-panelled and it had white carpet. The white carpet was very deep. You sank into it almost up to your ankles as you proceeded forward to the secretary's desk and I said, 'I'm Peter Mayer from Avon Books. Mr Berlin wanted to see me,' or wants to see me. Oh, would I sit over there, and there was a very well appointed leather chair and I sat in there and looked around the room and I saw, Jesus Christ! There were American eagles everywhere, there were flags, there were pictures of Douglas McArthur going ashore at either Iwo Jima or Okinawa. It was pictures of Patton taking on the Nazis at the Battle of the Bulge or the Ardennes. There were pictures of Ike and Roosevelt shaking hands, and everywhere there were reproduction of Washington crossing the Delaware and, well, I was certainly very glad to be an American and I had been raised suitably patriotically. I had said the pledge of allegiance and I thought America was a great country, but I was hardly a jingoist and certainly didn't have any military sense of my forward path in American life.
And I was deep into looking at this world around me when a buzzer rang and the secretary said, 'You can go in now', and the door opened sort of by itself, and I went into another room where the carpet was even deeper. I think I wandered forward up to my knee almost in wool pile and there was more: bayonets were crossed and at the end of the room there was a hemisphere of a desk going from the window to the wall and behind the hemisphere there was a man sitting, very ruddy-faced and with white hair. I took it to be and he was, Richard Berlin, the head of the Hearst Corporation, the man who after Hearst apparently saved the Hearst Corporation. He had been brought in by a banker in Boston named, Semenyenko I think to save what was left of the Hearst Corporation after Hearst's last years when he apparently didn't run it too well or things went adrift, I don't know. I've never been a student of what happened then.
And then there was a hatch such as you see in a bar which I took, you could lay raise so that the bar girl could get out or get in and I guess that was how he got in behind this hemisphere. And he sat there and he said, 'Come on in, Pete!' Well, nobody had ever called me, Pete except maybe in the army when I'd been in the army, but mostly they called me 'shithead', and I came forward to him and he said, 'Sit down, Pete!' So I did and he then said, 'Been reading the paper this morning and this guy, Mike Gold, had died. Did you have anything to do with him?' So I said… oh, this is becoming clear, communist and so on… so I said, 'Yes, sir, I did'. He said, 'Did you know him?' So I said, 'No, I didn't know him, but I had acquired the rights...' 'Did you? And who did you ask permission of?' So I said, 'Well, I didn't need permission', I think I bought it for $1500 and that that was well under my limit where I could buy books without asking permission. 'So you just bought it?' So I said, 'I guess that's right. I just bought it'. And he said, 'You didn't ask anybody's permission?' So I said, no, I didn't.
He said, 'It says in the obituary that I read this morning that the last eight lines of the book comes from the...' and he practically throttled on this, 'the Communist Manifesto, “workers of the world unite, you have nothing to lose, but your chains”'. I said, 'Yes, that's the end of the novel, you're right'. 'And you felt you could just publish that book without asking anybody's permission here?' I said, 'Well, the only limit on me was the money and I thought it was an important…' 'Important?!' I said, 'Well, I thought it was important book to publish. It's part of America's social history'. He said, 'Well, what do you mean by that?'
'Well', 'I said just like The Grapes of Wrath or the classic example of the agrarian proletarian…' 'Prolet…?!' 'Agrarian proletarian novel, this is sort of a classic example of the urban proletarian novel and it should be available for people to read'. 'Well, this beats all. Get out. And you, how long have you been working here?' So I said, three years. 'And you like it here?' I said, yes, it's a good job. 'Well, how did it sell?' Well, I said it's in a fourth... 'Fourth printing?' 'It's in a fourth printing and we've sold about 40,000 copies'. And he got up from his chair and he put his arm out to shake my hand and he said, 'It's great to meet you, Pete, and thank you very much'. And then I said to myself as I wandered out of the one office into the other office with this white carpet, with these eagles and bayonets, I finally get it. American capitalism is okay, all you have to do is make money and nobody gives a shit about anything. If you make money you can do anything and, well, that was the story of my, well, one of my many experiences in my early days as a publisher.

When I came out of the army, after my… I went into the army for the first time – that was after the Merchant Marine – I went into the army and I was released six months later because there was some deal that I was part of that you could be on active duty for six months if you signed an agreement to be in the reserve for six years. So I got out of the army and I was wandering up Madison Avenue, I had had a novel accepted by the Dial Press by Jim Silberman who was the editor of the Dial Press. It's a strange story how it came not to be published and it's probably sitting somewhere in my closet somewhere, and I was wandering up Madison Avenue and I ran into… I was looking for a job. I had to have a job, and I ran into Myrna Davis or maybe she was Myrna Mushkin at that time. I don't know if she had married Paul Davis yet. I think not, I think she was… and she was the girl who I was fondest of in grade school. And she'd been my dancing partner at the age of four or five in Mrs Roses Nursery or maybe an earlier dance class, I don't know, and I loved Myrna, but as little children love people and she was a friend. I still love her and, curiously, her life and my life has had its parallelisms. She went to PS 99, which is the grade school I went to, and then she went to Richmond Hill High School which is the high school I went to, and then she went to Columbia. She went to the girl's or the women's division which was Barnard. I went to the men's division at Columbia College. So we were in college together and her parents knew my parents, and we have stayed in touch all these years since then.
And anyway, I was walking up Madison Avenue, I had my discharge papers, I was looking for a job and I ran into her and she said what are you doing? So I said I'm looking for a job. What kind of a job? I don't know something with words, I remember saying. She said, what do you mean with words? She said, advertising? I said, no, I didn't think advertising, but maybe newspapers or magazines or books or something. I mean I don't really want a job. I have to have a job. I have to take care of myself. And she said, can't your parents help? She knew my parents. I said, no, no in my family parents took care of you in extremis when something was wrong and something was happening, but you had the obligation to take care of yourself, and I'm now 21 or whatever age I was, 22 maybe. So she said, well, you should meet my boss.
So I said who's your boss? She said, well, he's a man named Milton Glaser and he works for publishers. I said what does he do? Well, he's an artist. He's a commercial artist and I rep him. Repping him meant that she took his portfolio around to book publishers and record publishers, album covers and he did album covers and book covers, and I think he did some advertising, too. I don't remember. So I said, well, I'd be glad to meet him, and she said, well, maybe he could introduce you to some magazine or book publishing people. So I said, well, I'd be glad to do that and, thank you, and I said, when should we do that? And she said, well now. It's lunchtime, so why don't we go back there now unless you're doing something?
Well, I had nothing to do. I couldn't even get appointments to see anybody. So I went back to his studio with her and he was very nice to me, probably because of Myrna, and he said he would think about various people that he worked for to do dust jackets and covers. And two days later when I got up and got my mail there were carbon copies of five letters that he had written to Cy Nelson at perhaps Dutton, and Clay Felker at New York Magazine and someone at Farrar Straus, Roger Straus at Farrar Straus and two other publishing companies which I can't remember just now. And I saw all these people, none of whom had jobs for me, but they were all nice to me, everybody was very nice and they all said they would keep my resume, my CV, on file, and I finally answered an ad for messenger boy and I got it.
Messenger boy at The New York Times I thought that's a good connection, New York Times; messenger boy – not so terrific, but okay, 47 bucks a week, it was the lobster shift, I think it was called the lobster shift.

I was hired by Sammy who was a gnome-like figure. He was very short about… I think he was about five feet tall, very energetic. His name was Sammy and he was the chief of the messenger boys, only he was about 55 years old and he said, what you've got to do is all these reviewers, particularly reviewers at night, are writing their reviews and you have to get them whiskey, and there's a liquor store right across the street, while they're typing out their stories and you have to know which one drinks Seagram's and which one drinks Johnny Walker.
And I did get to know a lot of the reviewers and journalists who worked at night and they were all type writers and I got them their whiskey and tore the paper or was given – they tore the paper – out of their machine and I would take it down to the composing room, the hot metal room, to be typed or copy-edited. Maybe there was… I don't know who did the copy-editing I can't remember anymore it's too many years ago, but I brought it down to the hot metal room, and… and I did that for about three months working for Sammy and these reporters and nobody asked me many questions about myself. They just told me to do things. Some of them asked me to bring them coffee, a few.
And then, Clay Felker, one of the people that Milton, Milton Glaser had sent me to, called me up. I don't know how he found me but he found me, maybe he called me at home or maybe he called me in the office, I don't know, but he had truly kept my resume, my CV and he had actually remembered me, and he was the editor and publisher perhaps of New York magazine and he said on the phone, 'Kid, I've been thinking about you and I got a job for you, but it's not an editorial job. It's a marketing job'. So I said, well, that's great. I mean what does it pay? He said, '$92 a week'. Well, that was about double what I was earning and I quickly saw that there was not too much to be learned in this messenger job. So he said, 'Do you think you can copy for Rose's Lime Juice and Angostura Bitters?' I didn't know what Rose's Lime Juice or Angostura Bitters was, but I could understand $97 a week. I said, 'Sure!' He said, 'Well, come up here tomorrow'.
Well, I did. I gave notice to Sammy and I don't think they asked for two weeks. There was an endless supply of messengers; it was not important work. And I started writing advertising copy for Clay Felker, not in the editorial, but in the marketing department, writing: as advertised in Esquire or New York magazine. I think Clay had worked… maybe the job was at Esquire and not at New York magazine. New York magazine came later in his career. I think this was at Esquire which Clay was the editor of if I'm not mistaken. So they put up billboards of these ads that I wrote and the headline always was as advertised in Esquire magazine. So this was a give back if some of these products were advertised at Esquire they would make cards to go into windows of the ad and it was a cross promotion also for Esquire. I apparently did that pretty well and I went up to $104 a week very quickly.

But while that was going on, somebody else that Milton helped me with, Bill Koshland at Knopf and Roger Straus at Farrar Straus gave me… because I could read German and I could read French, and they gave me French and German books to read and write reports on. And now I'm almost out of breath, but I did that for a while getting, I don't know, $25 per book or something like that, and then Knopf asked me if I would take a job there, a real job at Knopf being Alfred Knopf's first reader. And curiously, at the same time and on the same day a man named Howard Greenfeld, for whom I was also reading books in foreign languages, also offered me a job for the same amount of money as Knopf did, about $110 a week or something like that, and I took the job at Orion Press. Didn't take the job at Knopf, and I got a call the next day from Roger Straus who said, 'Kid, I got you that job at Knopf!' or, I recommended you when your reports were so good or something like that, 'and I understand you've turned it down'. So I remember saying to Roger Straus, well, I think I can learn much more in a small company than I can in a large company, and he said, 'But you'll be reading for Alfred Knopf who's a great publisher!' I said I'd rather learn about how publishing works which I can in a small company. And I remember there was a pause and then he said, 'Schmuck, if Tiffany's wants you to go to work for them you go to work for Tiffany's!' And then the phone was slammed down, and I thought that was the last I would ever hear of Roger Straus who had, up to that point, been very nice to me, seen me when I was looking for a job and given me various books to read and apparently recommended me, but it wasn't.
He remained very nice to me all the days of his life and actually when he died and there was a eulogy I think the family - I think it was the family - I was asked to give the eulogy at his memorial service, and I told this story actually that I'd told now in front of a good-sized audience who were paying him homage, but it was not the end of my… according to him I did the wrong thing, but I always did what seemed to me to be the right thing. It was not advice from others that inclined me one way or the other. It was what seemed to me to be the right way to go.
I mean, I, of course, listen to others, but I discovered that others very often give you advice that is obvious. I mean, obviously, it was more prestigious to go to work for Knopf than to go to work for the Orion Press, but I knew I didn't know very much and so I didn't want to be a reader for somebody else. I wanted to learn about publishing and I didn't think I would, as a reader for this great man, I didn't think I would learn as much as working in a small company where I had a hand in everything, even if often the everything was not very important, but the process is always is. So it doesn't matter what, how important something is, life is very often about process.

[Q] You explained very clearly in our first session what happened at Orion and what you learned and so that was very good, yes. So it was the right decision.
It was the right decision.
[Q] Yes. I find it quite surprising that you were able to make that decision. I mean you said that you...
I'm surprised at myself today also but I can, you know, when someone like you – there is nobody like you – but when someone asks you a question you have to think to answer it, and I can think back on the process of 40, 50 years ago and I may not have been very articulate even to myself why I did what I did, but I'm sure the process was percolating in me that it is better to be in the centre of small things than to be on the periphery of big things. And that may be an ego issue so that may have been an issue, too. I can be more important maybe in a small company than I can be at Knopf where, well, what would they need young Peter Mayer for? Who knows why, you know, there's an interplay always between what is reasonable, logical, objective and one's personality and one's ego, and one never knows exactly how decisions are made. I at least don't.

[Q] Do you want us to just talk more about Milton Glaser. I'd really like to know about what he meant to you and about your involvement with him.
Curiously, Milton is my best friend in the world and I would include, Shirley, his wife in that. They have lived through all my accidents and my misadventures with various women who I've undoubtedly always failed or been a failure at, and they've picked me up off the ground figuratively, metaphorically and literally because I've had accidents on the road in which we live. So I've now said that they're my neighbours also and we both live in Woodstock and that was a curiosity, something I certainly didn't know when Myrna took me over to Milton's office. And at first I rented in Woodstock and then I later bought a house in Woodstock. The house I now… the house I still have, and by accident it was only 200 yards, the next house literally down the road, or almost the next house, down the road from my house that's where Shirley and Milton lived who I had met in New York and kept up, but I didn't presume to be their great friend. I wasn't, but over time and in publishing we had some common friends.
My friend, Mimi Vang Olsen knew Milton and Seymour Chwast worked with Milton and Myrna, of course, worked with Milton and there were others too, Stan Landsman. So we were more friends when we discovered, or when I discovered, that the house I bought was so close to his house in the same village! So, but we also lived very close to each other three or four streets away in New York. And later on, when I moved uptown for a period, for quite a long period to 67th Street, they had either just before me or just after me also bought an apartment on 67th Street. So our lives were always somewhat intertwined, although we saw each other rather more in the country where we both had more time where we three always had more time, four because sometimes I was married, and I had a daughter, and this relationship has not ended and I suspect it will end with our deaths, but it's a lifelong thing.
And one day, I was having dinner at their house and I was a paperback publisher at Avon Books and we had become, as I've mentioned, as a team very successful, and I'd never published hardcover books before and I said over dinner to, Milton, you know, some day, Milton, somebody should do a big visual book of your work. And he looked at me and said, 'Ask me'. So I didn't quite… I heard that but I didn't quite say, well, what does he mean? I don't publish hardcover books, I don't publish illustrated books. And he could see me in a quandary and he said, 'Ask me!' I said, are you suggesting that I ask you, that… I don't know anything about publishing visual books and big illustrated books. He said, 'I'll help you'. I said, okay, consider yourself asked. And that was the first visual book I ever did 35 years or 40 years later it's still in print. It is a great I think seminal book in the area of graphic design and I don't know too many graphic designers who have gotten the Presidential Medal [of Freedom], and been honoured by the Smithsonian by the...
He had an enormous one man show at MOMA, which was very unusual because Milton has never aspired to high art. The word is not aspired. He doesn't like, nor do I, the hierarchies of art that if you work on canvas or display your work in galleries that is somehow superior than being in the world. Milton is in the world and wants to be part of the world, so he's always done products and designs and restaurants and he's a pretty much… an all round designer. He sees design as solving problems and making the world better in some way. He won't… he wouldn't take on the advertising for any brand of cigarettes that I smoked. He's a very ethical man. He's politically sensitive, too, to the currents, and has given himself to being an illustrator and designer for all sorts of things that he feels strongly for, and he does a lot of pro bono work for charities for the town of Woodstock and so on. And the important thing is he's my best friend, but he's a great artist, a great genius.

Primo Levi's book had been published in Italian and it had been offered to us or we went after it, I don't remember any longer. It was called then If This Is a Man, which is a literal translation of the Italian, it was then vulgarly – we sold the rights, the paperback rights, to Macmillan or Crowell-Collier or something like that – and they re-titled it, vulgarly, Survival in Auschwitz, and I believe it is called that today, but the more elegant title and the actual title was Primo Levi's, If This Is a Man. But, no, neither I nor Howard Greenfeld knew him, but we knew it was a great book.
And there was another great book called the Death of the Adversary, by Hans Keilson which was recently republished. They didn't mention that it had been published beforehand, but it had, by me… by us, and got enormous attention. It's a great book. They even used the Orion Press jacket without giving it any credit, but we also published Chagall's book, Ma vie (My Life) and a lot of wonderful books. But I was one of, I mean Howard bought most of the books. I bought some of them. I worked on a lot of them. I worked on a great novel… a great book about the Incas, The Royal Commentaries of Garcilaso de la Vega [sic] who was half-Indian, half-Spanish, and it's the history of the Incas. In fact, I think it's out of print and maybe the Overlook Press should bring it back.
[Q] So was it Orion… Orion was really it wasn't it, in terms of making you into a publisher? This is where you must have discovered…
Yes, I think that's true because there were so few people and I even had to remain the books that didn't sell. Howard would send me out to the remainder dealers to try to get the most money that we could for what nobody else wanted to buy, and I mean I learned about life in publishing. I don't want to say I learned about life it's too grand, but I learned what it is to have to stay alive and meet the payroll on Friday and… to acquit one's self of all one's responsibilities, payment of royalties and how authors and publishers who are essentially in the same business are often adversarial because the publisher has to stay in business and the author has to make a life out of his writing and these are not things that are, or least at the time of contract, easily put together. Sometimes it works out the book is a great success so you pay additional royalties later but, obviously, when you sign up a book you don't want to pay too much for it so that in the event it doesn't work out you're not out of business, and the agent is theoretically trying to work for both parties, but he's really the author's agent. He's trying to get the best deal for the author and that's an honourable activity, but perhaps it's not an honourable activity if you go for too much money from the wrong publisher then you may actually get a lot of money for the author, but the book may fail because it's not been published well. That will actually hurt the author more than placing the book in the right house.
So there're a lot of these judgements that have to be made, but you have to learn about warehousing and you have to learn about all sorts of things, production, that don't seem to be interesting to a lot of people who are in publishing, but at the end of the day they all matter and they all come together.
And I got very good training both at Orion and at Avon. At Avon I didn't start out by being the head of a company, but I did become the head of the company after a few years and, fortunately, what I had learned at Orion was useful and I was always… I think all my life I've been trying to learn and the dynamic today, 2014, requires that one learns again about the internet and digitalisation and content. It's content… a poem doesn't become less because of its technology or the technology of its communication, but your ability to stay alive and publish more novels or more short stories or more works of history or politics or whatever it is, is dependent on your understanding the whole. And a lot of people think that the editorial process is the only creative process, but I am someone who thinks that you can be creative at every job that exists within the publishing matrix and the people who are the best publishers are the people who understand each one of those activities, but there's a great snobbism in publishing, largely from the editorial side. They are the heart of the activity, but what's not the heart of the activity – the bones, the muscles, the tendons, the brain, the arms and legs – that heart can go nowhere without all the parts of the body all the parts of the process and I respect them all.

Overlook didn't start by the intentionality to start a publishing company. It started while I was the head of Avon Books, this mass paperback publishing company that managed to publish a lot of very serious books, a couple of which I told you about. But we had a wonderful literary list at Avon under the Bard imprint and under the Discus imprint and under the Camelot imprint. Camelot books were books for young readers, and Bard books were fiction, we did the first Márquez book, Cien años de soledad, (One Hundred Years of Solitude). And Discus books, which were non-fiction, where I think we did Erich Fromm's Escape from Freedom. And we went on, we were trying to work our way through the alphabet: Avon, Bard, Camelot, Discus, Equinox – I think Equinox books were large format books, but maybe that was Flare, we got up to F. I've forgotten the difference between the Equinox books and the Flare books.
And then I decided to publish a book in hardcover, which was that book, Christopher, that I've mentioned already. It was this compilation from the German newspaper published in New York, Aufbau, and I wanted to publish one book in hardcover while continuing at Avon. I had to get the permission of the powers that existed at the Hearst Corporation because it seemed to be a conflict of interest, I was the head of a book publishing company, a mass market paperback line – mass market as distinguished by format more than anything else, but sometimes by the form of the sales channels Avon books went down, and something that I wanted to do on my own.
Well, I didn't want to start a publishing company, I wanted to publish this one book. And that was because it was my family's background, it was a tip of my hat to my family's background. I probably would have been either German or Luxembourger but for the Hitler years, and I became English-American, or British-American by an accident of history. I grew up basically in a German cultural household in the United States with my parents very pro-British and very pro-American, as a consequence, I guess, of history.
And there was this newspaper, I think I may also have mentioned it, which was for the émigré population. It only ended its publication five or six years ago, and they actually asked me to write, I think, in their last issue about growing up in America as a cultural experience because I was American in every respect except that when I got home I was in a German household, or a German-American household, or a German-American-English household. I don't know – not a household like the household of my friends.
But I respected it and admired it, and my parents were readers. My mother read more popular fiction; my father read serious books, and my father and I had many serious discussions about politics and history, and that's also what the newspaper represented, Aufbau, which in translation means reconstruction, the reconstruction of the German-Jewish community in the United States. I shouldn't say in the United States, in Shanghai, in Cuba, in London, wherever Jews could escape to – Brazil, my Luxembourg family escaped to Brazil. But most of these people were in the big urban places, London and New York, probably Los Angeles and some in Shanghai.
But great people wrote for it, not only Jews by any means: Catholics, Communists, homosexuals of any national persuasion, Jews, anybody that Hitler didn't like, and it turned out that Hitler didn't like almost anybody. You had to be Aryan, if you were Aryan you were okay, provided something or other, provided you were not a physical misfit, or a homosexual, or a communist or whatever. So, he had a very limited group of people that he liked. But it was the majority population of Germany and I don't know that all Germans, by any means, knew what they were getting into when they supported Hitler against the disorder, if you like, of the inflation and the tragedy, I think, of Weimar, which was a very liberal political community, a society, but was not able to govern very well. And German democracy was also a new thing.

In this newspaper for these émigrés, these people scattered all over the world, great writers wrote – Einstein wrote and Thomas Mann wrote, and everybody else who was someone who was German and who had fled for whatever reason. And I had to go to the Hearst Corporation to get permission to do so, and they at first said no. And then they discovered it was in hardcover, my job was in paperback. Then they discovered it was in German, and we published in English. And then they discovered it was only one book, and they finally relented and said okay, you can publish it.
I went to Viking, and that was an accident which later proved to be germane in a number of ways because Viking became part of Penguin later on, and I became part of Penguin – no connection between any of these things, but how interesting that they happened in this way. And curiously the company that I'd started with before I came to Avon, which I mentioned, the Orion Press, was sold to Grossman Publishers, who were themselves sold to Viking, so the earliest books that I published, curiously were part of Penguin by the time I came to Penguin. A lot of mysterious alliances of no great importance, but amusing to someone who reflected on them, and probably I was the only one who reflected on them.
But in any case, we did publish this book. My father offered to help me, he said the market is dying out on you, by which he meant that his generation was not being repeated because I was the next generation, and I was one of the few children of my parents' friends who spoke German. Why I was interested in German I don't know. I was curious as to what I might become or might have become, and that was also why I applied for a Fulbright to Berlin, which I think I've also mentioned.
My parents would have rather that I'd gone to the Sorbonne, but I was not very interested in France, I was interested in Germany. Not particularly pro-German or anti-German, just interested in German culture because I had been surrounded by it at home, and so this book was tipping my hat to that culture, and it was a high culture.
And we had to create a company so that in case there was a lawsuit or something like that they wouldn't take my flat from me or my little Volkswagen or whatever car I was driving – I think it was a used Volkswagen or maybe it was a used Plymouth, I don't know – but so that we didn't get wiped out if something happened, you had to incorporate it. And so we incorporated a company called the Overlook Press for the purpose of only this one book. And my father and I sat on a mountain, which was really a large hill in Woodstock, New York, and my father would hand me the book, we never got orders for more than one copy at a time.
I think most of the marketing for this book was done by the magazine or by the newspaper itself, and either he would hand me a jiffy bag, and I would pop the book into the jiffy bag then I would hand back to him and he would address it, and then he would hand it back to me to make a notation of the royalty we had to pay or the sales tax we had to pay on it. We would move this package backwards and forwards, and probably some days we sold as many as six or seven books – more days we sold two or three.
But we got along very well and he saw I was not a complete dolt, which he had thought, and I discovered he was not a complete dolt. But he was just amazed at this business and we had carefully calculated how much money we would lose by publishing it – and I was prepared to lose that money; it was my own money. He was helping me and I think he couldn't help me as a glove manufacturer since I hadn't wanted to become one.
He had flown over – I don't think I told you this story – while I was at Christ Church, while I was at Oxford, to ask me what he should do because his partner had died in this glove manufacturing business that he had. And I said well, I didn't know, and he said the reason he was asking me was that the widow of his partner wanted to be paid out her half. And he didn't have the money for that, all the money was tied up in the sewing machines, so he couldn't pay her out in cash.
So he said well, in a year or so you'll be finished at Oxford and if you'd like to join me you'd be welcome, and we walked around the scholar's garden in Meadows one two. I said, regrettably, because I think it may have hurt him but he never showed it, I said I didn't think that this was what I wanted to do upon graduation. He said, all right, he didn't pressure me in any way to go into the business; I was an only child, not only an only son but an only child. He had started this business with his partner, and what he said he would do if I came to join him, he would borrow the money – it was $500,000, I remember that – from a bank and pay out the widow.
He sold the business to a company called Kayser-Roth and became the employed head of the company that he had once owned. They were a company, a holding company that owned many companies, and they had wanted to buy my father's company, I think largely because of him – the machines weren't worth anything, as a brand it wasn't particularly famous. My father was the last of a certain generation of people who knew how to make gloves, and they wanted him to run the business that they had bought.

His experience as becoming an employee of a company that he had owned, a small company but nevertheless it was his, that's quite interesting, but it doesn't have to do so much with me but more my coming to understand my dad.
Anyway, at the age of 71 he retired and that's when we… if I've got my dates right, that's when we started Overlook with this book Aufbau, and we came to respect each other sitting on our mountain handing this book back and forth, jiffy bags and counting for royalties and postage stamps to send it out to the people who…
Well, I went to the Frankfurt Book Fair in October or November and I thought I might show it… this was the October before the book was actually published, so I went to Frankfurt before my father and I moved this book backwards and forwards. And I took the manuscript, the German manuscript to Germany to the Frankfurt Book Fair and a man named Reinhold Neven DuMont, who owned Kiepenheuer & Witsch – he's retired now – he said he wanted to publish it, and he thought why are you going to set type in German in America? I'll do it for you, in fact I'll produce the book for you.
Before the fair was over he came to my stand at Avon Books – so I did a little moonlighting for this one book – and he said I've just sold it to the Bertelsmann book club, and now instead of our printing 3000 or 4000 copies we're going to print 10,000 or 11,000 copies, and you can add to that whatever number you want. The book will be the same in the book club edition, the Kiepenheuer edition and the Overlook edition.
So, I came back to America – and we would earn some royalties from each one of these editions. My father said, 'Well, I knew publishing couldn't be that difficult if you could make a living at it!' And he said, 'We should publish some more books now'. I said well, dad, I can't, I've got this job at Avon. They let me do this one book because it was a hardcover and in German, and it was only one book. He said, 'Well you're a clever boy, you'll think of something else that isn't competitive'.
Well, there is a man named Jason Epstein who is a great genius, a very innovative pioneering man who went to Columbia, as did I, but he was some years ahead of me. He had become very famous in American publishing by being the progenitor of the idea of trade paperbacks. There must have been some but he had a whole line, he started a whole line, it was called Anchor Books. And he didn't only reprint books, he also originated books, but he didn't publish in hardcover, he originated books in paperback.
So, after a few weeks I said dad, I have an idea of something that we can do together if we want to publish more than this one book, and he said, 'What's that?' I said well, Jason only publishes these books in paperback, why don't I buy the hardcover rights from him. And he said, 'Well, who would buy a hardcover if the paperback is out?' – father was pretty sane and sensible and compos mentis. And I said libraries, because libraries didn't like paperbacks. They like hardbacks on the theory that they were more durable, and maybe they were, I don't know, but they certainly seemed more durable.
So, I said dad, I'm going to have to get permission from the Hearst Corporation again because I told them there was only this one book, and now there will be more. And I identified six famous books that Jason had published only in paperback, they didn't exist in hardcover. And so these very serious books – books like Martin Esslin's The Theatre of the Absurd, did not appear in any library in America; a book by Peter Berger on sociology; a book, I think, by Buckminster Fuller, and I can't remember all of the six books that we published, EM Forster's book on Alexandria, and they did not appear in any library.
So, I went into the Hearst Corporation, who I did know was rather pleased with the progress of Avon Books. So, I thought this was my weapon, that I would… if they caused me trouble and didn't want to let me publish these further Overlook books, I would intimate that I might leave, the issue was so important to me. And it happened exactly that way. They said no, because now they were in English not in German, and it was more than one book – it was six, I believe – although they were in hardback and Avon was not in the hardback business.
Well, I suggested that it was so important to me that I might have to consider my employment. They said all right, but any further books you publish have to be vetted by us so that we don't want you to be publishing books that we could be publishing, and we can see how the German book and these six books would not fit in. But they saw that I was a thinking person and might come up with some other projects that didn't quite square.
So, we agreed all of that and I stayed, I think, 12 or 14 years at Avon, became the head of the company or, I don't know, my titles changed and it was a very happy experience. And Overlook grew and my dad joined me, but later on when I went to Penguin I had to say dad, I'm going to England, you'll have to run it from now on. And he liked doing that, in fact I remember when I asked him what title would you like, he said, 'President'. So I said, 'President? Dad, you're a glove manufacturer by background, you've never even worked in the book publishing business except for this one German book'. He said, 'Peter, I've never not been President of anything that I've done'. So I said, 'President it is'. I was off to England to work for Penguin.

Philip [Roth] called me, as he did a couple of other times on different matters. You couldn't say we were close friends but you could certainly say that I don't think we'd ever had a problem and we spent a lot of social time together, partly through a lady that he lived with for quite a few years, Barbara Sproul, and also through his friendship with Philip Guston who also lived in Woodstock, as did I. And I think maybe he had been in the army with Marty Garbus, who was my lawyer and my friend, I don't know.
But Philip called me and said can I sit down with your father? So I said, why? He said well, I've met him a couple of times here in Woodstock and he's an interesting man. I said he was indeed, what would you be sitting down with him about? I can't give you permission, you can just telephone him yourself, he's a big boy, he'll say yes or no. He said well, I'm interested in his background as a book publisher… glove manufacturer, and I said well, he's not doing that now – because I think he wasn't any more, it must have been after my dad was 71 and working at Overlook, but living in Woodstock. I said I'll ask him, Philip.
So, I asked him and he said yes, he'd be glad to talk to Philip. I think Philip had said he wanted it as background for a character he was writing about, don't know if he said for a novel called American Pastoral, he probably didn't, and my father said, 'Well, shall I do it, Peter?' I said, well, of course you should do it, but I think you do have to be careful about personal things that you say because… personal things you can say but professional things, I can't imagine any problem but I said Philip has sometimes used material in a personal sense.
I think in most cases the person was disguised but certain characters are interesting in life and interesting in fiction, and... but my father didn't have any relationship to Philip so there was no part of my father's life that would have affected necessarily anything that Philip was writing, but who knew? And I said he wants background on the glove manufacturing business, and my father had two or three sessions, maybe more but I think two or three with Philip, and he came there with pad in hand, the great Philip Roth and my unassuming but very charming father, storytelling father – he was a great storyteller, and I think they got on.
It was only when I read American Pastoral I said, there's a lot of connections between this character and my dad, and I remembered that Philip had taken all these notes. Now, there were some major differences. The glove manufacturer in the novel, I don't think he had a German background or German or Luxembourg background, and he was also in the leather goods area, and my father may have imported leather goods, but I don't think he ever made leather goods, so he would not have been an expert. And there's quite a lot about the leather good… making gloves business in the novel, so Philip must have got quite a bit of information from other people or at least another glove manufacturer. But there were significant parts, and probably the character is an amalgam in some ways; I've never even talked to Philip about it.

The name Overlook comes from the mountain or large hill that I live on in Woodstock, New York. But the logo, the elephant with wings, comes from an experience I had reading, I think it was the last issue of LIFE magazine, in which two German photographers were following at great distance with telescopic lenses a herd of elephants to see where the elephants went to die, to put to rest a certain mythology and legend that they disappeared somewhere or whatever. And they noticed that there was one elephant, a female, I think they're called cows, who was getting very weak in their knees. And elephants actually bend their knees in the reverse way from our own knees, so they bend the other way, which I don't think many people know or care about, why should they?
But they do, and this cow, this old elephant, her knees were beginning to buckle and she could not continue through the savannah with these 20 other elephants. Finally, after a day – and the two German photographers were always one or two miles away in a tree photographing them – the other elephants got on the side of this cow, and holding her up on either side they sort of knew she was weak and couldn't go forward. And they propped her up and they kept moving forward but finally her age, her weakness, her enormous weight, and she collapsed.
And she was still alive. And then all the elephants went around and with their tusks and with their trunks they tried to rouse her – get up, get up, we're going on – but she couldn't get up anymore. And then they made a circle around her and they started trumpeting: get up, get up! But she couldn't. And then after a while they just left her there still alive and continued forward.
Well, that's not the end of the story because in the LIFE magazine article some journalist asked the photographers why do you think the elephants do that? And one of the photographers said I don't know, I think elephants just like elephants.
Well, I thought about that as I turned the page, and the next page in this LIFE magazine issue was the US in Vietnam. It was the Viet Cong and the US, and there were five, six, ten or 12 whatever number of bloody pages, what the Americans were doing to the Viet Cong, what the Viet Cong was doing to the Americans and their Vietnamese allies. And it was horrible. And I, sort of, remembered that at the time, elephants like elephants, but you know, human beings don't really like human beings.
Well, I filed that away in my head and when I was looking for a logo for the Overlook Press, I thought of 'elephants just like elephants', that's a good backstory. And when Milton Glaser designed the Overlook elephant, since you asked me the other day about Milton Glaser, he put wings on the elephant and he said, 'Peter, if you can make an elephant fly you can do anything', so that's the story.

I was, for a very brief time, running – after Penguin – a paperback publishing company called Pocket Books, which owned Simon & Schuster. Actually, the story that most people would prefer to hear is a lie, that Simon & Schuster owned Pocket Books, but in fact Pocket Books bought Simon & Schuster. And then Dick Snyder, who became the head of Simon & Schuster, put out the notion that Pocket Books was some subsidiary of Simon & Schuster, but the truth is the other way around.
And I went to work for Mr Snyder but I didn't care for him, and I don't think he cared for me, either. It was a marriage made in hell. His concept of why one was a publisher was very different from my concept, and I wanted to leave. One day I got a phone call from a man named Jim Rose, who I didn't know, would I meet him, and he said he was the chairman of Penguin. I don't know if I said what about, but why would someone who was running one paperback publishing company in America not want to meet someone running Penguin? So, of course I said yes, and I met him at the Algonquin Hotel downstairs in the lobby.
He was an older man, much younger than I am now, and I was amazed that at the age of 70 or 71 he was running Penguin. And he said he was looking – it was a cock and bull story, and it was so ridiculous that I knew it was ridiculous, but I didn't say so – he was looking for someone in America to distribute Penguin books in the US. And I said well, you do have someone distributing Penguin books in the US now, so do you want to make a change? And he said yes, and gave some reasons, which were all specious.
And I told him I didn't think that would work because Pocket Books was an American mass market publisher, and although he may have thought that Penguin, because of its format and its A-book size, which is about the size of an American paperback, was a mass market book, in its content it was really closer to a trade paperback, which has a different format and often a different editorial thrust. So, I told him I thought it was extremely unlikely, but one could consider it. Pocket Books might like the income that could come about from distributing Penguin books but I thought it was a non-starter.
Well, we said goodbye, and about two months later he called again, maybe it was three months later, maybe it was four months later, I don't remember. He said, I'm going to be at JFK on my way to India, could I come out to the airport? I said, what about? He said, to further our discussions. I said well, why at the airport? Why don't you come into New York at the weekend, sit down and have some dinner? He said, well, the plane is stopping here for four hours, if you can come out to the airport we can go into a lounge and talk, and then I'll continue on to India.
Well, I don't know why I said yes, it's quite a big schlep out to the airport and then back again, but I said yes and I met him. We had a bite to eat and a drink, and he said well, he had changed his plan. His plan now was not to change the distribution, but maybe to change… I think by this time Viking had been bought by Penguin, Viking in America had been bought by Penguin, I'm not quite sure anymore. But he wanted a change at Viking, and he wanted to know if I would be interested in that.
I remember saying that I think I've got a better job, in some respects, staying at Pocket Books than changing, but it interested me a little bit more than what he had proposed the first time we had met at the Algonquin. I never found out how he got my name, but I have some reason to think that a gentleman in London, who was a friend of his, Andre Deutsch, may have given him my name. And he explored it by meeting me, and whatever I may have said, sort of, interested him. I think just like it is with ladies, if you say no… if they say no to you, you get more interested. So, when I said no to Mr Rose the first time and the second time, I think he got more interested because… I'm just joking. I don't know what I said, and I don't know what his motivations were but we then started to talk more. Then at a third or fourth meeting he said he was of a certain age and would want to retire, and that it was the interest of Pearson, who owned Penguin, that he retire at some point and he wanted to know if I would consider being his replacement.
Well, I thought that was more interesting, but he said then of course you'll have to stay in America to fix our situation in America, which was Viking and Penguin. I said well, then I'm not very interested because the heart of Penguin, regardless of what you may own, is in London. And he said well, you've never worked in London before and you don't know British publishing. But I said that might interest me, and what he had to offer didn't.
And then it went on for months and months and months, and finally I took the job and came to London and stayed for ten years. And then I went back to America to build Penguin's American business. So, I was at Penguin just under 20 years, but I loved just about every minute of it, except maybe the Salman Rushdie period.

[Q] When he said to you, well, you don't know, you haven't worked in London and you don't know British publishing and all that, so how did you go about putting that right? What happened when you arrived, what did you see in front of you, what needed to be done?
Well, it was a very strange time. I don't think there were any American executives in Britain at all when I came; there may have been one, I don't know, but there weren't. And I was paid an American salary. We had some argy-bargy about salary and I said I don't want anything more than I'm earning in America, but I want the same. And that became an issue because under the Labour government there was very, very high taxation and lots of perks and so on, and I said save all the perks and so on, just pay me the cash that the job would pay in the US. I'm American working in American, and finally that got done.
But when I arrived in England at Heathrow with my girlfriend, I thought somebody would be waiting for us at the airport. I didn't have a flat, didn't have a hotel room. I thought this is how… I thought when you move a chief executive from one country to another there is some minimal… I don't think the British knew very much about taking executives from one country to another, and not an American executive from America to England, and there was nobody there. I was very embarrassed in front of my girlfriend because on the plane I said there will be somebody to greet us and to take us to a flat, maybe for a month and then we'll have to find some place to live, or something like that. Maybe there's even a company apartment or… I didn't ask about these things, I was much younger and not very interested in these things but I assumed them.
But there was nobody at the airport. And I did know that Penguin had a very historic and large warehouse and maybe even centre of the company at Harmondsworth, which was very close to the airport – at the airport, actually, and so I got Mary to... We got the bags to a taxi, we went to Harmondsworth and I asked to see Jim Rose. Well, he wasn't there and I stood under… the receptionist didn't know anything about me either and I was embarrassed to say I'm your new boss. I didn't say that, but I stood under this very famous painting, I don't know if Penguin still owns it, by Rodrigo Moynihan of all the greats assembled from previous generations of Penguin. I asked to see Ron Blass. Ron Blass was the deputy chairman and he had been very much involved after Jim Rose had made the introduction in hiring me, and actually negotiating a salary and a title, and the details of the contract. I knew him and I could tell very many nice and funny stories about Ron Blass, and maybe I will because they're very amusing, if you're interested.
But I went up to Mr Blass's office, he sent for me, and as I walked in he was a gargantuan man, probably 6' 3”… 6' 4” and rather well packed, you might say. I remember when you shook his hand all you felt was foam rubber, you never were quite sure that there were bones underneath the fingers, and he was fleshy in many respects, but a very strong-looking appearance. I stood, went up the stairs from the waiting room where we were both waiting and Mary was down there with the suitcases, and as I walked into his office I said, 'Well, Ron, your boy's here'.
And he looked up at me as though I was not expected, and I thought maybe he was hard of hearing, I said, 'Your boy is here, I'm ready to start work!' Not a sign that he'd ever seen me before, and then he took his large hand and said, 'Sit down'. So, I went six or eight steps forward and sat down at the front of his desk and I said, 'Ron, not only am I here, but we've got a big job to do together here. Penguin's had a tough time in these last few years and I'm going to need your support, I'm going to need your help, I don't know my way around this company'. And not a trace of recognition, his face was impassive, and I said, 'We have to get settled, but I could start work tomorrow and I'll need your support, of course'.
And he said, 'Listen here, Peter', – I was glad he said Peter, he could have said Mr Mayer, but he'd met me about eight times – 'listen here, Peter. Support, you've got it. But, you know, I started here at Penguin as a lorry driver, I've been here 35 years and I'm now the vice-chairman, and I love this company. Support, I'll give it to you, as long as you're winning. And if you're not winning but I think you could win, you've got my support and I'll help you. But if you're not winning and I think you're losing, and I think you're going to lose, I'll be the first person to drive you out of here. I love this company'.
This was my welcome to Penguin.

I think Mr Blass's secretary or assistant, Betty Hartel, found us a room in The Goring Hotel in Victoria, and as we drove in a cab there… and got there, I remember as I went up the steps I saw a plaque just to the right or left saying first indoor plumbing in the United Kingdom, or it may have said in England, I don't know. And I said, my goodness, and the room was so small that there was a suitcase to the right of where Mary slept, and to the left of where I slept in the bed, which occupied 90% of the room, and when we got out of bed we would step into the suitcase.
Penguin was not in the habit, neither were most British publishers, of bringing executives to Britain, and they expected the executives to make all these arrangements themselves. Well, we would have been prepared to do so if someone had told me, but nobody told me and I imagined that British companies treated their executives the way American companies treated their executives: they do things for them to get them started at least. But nobody did anything for us, but we learnt the British way and we came to love Britain - I certainly did.
The fact that I have bought a British company, Duckworth, and the fact that we're talking inside an English flat and the fact that when I come into Heathrow I am very happy to show my British passport, it's all part of the same thing. I love my British friends and I care about the [Scottish] referendum on Thursday.

They were momentous years in British publishing. And you may want to read a chapter that I wrote in a book published by the University of Manchester Press, or the University of Bristol Press, about my first ten years at Penguin, and the political ferment going on in Britain at that time. It was the Callaghan Government. I did not come in under Mrs Thatcher; Mrs Thatcher happened to me and to us and to Britain in the second or third year that I was here.
But it was the famous Winter of Discontent. We arrived with ambulances not taking people to hospitals and garbage not picked up, and the famous Saatchi slogan, and so on. I didn't understand the union issues, but I was not used to dealing with unions because to the extent that we had unions in America, they were not ideological, they were about meat and potatoes issues. In Britain at that time, unions were quite ideological and the staff at Penguin to some extent believed that Penguin itself was a vehicle for change. And a large proportion of the staff came from British universities which I don't want to say had been radicalised, but the notion was that a more social way of organising a society was the way to go, a more collective approach. I didn't necessarily even disagree with that.
I was not especially political, but I did know that my job was to bring Penguin back to health. It had not been in health for seven years, and its publishing had become in that period increasing political. And I would have been perfectly happy with that political stance if anybody had been buying the books, but nobody was buying the books. The books were political, they were looking to change British education, British management, British capitalism, but nobody, in any number at least, was buying those books because the idea was that workers would buy these books and become educated, or more educated or incentivised intellectually to a different way of doing things.
But as we know, working people… or we now know that working people don't necessarily operate by theory; they are practical people, they are working people. And the carriers of these messages, as I came to know them within Penguin, were mostly not workers at all, they were middle class or upper middle class or rich. They had been to… many of them had been to private schools, private education, but they were ostensibly very left wing. They were very left wing without actually wanting to give up any privileges, I discovered.

When I left Penguin my idea was since I had this very small company which I'd started with my dad, the Overlook Press, and I had a lady friend who had some rather uncharming sides, but she did have a charming side and she didn't want to live with or marry – she did finally, both – a mogul, as she called me. Well, I never thought of myself as a mogul, but that was her word. And her mother owned a little bookshop in Amsterdam, and they were very pro-Penguin, but the trappings that came with being a chief executive were not really her sense of herself. But she did like the emoluments that came with it, but there were certainly trappings which she didn't like.
My daughter was living in America because when I got divorced from the Mary I mentioned, she remained in the United States. And she was now, I don't know, 13 or 14, 15, something like that, and she wanted me to come back. And my mother was, I don't know, 82 or 83, and she wanted me to come back. And I was actually often in America, and the centre of our operations did move from being strictly British to being more equally divided between Britain and America – and when I say Britain I mean the Commonwealth as well. But I was gone a lot and I never gave up the connection with the head office, which was actually in Britain, and Pearson was a British company too.
So, I listened to women for the first time in my life and came back. Some of that experience was useful, in a business sense it was – it was the right move for Penguin to make, to have the CEO in America. Michael Blakenham, Lord Blakenham, said to me that… because at that time I wanted to buy a big American company called New American Library, and Michael said, or the Board and Michael said well, if we put up this $80 million or whatever it cost, you will have to come back to America, you will have to go back to America to integrate it because we don't have anybody there who can do that and make it into a Penguin company.
And I agreed, partly because the women in my life wanted me to, partly because it had worked out for Penguin to have me in America, or it had worked out for me to be in England. And I was looking forward to coming back and telling some good war stories about the battles with unions and a lot of entrenched ideas, some of which I came to adopt, by the way, but also some of which I managed to jettison because they were no longer part of our time. They were not part of the zeitgeist that publishing was occupying, or that surrounded publishing, and Penguin was, I don't want to say in a backwater, but Penguin was so traditional thinking that it was missing out on what was happening.

When I in 1997 or 1998, decided to leave Penguin and went to Michael Blakenham who was the CEO of Pearson, to tell him that, I wanted to assuage these three women, something I found difficult to do. But I was thinking that I could re-join the company that my father had kept alive during the years I was in England, the Overlook Press. And that interested me. I had had my fill, I did not dislike any aspect of Penguin or Pearson, I loved it and it was all going very well, but I'd done it for nearly 20 years. And so, I thought now is the time to do something very modest and build up the Overlook Press. And Michael asked me to stay an additional year and help him and Pearson find a successor and I said yes, and they made it attractive for me to stay one additional year; I did. And then I went back and I built up Overlook – when I say built up Overlook I had no desire to build it into something big, but just to make it self-sustaining. It had nearly always lost money, very little, but it had lost money most years and I had a good salary at Penguin, so the tax authorities let you write off the losses at Overlook against your income, so you lost less. You didn't make money but you lost less.
But it became solid, small but solid, and I came – this is a roundabout way of coming to your question – I came to miss England terribly. I missed my friends, I missed the UK, I missed the Commonwealth, I missed all those things that had been part of my life for nearly 20 years. And I was probably the American who most knew the Commonwealth, since I travelled constantly to India and South Africa, Australia, New Zealand and Canada. I came to even know the Commonwealth more than a little bit and more than most British people.
I loved my friends, and also the years that I was part of Penguin was between my 39th year and my 59th year. Those are for most people very significant years, whether you're a man or a woman. You're not old yet at the end of it; you're not young at the beginning of it but you're not middle-aged yet, and it's when a lot of things happen. For someone in business or in publishing, that's when you have your greatest years or most terrible years, depending on how it turns out.
Well, they were wonderful for me, and I just missed it, and when the opportunity arose to buy Duckworth… I don't remember any longer how I became aware that it was for sale, but it was a great British experience because it was one of the oldest publishing companies in Britain. It was small, which was about all I could afford. It had once had a great literary reputation, which was something to build upon or try to restore, and everybody likes a rescue operation. There was a rescue operation with respect to Penguin, which had happened years before.
So, I bought Duckworth with the help of UBS, a bank. I had to borrow a lot of money to buy Duckworth because although it was insolvent, it doesn't mean it didn't have any assets; it did have some assets. Insolvent basically means that it can no longer meet its obligations, but there were assets there. So, I paid I don't know how much, maybe $1,200,000, I can't remember, which was probably today… in today's money maybe $5 million today or something like that, a lot of money for one person who had never... I was never the owner of Penguin, I was a very well-paid employee. You get well off that way but you can't get really rich.
So I borrowed the money to buy Duckworth. It's taken us about ten years now to pay off the debt, but the debt is now paid off and I feel very good about it. I don't know what will happen, I'm older now, how long I want to go on, but it works together in tandem with Overlook in the US, which was something that I'd learnt at Penguin, because the Penguin group shared copyrights and shared physical plant, and worked across quite a few frontiers. And in the most modest of ways, that's what Overlook and Duckworth do, they share quite a few copyrights, not all, quite a few copyrights quite a few physical printings, physical plants. And I think I can thank Penguin for having taught me how you can make those things work.

Small companies and large companies all face technological change and changing consumer patterns, and changing retail patterns – you mentioned Amazon. So, we all struggle, and it could be – I don't have any crystal ball – but it could be that the smaller companies are actually quite well-placed for the future. You can't get much smaller than small, but large companies can get smaller. I don't say that that's what will happen, but it is conceivable that book publishing will be a smaller industry. It's not going to go away but it could happen.
And I divide my time between Britain and the US – it's convenient. I like both countries, sometimes I like one country more than another, sometimes not. But I have a feeling for both countries and I think if there is anything I'm proud of in respect of my Penguin years, in a business sense, is that when I came to Penguin in '78 it was British; when I left it in '98, I think it was '98, it was still British. Most of the other companies had changed, they were either Australian or German or French or whatever, but Penguin was British. The irony is that last year Penguin ceased to be British-owned and it is now German-owned, and that has its own ironies since my own background is German/English.

[Q] Can you say a bit about how… how now do you be a publisher, you, I mean with Duckworth? I need to know what you do really and how you decide…
Well, you do it… you do it very modestly.  You do it very modestly, you take the view that whether you're playing cricket or baseball you get so many turns at bat, and you get just as many turns at bat whether you're big or small. And you only need to hit, I think the phrase is hit for a century, or something like that. You only have to do that once in a while, and you only have to hit a home run once in a while, and depending on how small you are, that much smaller do you need to.
And if you have some good connections as a publisher, as an editor in Britain and the US, you will get books offered to you that the large companies have turned down. You will unlikely have obvious best-sellers, but some of the books that large companies turn down are sometimes overlooked – no pun intended – and you can make something of them. If they don't succeed well, they didn't cost a fortune and they don't sink your enterprise, so you're there to fight again another day, as they say… as Kipling said? I don't know, but as somebody said.
So, I think it's appropriate for an older chap, an older guy to run a company that is – or companies – in Britain and America that is… modest and not too risky. I'm not trying to make it big, I do think as long as we have a capitalist system you have to make money to go on, so the enterprise has to do well enough so that you can go on, but making money is not the main thrust.
And I have to say that even in running Penguin, although Pearson may have thought that what I wanted to do was to make Penguin viable in the first instance, it really wasn't. I thought that if you could publish well, which Penguin started to do again, and have good business principles it would make money. You don't have to start with the notion of making money first. Making money will come your way if you have good editors and you publish well, you keep the costs reasonable. It will come your way, and it did. You don't wake up in the morning and say I'm going to make some more money now.

[Q] Tell me why you're a great publisher and what that means.
Well, I wouldn't say I was, but I've been around a long time and I love… I don't know what they mean by it if they say it.  They could mean one thing, that you've lasted a long time – although it occurs to me that people are often remembered, especially rock stars, if they die young so… But if you last a long time you may get some plaudits for that.
I think a lot comes to you based on not only what you do, but what you work for. So, I was blessed by being asked to work for Penguin, which was a great company before I came. I made it viable, I took it in new directions, or I and my staff made it viable and took it in new directions.
I think just lasting and working for the right company makes other people say something or other is great, but… I mean, I don't know… I don't know how to answer your question, it's embarrassing and… I mean, from time to time somebody comes up to me and says oh, you're Peter Mayer, you're a legend. I say that means I'm almost dead! You know, I don't want to be a legend, I just want to... And I've made a lot of mistakes, and everybody does. I think lasting a long time and running a great company gives you… but do you know, people who are the heads of things, they get too much credit. They get much too much credit, and when whatever they're running doesn't work out they get too much blame.

My policy? Well, I'll tell you. I come into the office and I read a letter, and I answer it. And whatever I answer, that's my policy. And somebody telephones me and asks me something or other and I answer as best I can. And I guess that's my policy, whatever I've said. And someone comes in, either individually or collectively, and they want to know about production, or sales to Australia, or I don't know what. Anything. And I answer as best I can. I guess that's my policy.
However, after about six months, I did actually – I'd love to have it now, I'd love to have it now – I did write a letter to the staff about my general policy because I... I won't say I became English. I didn't become English or... I won't say I became British, I'd never say that, but I could see that the question also assumed that people would work together better if they knew the direction. And there was some point to it, that it was not just some traditional, non-reflective thinking that went on. It was not some 'Britishism' left over from the civil service that had now insinuated itself into private industry. I actually thought there was some point to it and I did issue... 'issue'. There's a phrase. I did write a policy letter. But do you see how you could fall into it you say, 'I did issue'. I mean, you become very, sort of, formal when you're not.

People get your policy by your reactions to this and that and so on. You give answers. You provide leadership. You don't have to have a general statement, but people in Britain wanted it. And I came to think, well, if they want it, they may need it. Not perhaps in real terms, but in imagined terms: oh, this is what the boss has said. So I said something. But I did think I, by that time, after six months, I knew what the issues were. And I thought it was, sort of, useful for people to know what your positions were on production, on design, on paying advances, on overseas companies and whether they should publish books themselves or whether they should only be sales channels for British books all over the world. And that was the latter, was the way people thought in 1978 and for years afterwards, that the colonies were there to… the former colonies were there to, absorb the production from Britain. But Britain was not there to absorb the culture of New Zealand or Australia. It was to be a one-way commercial transaction, which of course had cultural overtones.
And perhaps I, as an American, or as a person who grew up with American thinking, our stance in America, whatever the untruth of that may be, is that we are anti-imperialist. We don't, and rarely did, conquer anything in order to rule it, which was not the way the French Empire was put together and not the way the British Commonwealth was put together.
[Q] What about the conquest of the Native Americans? 
Well, I don't think that was a... You're right, but you weren't conquering a foreign country. It was an internal issue, but the rapacity was exactly the same. And... but I don't think, in the classic sense, it could be called imperialist.

I didn't have any politics. If any politics, they were centre-left, but I was a person who saw himself as a professional publisher. I was going to get Penguin right so that it could go on and publish more books, great books, ideally, but also entertaining books, and not be sold, as so many companies were being sold, to non-British companies. And that was an issue as well – issue as well – because many people said – there were many British publishing worthies – what a scandal it was that Pearson had hired someone who was an American to run this most British of companies.
Well, I saw it as... I mean, I did... I was aware of the issue, but from all sort of reasons, birth and what had happened to my family and so on, I was very pro-British. But I didn't see that as being particularly a publishing issue. I just wanted to be professional, and publish well, and have Penguin grow again, and expand into the Commonwealth, and into the United States particularly, because that was one of the things that must have been in the background of both Jim Rose, Ron Blass and more importantly even Pearson, in owning Penguin, which was very under-represented in the United States, which was the largest British market… the largest market for English language books. And Penguin had a presence there but it was a very small one, so I think they thought that I would address myself to that opportunity.
But after those six months which I've just recounted, part of my policy was not to stress America at all. But there's this Walt Kelly cartoon, Pogo, 'I have met the enemy and they is us'. And I found that the real problem with Penguin was in Penguin, not in America, it was in Penguin in Britain. And so I disappointed Pearson initially, when I put out that statement about what I was going to try and do. And I was going to try and get Penguin's Commonwealth position – Britain, and Australia, and New Zealand, and India, and so on – I was going to get that right before addressing the American problem. And Jim Rose and Ron Blass and Pearson all believed... because I think it's always easier to believe that the problem is somewhere else. It's not where you are, it's somewhere else. So they believed it was all in America.

Well, in that document that I had learned to do to provide my colleagues and owners with a view of what I was likely to have as a policy, I did say that I was going to, not exactly forget about America, but deal with America later because the problems were right there in the heart of Penguin. And I did go to America later, in the eighth, ninth or tenth year of my 19 or 20 years at Penguin, because I noticed, or I came to see, that Penguin in the United States was not a mass market paperback publisher. It was the most universally known imprint or publishing company in Britain and in the Commonwealth, but not in the United States. And the reasons for [this] were very complicated. They had to do with cover art. They had to do with forms of distribution. It had to do with where books were sold in America, as distinct from where they were sold in Britain.
And so, when I finally came to address the issue of the fact that Penguin in the United States, the largest book market for English language reading, Penguin was hardly to be seen there, I bought – I had Penguin buy – New American Library, which was one of the large American paperback houses, mass market. But what was curious about New American Library is that it had been founded by people who sought, originally, to copy Penguin in the United States, so it was like recapturing the castle. They had a non-fiction line called Mentor Books which was modelled on Penguin, on Pelican, I should say… on Pelican. And they had a classics line which was called Signet Classics which was modelled on the Penguin Classics.

And Penguin always, in the UK, had a kind of central European aspect to its Britishness, which I don't think most British people knew about. But the design of Penguin books was that of a Czech designer, and various people on the… in the directorate at Penguin were central Europeans. So that... it was not so crazy as all that. The New American Library had been started by a kind of faux-Englishman, Victor Weybright, who was not English at all, but he was an American who dressed like a Brit. I rarely saw him out of tweeds and his English was very stilted. To an American, I mean. And a European, Kurt Enoch from Hamburg, Germany. Those were the two principals of New American Library. It had had, before that an involvement, a very serious corporate involvement, with Ian Ballantine, who was partly a Scot and, I think, partly Jewish. There was some connection with his… in his family, with Emma Goldman, the famous social iconoclast fighter for women's rights and socialism and so on. He was partly a Scot. His father, Teddy, acted on the British stage. And so, New American Library, which I bought for Penguin, actually was a perfect fit for Penguin and it did, in a publishing sense, what Penguin could not do. It was a mass market line. Penguin, in America was what we could call there, a trade paperback publisher, which was what the British probably called a midway edition at some level. Not quite mass, not quite hardback, or not a hardback at all, but occupying a book shop shelf and sensibility.
So that was... So Penguin, by our having bought New American Library, was now a full-service publisher. It could publish an author, it could exploit the copyright in hardback, in trade paperback through Penguin, or in the mass market through New American Library, also known as Signet. The corporate name was New American Library but the mass market imprint was Signet. And Pearson, when I came to present the opportunity of buying New American Library to them, said they would only permit me to buy the company, which I told them was essential to their dream of being important in America, if I went there myself to integrate it. And I was not unhappy with that idea, but I think it was a mistake.

Penguin was in good health, rude good health, at that time. We had gotten the... we had won back our position in British publishing, we had expanded our reach in the Commonwealth, and we were in rude good health and now we were ready to take on America according to my policy.
And I guess I thought, what a nice thing for an American, to come back to America having not too badly acquitted himself of the job I'd gone to Britain to do. I think there was a degree of hubris connected to that but I covered it up, I'm going back to see my parents again. I mean, I did see them, obviously, several times a year, but people didn't travel quite as much then as they do now. I had a home in the country, I only saw that two or three times a year. And my friends! I had so many American friends I rarely saw anymore. I had spent ten years travelling through South Africa and India, and Australia, and New Zealand, and so... and I could tell them a lot of stories that they didn't know and... so I was, sort of, eager to come back. And I was not deserting England; I was still the CEO of the group, the Penguin group, still headquartered in London, but me now working out of the US.
 
And I think I made a mistake in one sense. I think it was partly responsible for the wreck of my marriage. I don't know that others who may see or hear this text would agree with me, but that's irrelevant. When you get to be almost 80, you feel you can say anything you like. And I think my now ex-wife enjoyed the position she had as a result of my being the head of Penguin in England, where being the head of Penguin meant something. Well, it meant something more, in many ways, to her than it did to me. I mean, I was aware that it was a really good job in publishing, but I had to work. I went to the office every day and I worked! I've always worked! So the glory, as such, did not... I was aware of it but it... I had come there to do a job. Mary was the beneficiary of... so was I, but it didn't mean that much to me. What I liked was I made some British friends, met different people that I hadn't known before. And I certainly enjoyed the fact that Penguin was doing well. But Mary was the wife of the head of Penguin and that was an honourable, or honorific, role for her to have. And when we came back to America, she was just the wife of Peter Mayer. I still had the same job title but it didn't mean that much. Penguin was not yet as important in America as Pearson wanted me to make it. So I think glamour disappeared from our life in America. And I believe that was a component to our life in England, certainly for her, and that was missing in America. Not missing for me, because I, once again, had to go to the office in the morning and work. So I don't think I ever took something for the sheer prestige of it or something like that. Was it an interesting job? Could it be done? That was, sort of, the way I looked at publishing. And of course, I loved the fact that, because it was Penguin, we could publish, I could publish, a lot of books that would not come my way under any other imprint. So it certainly added to the attraction, that more and more great books became part of my life.

Those were the most dramatic years. And I have written about that from a political context, or from a political point of view, in a book that has been published this year, I think, by the University of Manchester Press, a chapter about Penguin in the 70s and 80s because it was... I came in the Callaghan period, the Labour period, the Winter of Discontent, and I... in I don't know year. Mrs Thatcher was '79 or '80 she became the prime minister. And there was an enormous change, as we all know, in Britain, as a result of Mrs Thatcher becoming the prime minister. First, when she became the leader of her party, I don't think many people in Britain knew how far to the right she was. She was obviously to the right, she was a Tory, anyway, but I think she surprised many people. And I think it is fair to say that, not only did she control the industrial situation, but she went a long way down the road to destroying the unions or destroying their power. She, of course, didn't destroy the unions, but she did erode their power in a significant way. And this changed the context for the individuals who had come to Penguin straight from university, many of them, not all of them, but many of them, seeing Penguin as a vehicle for social justice.
I saw it, probably, to some extent, as they saw it, but I saw it, also, in a way they did not see it, partly because it was my job to fix it. I saw it as a publishing company, and was not a national institution as the BBC. It was privately owned! And I knew that it would be either sold or... well, probably sold at some point, if it was not brought back to health. And in fact, I can say, and I've never said it before, but I don't mind saying it, that the thing I was proudest of when I left in '97 or '98... I was proud, I was actually proud, that Penguin was still owned British, because so many other companies had become French, or Swedish, or Australian, or German, or American, or whatever. And in a way, it showed that we were a professional bunch of people and I was a professional publisher, that it didn't matter what flag I was flying, it was an entity that did good work and deserved to survive. And I think I took a pride in the fact that many people said an American couldn't understand British culture or civilisation or publishing or Penguin or Pearson. And I don't want to presume that I did, but I do want to say that I was still standing at the end of it and Penguin was still there. And I took a lot of pleasure in that and I still do.

When I came back to England, if that's the right phrase, after years in the United States again after I left Penguin, I bought this ancient company in whose quarters you interview me today, in whose modest, extremely modest, quarters you find me in today – Duckworth –started in 1898 by Virginia Woolf's half-brother, Gerald Duckworth. And I found that a vehicle for myself to revisit a place I'd come to love, which was England and Britain and the United Kingdom.
And I don't know if anybody welcomed me, but I was glad to be back here. And I also realised that no matter how often I came here in the intervening years, it's one thing to come here and not have any work. And you say to your friends, well, what are you doing on this night or that night? And they're sometimes busy, sometimes they're... But if you have come here to work, well, it's entirely different to see you, and a lot of it was to refashion my connection with a country that I loved. And I happened to be born here. That was an accident for which I can take neither credit or discredit; it just happened. But I was very glad that my daughter was born here. I was very proud of that. Proud is the wrong word, but happy about that. I thought she might one day appreciate Britain, and she went to school here for, I think, three years, and... So buying something that was British and on hard times, which I was able to do privately, I got a big bank loan from UBS and set up shop here again. And now I've bought a flat here and… and I even have some private time with an English lady, and... British lady. And all these things are part of feeling something about a place. But I never didn't feel happy about being an American, too. I mean, I think you can have a wife and a mistress. I don't know which one is the wife and which one is the mistress, but it's possible to care about both.

There was a political problem because the editors around me saw Penguin as a battering ram for social change, and the social change they saw was social change to the left, but the government had changed to the right. So in a sense, that was some kind of help to me, because the unions were very difficult within Penguin and they didn't understand that I was constitutionally pro-union in an American sense, but not pro-union in a British sense where the unions were somewhat more ideological than they are in America. In America, they're about wages and hours, and [largely] that's all. In Britain and in Europe, unions mean rather more: a balancing of power actually, and the management of the company. And there was a much higher degree of class consciousness in Britain, as in Europe, than there was in the United States, so that was quite foreign to me. And there was this higher degree of class consciousness, but there was also a bigger gulf between classes, at the level of even a company like Penguin, that saw itself as a force for progress. Company dining rooms were divided between the workers and the directors, and cars were bought for people at different pay grades, and there was a great deal of snobbery, which we, at the workplace at least, did not have in the United States.
So to try and say that I... I showed you a letter which mentioned Milton Friedman today. Well, when the opportunity came to publish a major economist at Penguin, the book that I wanted to publish was by Milton Friedman, and maybe Milton and his wife as well. And this was really fought over at Penguin, the editors almost entirely against our publishing this book. He was a supply… money supply theorist. He was certainly to the right. He was the informing economist for the Reagan administration, and became the main guru of Mrs Thatcher, who was certainly anathema to the people who worked at Penguin. I shouldn't say the people who worked at Penguin; there were many different kinds of people who worked at Penguin, but let me say, the intellectuals, or the editors, the publishing part of Penguin. Penguin was also Harmondsworth warehouses, an assembly line, and...
And somehow the normalisation of Penguin was one of the subsidiary tasks that had to be achieved during those eight or nine years. There was also an aspect at Penguin that Penguin had the most brilliant backlist of any publisher, of any paperback publisher certainly. And that was achieved in the early years of Penguin, when there was really no competition, so that generations of school children in Britain – who later became sixth formers and university graduates – had to read Penguin books, and they were inclined to do so by their lecturers and professors and teachers. And there was an aspect of Penguin that 'Penguin is good for you'. But that's not what you, perhaps, wanted to read. It was... everything about Penguin was earnest, but not fun. I think that was unfair, but I think a lot of Penguin... A lot of Britain saw Penguin that way. And if Penguin was to be, again, the paperback reading choice – or the reading choice, to leave out the work paperback – the reading choice of the majority of Brits, it had to change its editorial policy by becoming more inclusive. I didn't want us to drop quality, I wanted us to add things that normal English people also liked. It had become a kind of cultural ghetto. It only did the 'best things'. Well, the 'best things' has a degree of snobbery to even that phrase. It had to have cover art that related to the aesthetics or the psychological drives of lots of readers who wanted to pick up a book and...
In fact, what we had to combat was this rather elitist notion that there was a Penguin look to everything. Now, people, including myself, were very proud of that. No other imprint had a look that was itself. But I came to realise that that celebrated Penguin, it didn't celebrate the author or the book. Every book has its own soul, has its own readership, and it's not necessarily one that can be ascribed to it by the fact of who publishes it. It has its own life and its own potential readership. So I thought that our books should look like they were going to be bought by whatever group that was the natural readership for that book. All of these issues had social and cultural connotations to them.

There were some art directors who had come to Penguin to fit into the Penguin notion of uniformity and conformity. And there [were] the green Penguins, they were mysteries, and the purple Penguins, they were, I think, travel.
[Q] That’s right – green Agatha Christie, orange for George Orwell. Lady Chatterley’s Lover…
That would have been orange, I think. Yes. But... and they were very arcane discussions that took place, whether it should be orange or green or blue, or whatever colour. It... I mean, it was... there was an aspect of priesthood to it. It was all a celebration of Penguin, but not of the author and not of the reader. And that’s what I tried to do. And, of course, I was attacked for being very commercial and very American. But actually, what I was was a publisher, and a publisher is someone who wants to find readers for his books. He believes in his books and he wants not only to sell them to make money out of them, he wants to be validated. Penguin wanted to be validated for itself, and much of that we retained, but not entirely. And I think the change was very important.

When I bought Hamish Hamilton and Michael Joseph and so on, that was the first real consolidation, if you like, of many that ensued after that. They were called the Thompson companies, because Lord Thomson's organisation here, Thomson Travel [Group]... And I think a man named Gordon Brunton was the head of Thomson's publishing. And they owned Hamish Hamilton, Michael Joseph, Rainbird, which was a packager, and Sphere, which was a mass paperback publisher. And for whatever reason, undoubtedly economics, for whatever reason, the board of Thomson's decided to sell this group of four or five companies – I can't remember if there was a fifth or not – at one go, to someone. And we were asked if we were... we'd be interested. And I was.
And the reason I was interested, for Penguin, was something very important in the history of both Penguin and British and American publishing. The vaunted and famous Penguin backlist was made up of books - great books - that had been bought, not by me, but by my predecessors, originally on full term contracts, which meant that they were sold to Penguin on a license, but forever inviolate. In other words, they could not be reverted from Penguin. Others were sold to Penguin, or licensed to Penguin, but could be reverted at the end of a term. Increasingly the latter, licenses for term became the operative way in which British hardcover publishers sold, or licensed, books to Penguin and to other paperback publishers as well. When I came to Penguin in 1978, I saw – and this was something that I spoke about in this policy statement six months after I arrived – an aspect of that was the rebuilding of the Penguin backlist. Penguin was incurring losses of its backlist because the original hardcover publishers were reverting the rights after a term.
So that would have been fine if... not fine, perhaps that's the wrong word, but that would have been all right if Penguin had been building up new rights and new copyrights to accompany or allay the pain of losing older copyrights. But that was difficult to do. We did not have an editorial staff, when I came there, that was interested in publishing across a mass market. They might or might not have said it, but that was how they functioned. They were, politically, very, very strong, mostly on the left as I've also said. But they were not particularly interested in popular fiction, which is the largest category for large sales of paperbacks. And Pan was book... was built on the titles that either had been reverted from Penguin or that… or that Penguin didn't bid on for new books. So I could see when I came, that over time, there wouldn't be a Penguin anymore. Books would be increasingly reverted to the original publishers, put out by either other paperback publishers or by the publishers themselves in paperback, and Penguin would become... Penguin would go into further decline. It was already in decline.
Well, part of that policy statement was that we would rebuild the backlist by creating more copyrights, so we would be less a reprinter and more an originating publisher. Because as an originating publisher, we would own the books fully, life of copyright, and so-called volume rights, and they could never be taken away from us. But it also occurred to me that it would take us 20 or 30 year to do that, so I decided on a two-pronged approach. One was to rebuild copyright by commissioning more original books, and the second one was to buy those companies from whom Penguin had the most copyrights. And one of them was Hamish Hamilton, and the other one was Michael Joseph.
So, by buying those two companies of the four or five that we bought, I was securing long term health of those books in paperback, for the Penguin backlist. And we never bought a book... we never bought a company just to be larger; we always bought companies because they were strategic. When we bought Frederick Warne and I was the only bidder, which is a very funny story which I'll tell, not now but next time. Beatrix Potter story, very English subject, is one I will tell. That was because I wanted to take Penguin into the field of mass merchandising, and we had no product, as to use the word that mass merchandisers use, we had no product to do that with. And it occurred to me that Peter Rabbit was a character who could be mass-merchandised.

I think you took down some of the initial features of arriving at Heathrow and going to see Ron Blass.  But then, Mary and I went into London where we discovered - perhaps we knew it from Mr Blass, or his PA, Betty Hartel - that no arrangements had been made for us to stay anywhere, which we found a little bit peculiar, because we were somewhat more used to the way American corporations handled chief executives [when] they were [moved] from one city to another.  And we thought a company like Penguin, owned by Pearson, would have some experience with this kind of thing.
So we took that on faith, but were slightly disappointed when we discovered that we had to do everything ourselves which we didn't mind doing, but we were foreigners in England and London, and didn't know what things cost, and didn't know where one should ideally or temporarily live.
And an arrangement was made for the Goring Hotel, where we camped.  And really, we camped there because there was the bed in the room that we were given.  And, as I recall, we had a suitcase open to the left side of the bed and to the right side of the bed.  And we would, for months, step out of the bed into the suitcases.
Well, I went to work each day, and Mary scouted around with different estate agents for either a temporary house to rent, or maybe even a house to buy, or a flat to buy, or whatever.  And I didn't have any time, really, to aid her in any of this.  So she did pretty well, I think.  And we finally rented something behind the Royal Court Theatre, not so far from Sloane Square, a house on a six-month rental, after perhaps a month in the Goring Hotel.  And life began in a more or less reasonable fashion.
We discovered it wasn't exactly where we wanted to live, wasn't exactly the kind of house we wanted to have, or flat, but these things didn't matter so much to us.  We were younger then.  We were younger then.  And very happy to be in London.

The same thing was truly… was actually the case as well with respect to working conditions: nobody had even thought that I might need an office!  I think the notion was that I would work in Harmondsworth, but I quickly dispelled any of that notion because the editorial process was not in Harmondsworth and given my own background, which was largely editorial, I would certainly look toward the editorial side of publishing as that area that I would most want to involve myself in towards turning Penguin's fortunes around, [as] I was expected to do.
So, the editorial part of Penguin was actually in Victoria.  Rather ridiculous offices, organised vertically rather than horizontally, which [isn't] the way people would organise things today for relative easy access of people to each other and departments to each other.  Instead, people ran up and down stairs.  I was told this was rather typical of British publishing, and it was - an older form of British publishing.  Publishing today, and in the years since then, did devolve into a more or less horizontal scheme.  But at that time, many publishing companies were in houses that had never been built, or buildings that had never been built, for offices.  And I think somebody or other must have thought it was literary which, of course, was some sort of nonsense because anything that is literary is in the books, not in the architecture of the offices.

When I walked into Grosvenor Gardens, which is where the building that housed Penguin's editorial processes were, I discovered there was not only no office for me - no preparations had been made for me.  So they sat me at a table which was part of the reception room for visitors who came into the building.  It was a large table.  Took about a week to get a phone put in there.  And I sat there with all the visitors who were visiting different editors.
Well, I remember saying to John Broome… John Broome was the, I think he would be called today the HR person, but I think he was the perhaps then the personnel director or whatever.  And I said, "Well, I'm going to need a, not only a phone here, but I need someone to answer it.  And it's got to be someone discreet, since all these visitors are sitting all around me".
And I said, "Couldn't I have someone's office?"  They said… there was shock and awe and dismay.  The unions won't have it that you take someone's office away from them.  It's part of their contract.  So, I learned something about unions, and in particular the NUJ, because the editors were all either NUJ members or associated or spoken to by the regulations.  They were bound by NUJ agreements with the company.  I can't remember any longer whether the editors were NUJ members or not, but their hearts were certainly with the NUJ.
My heart was not with the NUJ, or not [against] the NUJ.  I didn't even understand unions because, for the most part, in America, there were no unions in publishing.  And if they were, they were not on the editorial end of things; they would have been in the bricks-and-mortar area of warehousing and transportation and so on.

I was someone who actually had a very strong sympathy for unions, which it was quite possible to have at that time in American life - maybe that's even true today - because the unions in America were, for the most part, not ideological.  They were about wages and hours and holidays and benefits.  That's all that it was about.  Wasn't about your right to manage.
But the NUJ took a different view, that they had something to say about the way a company was managed, and it was a bit unfortunate that they did, since almost none of them had any background in management.  But that didn't disqualify them, they thought, from having a say.  And I discovered that most of what they believed in was restrictive of the management's right to manage, so that it was a strange situation.
Penguin was failing, but the union made it very difficult to make any changes.  They probably saw it very differently.  But I, who had been given the ball, to use an American football expression, [to] either run with it, pass with the ball, or kick the ball, do something with the ball, found I was generally confronted with: that can't be done, or that isn't done.
And, well, I discovered that I had no office, and so I commandeered, my few powers were to organise, that walls, four walls, would be built around this table.  So carpenters, before long, set about building walls while I was sitting inside the, slowly, very slowly arriving walls.  I was sitting inside.  The guests at Penguin were just outside the hammering.  And I thought it would be possible to get an assistant or a secretary just to pick up the phone.  I was told that was not possible either, since everybody had an assigned role, and it did not say in anybody's contract: pick up the phone for the chief executive.  It was: pick up the phone and write letters for whichever editor they might be assigned to.
So, I remember saying to John Broome, well, are all the editors present?  No.  Two of them are off on business trips to America.  So I said, couldn't these, couldn't their PAs or their assistants be seconded while [their editors] were in America to the chief executive to just pick up the phone?  And I was told that the agreements didn't say yea or nay to that.  So I had a different… I had different people picking up the phone.  Whenever somebody was missing, that PA would be assigned to me for a day, a week.  Sometimes as long as two weeks, but nobody ever knew anything, because they were not very interested.  And they actually thought it was quite wrong, that they had been hired to be Mr Smith's PA and they were now Mr Mayer's PA and… but there wasn't anything to forbid this practice, so it went on.

And finally, after about six months, the walls were completed around this table.  And it was a kind of office.  But, on the day it was finished, we moved our offices to the King's Road, and these walls were promptly taken down, which had taken six months [to build], because whoever owned the building wanted the building restored to its original condition.  Refurbishment, or there's some phrase for that in British real estate parlance.  And so, it had taken six months to build walls around this table.  It had been completed.  Took six months. Don't know if it was a go-slow period or not.  You have to understand, this was before Mrs Thatcher came in, and this was the 'winter of discontent'.  Nobody was working very hard in Britain at all.  And it was very hard to get anything done.  Garbage pickups were infrequent, visits by ambulances to hospitals were also infrequent.  You had to hope that you either had no garbage or never got ill.  And, but this was all very new to Mary and me.  We came from a country which was perhaps benighted in many different ways, but in which the power of the boss was rather great to commandeer work.
Over the years, I didn't think… I came to think that the American system was not so good.  But that was the system we were used to.  I came to have a lot of respect for the British system over the years, and I found you could work with the unions, although, I have to say, part of that was very tedious.  Took a long time to agree anything with the unions and you had to listen to a great deal of ideological cant in order to come to any agreement.  But one, at the end of the day, could.  And I guess this was aided and abetted by the government taking a very tough view of labour.  That was when Mrs Thatcher came in, probably in the spring of 1979.  Something like that.
But I don't want to say that I was in approval of many of the things that Mrs Thatcher did.  I was not.  Constitutionally, I was, in American terms, a Democrat not a Republican.  If I had voted in England, I would have voted for Labour, not for the Tories.  But it was clear to me that Mrs Thatcher was right about controlling the unions because the unions were not helping Britain succeed in a world of nations.  Britain had ceased to be very competitive.  And, at the end of the day, if you want to go up the charts, you have to win sometimes.  And Britain wasn't winning.

Control of the unions was very strong at that, particularly at the NUJ level, and I found out that there was very, very poor attendance at meetings.  Somebody was always ill, somebody was always not feeling well, somebody always had to go to the doctor - we had our own doctor and sister - somebody was off in Ireland meeting an author, or in Paris having a meeting with a French publisher.  And so, I didn't know how to curtail this without becoming a snoop and asking for proof of this or that. So I made all meetings on Mondays and Fridays.  And the absenteeism went down unbelievably, because it was quite clear who wasn't there on Mondays and Fridays, who was extending their weekends.  And before too long, things regulated themselves very nicely.
I also discovered sometimes the phone would ring, all through the building.  Many different phones were ringing, and nobody would pick them up.  And I would ask someone, why is the phone ringing all the time, and nobody ever picks up?  He says, it's not my job.  And I said, well, whose job is it?  Well, it's so-and-so's, they're out to lunch.  Or so and so, they're ill.  So the phone just keeps ringing.  Well, whoever's ringing will call back.  So, I didn't know quite what to do.  I couldn't get anybody to pick up anybody else's phones.  Seemed to me to be civil.  You would do this for somebody, I thought.  But not in a union environment, or not in the union environment that existed at that time.
So I would run around the building every time I heard a phone ring incessantly, and I would start picking up the phones all over the building, but particularly, of course, on my floor which was the ground floor.  And I found out that it started to embarrass people to have the CEO pick up everybody's phones.  And soon they started picking up their own phones, or helping their buddies… and picking up the phone on the desk next to them and say, he'll call you back right after lunch or whatever, can I take a message?

Over time, people adopted different systems.  There had to be some leadership for that, some examples.  And I think people started liking to win because we had some books.  I bought an early book called, I believe, The Four Hundred.  I paid much too much money for it.  Wasn't a very good book, but it wasn't a very bad book; it was a very commercial book.  But we paid a lot of money for it and we were taken to task, or I was taken to task, for having paid so much money for a very commercial book.  Well, I needed some books that would sell in large numbers.  And this was a very good story. And… but the book was rubbished almost instantly because of the money we had paid for it.  And it was not Penguin-like to publish a book like that for a lot of money.  There was nothing disgraceful about the book, but… So, it failed very badly.  And the first time out, let's say, in the effort to both preserve Penguin and its culture by adding something to it that Penguin had lost  which was, frankly… Penguin had lost an engagement with the British reading public.  It was now only publishing books for a kind of cultural ghetto, either a literary one or a political one.  And companies like Pan were doing extremely well with all the books that Penguin was now turning down or bidding too low on.
And the middle, if you like, the middle of reading such in Britain was going to other companies whereas from 1935 on, it had been dominant… dominated by Penguin.  Penguin had become a kind of cultural ghetto - much admired, but not too well attended to.  And the famous Penguin logo and the colours which defined the different areas in which Penguin published became slightly laughable in the context of a wider Britain.  Those were the books that were considered 'good'.  Like good medicine.  Not… you have to read them in school; they're not what you'd… might want to read for yourself, for fun, for education, whatever.  Everything about Penguin was sort of de rigueur and not me.  That's what the toffs, or that's what better people - better people meant all those people you hated, school administrators and parents and vicars and so on - told you was good for you.
Well, I had to recapture for Penguin the joy of reading, if you like.  And the first time out of the box, I came up with a very big failure [The Four Hundred]and I was laughed at, and Penguin was laughed at for our failure.  But the book was really killed by the media because of what we paid for it, which was probably too much.

The second book we bought for quite a bit of money was William Wharton's Birdy, and this was much more Penguin country.  And we published it very well, and it did very well, and Penguin was on the way back.  But I did learn one thing, that Penguin was always news, so that whatever we did would be remarked on more than if some other publisher had published it.  If some other publisher had published Mr Sheppard's book [The Four Hundred], they probably would have gotten away with it.
And then we came to The Far Pavilions, where I had the temerity to have a couple kissing on the cover.  That was considered something other publishers did, but not Penguin.  Actually, the story is legend, and also, like many legends, not correct.  I was associated with the book's success, but, in fact, I can't take any real credit for bringing the book into Penguin.  The book had been bought by the former Longmans and [even] before Longmans was integrated into Penguin by Pearson.  And Longmans was not then just an educational publisher - it was a publisher, did trade books, general books, and it also did educational books.  And a book by a British writer named Molly Kaye, which was an Anglo-Indian novel called The Far Pavilions, and she had been married to, she was still married at that time, to a British Army officer, and she had been stationed in India.  And she wrote a big, sweeping romance of life in India at that time.
She took 20 years to write the book.  Nobody at Penguin knew the book even existed anymore, because Longmans had been integrated.  One day, a little lady, Molly Kaye herself, came into the reception - this is before I came to Penguin - and brought the manuscript with her and said, I'm Molly Kaye.  Here's my novel.  Nobody knew anything about it.
But it was, in fact, owned by Penguin, and it was read by Penguin, by, I think, John Guest who had also worked at Longmans, and now was either full-time or consultant to Penguin, and Peter Carson, and maybe a few other people as well, and they thought it was a commercial novel, and they published it.  And that was unusual, too.  They published it at Allen Lane, which was a new, newish imprint that had been created at Penguin to publish hardcovers.
You'll remember, of course, that Penguin's reputation had been made in paperbacks.  So I think, partly to acquire copyrights - this is, again, still before my time - Penguin created the Allen Lane imprint, which was hardcovers.  And people like Peter Carson, who was also the history editor of Penguin, became - and Eleo Gordon, his wife, who had also been at Longmans - were in charge of that.
And they published The Far Pavilions in hardcover, to a modest success.  A success, certainly, not a raging success, it wasn't the biggest best-seller of the year, but it was a best-seller.

I showed up in the interim between that time that they had published the hardcover and the paperback publication of The Far Pavilions.  And I took it, I guess onto… upon myself to look at what the upcoming lists of Penguin were, and I saw that book there, which I read, and I said, this can be a very big success for Penguin.  So I mass marketed this book, which… 'mass marketed' was a phrase also not known at Penguin.  Penguin books were paperbacks, but mass marketing a book meant heavily promoting it, heavily publicising it, having an appropriate commercial cover on it to catch readers, and so on.  And I decided this book by Molly Kaye should become that.
And I decided - working, I'm sure, with people in the publicity and promotion department - that what I wanted to do for the book would cost not less than £50,000.  We didn't have budgets at Penguin for marketing and publicising in that kind of way.  What money that we did have for those things were more or less democratically, evenly distributed across an entire list.
Well, I thought that was wrong, too, because that kind of equality of marketing moneys meant the impoverishment of every book.  You divide the moneys over a great many books, and each book gets practically no money.  And it was a way to make most books fail.
So I took a page from our American songbook, so to speak, from an American, my American experience and I said, we're going to heavily publicise 12 books a year, or 20 books a year, or whatever number we decide to, and, well, the large sums will be spent for those books, and the other books will get very little attention.
Well, of course, the editors were not happy about that.  The authors were not happy about that.  The agents were not happy about that.  They were happy having small sums of money spent on each and every book, regardless of the fact that that was a way to have the books not sell.

The first book that was published under this different policy was The Far Pavilions.  And somebody said, well, were are we going to get £50,000 from?  So I said, from the author.  From the author?  I said, yes, from the author - what's her royalty?  So somebody told me it was 10%, let us say, for the paperback.  I said, well, we give her 7.5%.  But that's not fair, others said. I said, "Well, it all depends what you mean by fair.  What if we sell so many copies of her book that, despite the reduction in her royalty, she winds up with more money?" They said, "Well, can you guarantee that?" I said, "No, but I can believe in it, and we can work toward it".  Well, how will we do that?  I said, well, we'll double the retail price of the book.  You mean, instead of £1.25, it will be £2.50?  I said, absolutely.  And so, her 7.5% will be 7.5% of £2.50.  That's a lot better than 10% of £1.95, isn't it?
Well, people were dumbfounded by this.  We can't do this this unilaterally.  You'll have to get her approval to reduce her royalty.  I said, I'll do that.  Who's her agent?  They told me the agent was, I think, Jacqueline Korn.  So I said, well, I'll have lunch with her.
Well, Jacqueline Korn says, you can't do that.  You can't reduce… she's a bestseller… you can't reduce her royalty.  I said, I can, because, if we keep her royalty the way it is, we'll [only] spend £5,000 on the book.  But if you do what I say, we'll spend £50,000 on the book.  And Jacqueline Korn says, where can I sign?
So, we reduced Molly Kaye's royalty from, I think it was from 10% to 7.5%.  We doubled the retail price of the book.  We agreed, I think, also, as part of the… getting Molly to lower her royalty, to print twice as many copies as we otherwise would have.  And we did the book in B format, a larger format, to make it look like it was worth £2.50 instead of £1.25.
So, all of these things were put together. The author and agent agreed.  And we sold, in the first year, I think, 400,000 copies.  And Penguin was off and running.  Molly Kaye loved us.  The agent loved us.  Everybody in British publishing knew what we had done.  And we were off and running.

Ah, yes. We… I had this couple kissing on the cover.  So, we got a lot of stick from readers, but far fewer from readers, a lot from third-rate journalists.  They said, how can you have a couple kissing on the cover on a Penguin book?  I said, well, forget that it's a Penguin book.  Have you read this book?  They're kissing in the book.  Why shouldn't they be kissing on the cover?  That shut them up.  And they kept kissing on the cover, and people kept buying the book and reading it.
And I think there were other people who said, well, a book that is that large, it won't fit into racks, because the racks are designed for A-size books.  And I remember saying, well, then the racks have become the publisher instead of me.  You'll have to change the racks so the… for the larger size book.
[Q] How did you know how to do all that?
I didn't.  I didn't know what I was doing.  I knew that, if it worked, it would be very good for the author.  It would be very good for the book itself.  It would be very good for readers.  It would be very good for booksellers.  It would be very good for Penguin.  But, in other words, I created a model that, if it worked, would be a virtuous circle.  It would be good for everybody.
But, I mean, I did have the power - I was the CEO - to price the book any way I wanted to, to have the book be in any format, to have a couple on the cover that was sufficiently provocative to make people… it was not very provocative.  They were fully clothed. But it… the shock was that it was on a Penguin cover.  We don't do things like this at Penguin.  Well, you better, because nobody will read your books otherwise.  People are people.

I made a lot of enemies, and even inside the company because there were a lot of people at Penguin who loved the institutional nature of Penguin.  They didn't understand that, so did I, but that unless I could produce some sales somewhere within this company, nothing could make the institution survive by itself.  The company was not doing well.
So [many on the staff] didn't seem to care whether the company was doing well or not.  They said, they wanted to tell their mums and dads, 'I'm in publishing, and I work for Penguin!'  Ah, that's all right.  That's a good thing.
So, the power of Penguin was very, very great as a proper approach to, I guess, publishing, and to media.  But there was another question, and that was - it was not publicly-owned, I mean, it was not owned by the government.  It was a privately… it was a privately-owned company, and privately-owned companies, if they don't do well for enough years, will finally get sold or liquidated.  Well, we weren't going to get liquidated; we were too famous.  It would have been sold to somebody, who probably would have done some version of the same thing.
I actually believed in the institutional nature of Penguin.  I believed in its quality, but I said, something has to pay for that quality.  The quality cannot pay for itself, any more than the opera can pay for itself.  Many high-minded things have to be subsidised either by the public, meaning the government, or by private institutions and private individuals, or you will only have popular music.  If you want something that is of a minority taste - by minority, I don't mean ethnic minority, I mean something that a small group of people, small, want - something has to make it pay.  You either get handouts from the government, or you get handouts from private people and private companies.
Pearson always had a budget for subsidising various museum shows at either the V&A or British Museum or wherever it might be… National Portrait Gallery.  And that was a virtuous thing that Pearson did and, but it speaks to the fact, if you go to opera in the US - I can't remember if it's true of every seat at Covent Garden or not - it says on the back of every chair: this chair was donated by the Samuel Johnson Foundation or by Samuel Johnson.  Somebody's got to pay for the chairs. I mean…
Well, somebody had to pay for Penguin's excellence also.  The excellence was not sufficiently broad to pay for the company.  It had paid for the company in earlier years, before there were mass market competitors.  As soon as there were mass market competitors, in particular Pan, the public increasingly deserted Penguin and went to more popular imprints.

During the years before I was a publisher, and when I was a graduate student, and even after I was a graduate student, I was a sailor also.  I was in the Merchant Marine.  But in this period when I was, I think, in graduate school, or studying, I think, comparative literature at Indiana.  But only, not… can't remember anymore what my academic life was while I was driving a cab at night.  And I don't even recall any longer how I came to drive a cab at night, but I must have known somebody who was doing that, who was my age.  And what was good about it was - I never liked authority very much -and you were by yourself in the cab so you had a degree of freedom.  Of course, you had to bring in money for the cab drive, for the cab company.
But I, so, I got my hackman's license, which was not difficult to get.  You had to pass a test on New York City to get your hackman's license, but it was not so difficult.  It would say: where is Yankee Stadium?  And so, you would say: the Bronx.  They might then say: how do you get there?  And you would tell them how you got there.  And they asked 20 or 30 questions about famous places.  Anyway, I did well enough to get my hackman's license.  A hackman's license is about yea big and has your picture on it, in which everybody looks like a felon, including me.

So, I worked at night, and - nearly always at night - and I was working one New Year's Eve, or Christmas Eve, I don't remember, and on the Lower East Side, where I also lived, you know, there's a mirror for the driver, and you can see [who] you picked up.
So, it was snowy.  And three guys got into the cab, one of whom I recognised in the mirror was Allen Ginsberg.  The other two were, I think, Gregory Corso and Philip Lamantia, two friends of Allen's.  And the only reason I recognised Allen was because he was a very famous figure around Columbia University.  He had been at Columbia some years before me, but even after he left Columbia, he still hung around Morningside Heights and he was a very famous figure.  I don't know any longer - I would have to look it up, but one could - whether Howl had been published at that time or not.  I'm not sure it had been.
But, anyway, I recognised him and I asked them where they were going, and they gave me an address and we drove along, and I said, Mr Ginsberg, something or other.  They were very startled in the back of the car - a cab driver who  recognised them.  They were not really famous.  So, I said, well, I'd read some of his poems, and I knew who he was, and I'd seen him around the… what was the name of that bar?  There was a bar around 112th Street and Broadway.  The West End Bar, I think.  And so, they said, well you're a cab driver.  I said, yes.  Earn some money and so on.
They said, well, we're going to a party.  You want to come?  So, I thought this was terrific.  I was a literature student, and these three characters invited me to a party.  Nobody invited me to anything those days.  So, I parked the car right outside, somewhere on the Lower East Side and locked it and went upstairs, a walk-up, to a party at which everybody was doing a lot of drinking, in spite of the fact that Allen, and I think his friends, were all gay - this was a very mixed party - there were a lot of gays there.  There was a lot of marijuana being smoked.  And I was having a good time there.
And somebody said, I don't know, at two in the morning, let's go to San Francisco.  And somebody said, "Who's got a short?"  'A short' was the word in that year, I believe, for a car.  And I, like a fool, raised my arm and said, "I got one!"  Where is it? they said. "It's downstairs".  And four people, including Allen, went downstairs and I drove them to San Francisco.
I got fired somewhere around Kansas City.  The… either the cab company put out to the police, they're looking for a yellow cab, license plate such and such and such and such.  But I was on… or maybe I called George's Garage in Harlem, which was the garage I took the cab from or worked for, on 125th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, George's Garage.  And I may have called them and say, listen, I've got your cab, and I'm taking some people to San Francisco.
And the cab driver, who liked me… the, not the cab driver, the owner of… the cab owner, who liked me, because I was very, I was… I brought in a lot of money.  I was a good cab driver.  He said, look, we know how much this cab is supposed to produce every day, and every day that cab is not back here, you owe us $200 or, I don't know.  And you're going to pay it.
Well, I remember, somewhere around Denver, we all got out of the car and pissed collectively and we put our money together for gas, because we didn't have that much for gasoline and Yankee Doodles.  We ate a lot of Yankee Doodles.  It's a sort of brown cake with cheap icing inside it.  We ate that all the way across America.  Yankee Doodles and pissed collectively.
And we got to San Francisco.  We had about the last $16 worth of gas.  They got some money together from someone and gave me enough money to get gas and go back to New York.  I did, and I paid them, I don't know, $1,200 or something like that, which was what the cab would have earned if it had continued to be plying the streets.

But I knew Allen forever.  And I ran into Allen for years at Naropa, which was a kind of Zen consciousness-raising grouping of individuals in Boulder, Colorado and Allen went there every year to teach.  And I finally saw him in New York.  And I even published The Complete Poems of Allen Ginsberg at Penguin, I think it was, in England; think Harper was his publisher in America.  And Allen says, well, why don't you publish it in England?  By that time I was the head of Penguin.  So I did.
And I even had dinner with him, maybe, less than a year before he died.  And it was very disheartening, because it was either a PEN dinner or it was some literary organisation's benefit dinner, and you could pick what table you wanted to sit at.  And every table had a famous author there.  So, at one table, Allen Ginsberg was seated, and I put myself down to sit there and see him again.  I was his publisher.  He also lived on 2nd Avenue, which was very close to where I lived, but I didn't see him perhaps more than once a year after I published him.  And I sat next to him at the dinner.
And I thought I would have a wonderful sort of literary or intellectual dinner with him.  There were other people at the table, too, but he and I were the only ones who knew each other, and we were sitting next to each other.  And nothing of the sort happened.  He told me about all of his physical ailments in disgusting detail, and he had many of them.  And the last thing I wanted to do was hear about his problems at bed, in bed at night, and running to the bathroom, and draining from every orifice, and I don't know.  It was horrible!  That's all he wanted to talk about through this whole dinner.  And I wanted to ask him was, what are you writing now?  And where… and he was very, very nice, but he died relatively soon after that.  And I think he had a very unhappy death, because he was a mess.
But it started with a cab ride.  And your friend remembers that.  I did write it up somewhere, 1000 years ago.

This happened in my first year at Penguin.  Jim Rose had been the CEO of Penguin, and he was the brother-in-law of Pat Gibson, of Lord Gibson, who was the head of Pearson.  And I think [Pat] was also the chairman, or something like that, of the National Trust, and he had been part of the Pearson grouping that hired me.  I think I told you about meeting Michael Blakenham, who was then Michael Hare, became Michael Blakenham… became Viscount Blakenham.
And Jim did not retire when I became the CEO.  I think he normally would have or should have.  But he stayed on for quite some time and that caused me a great deal of difficulty, because, as you said yourself in asking me a question about some of the unusual things I may have done when I came to Penguin, people said, well, this kid, or this man, Mayer, he won't last long.  He's doing things so differently from the way they were done at Penguin before him.  And he doesn't know better.  He's an American and so on.  And besides, he's an employee.  Jim Rose is the family.
So, they started, those people who were disaffected by many of the things I did, went behind my back to Jim.  Jim, do you know what Peter's doing now, or what next month is going to happen?  And something like that.  And can you stop it?
Well, technically, he couldn't because I had been given the job, and I had the contract.  And he was the chairman, and I was the chief executive.  And… but he could see me, and I liked him.  People's opinions about Jim Rose varied greatly within the company, but I rather liked him.
I thought, he was not a professional publisher, so it was not likely that he was going to get it right.  He was there for about seven years, and he was picked, I suppose, because he was certainly a journalist and a cultured gentleman, but particularly because he was the brother-in-law of Pat Gibson.  He had married Pat Gibson's wife, Dione.  And, to his credit…
[Q] Sister?
Pat Gibson's sister, yes.  Thank you.
To Jim's credit… well, it's hard to say hiring me was to his credit, but he either had been told by Pearson, hire somebody else to replace yourself because you're now 72, or he noticed himself that it was not going well, whatever it was, but Ron Blass, and maybe Andre Deutsch, suggested me to Jim Rose.

Some Jewish group - or Jewish individual, I don't know - contacted Jim and said, Jim, did you know, or Mr Rose, did you know, that Penguin is about to publish David Irving? Well, either Jim knew or found out, but, in any case, I don't think it was a secret. And the book that David Irving was writing for, I believe, Allen Lane, the Penguin Press, the hardcover imprint of Penguin, maybe even for Peter Carson who was its head, and also part of the mystery… history establishment at Penguin, was a book called Hitler's Generals [sic! Should be: The War Between the Generals].
And Jim Rose called me in and said, I don't want you to publish this book. David Irving is a terrible anti-Semite and has some very strange views about the Third Reich and the war, and given your personal background, you won't have any trouble cancelling this book.
So I said to him, well, first I'd like to read it; I don't want to take it on your say-so. But I do know who David Irving is. I don't like him - I don't know him personally, but I don't like what he stands for. But this is a book, and I'd like to read it.
So, I either got a manuscript or a galley or physical book, I don't remember any longer, but I did read it, and I couldn't find anything that was particularly objectionable in the book. It was a rather straightforward history of the general corps of the Third Reich, Hitler's generals. There were some comments in it that perhaps I didn't like, as either a liberal or perhaps as a Jew, but I didn't find they were bad history as such.
And I, after reading the book, I said to Jim, I'm not going to cancel this book. I might cancel some other book that David Irving wrote, but not this book. He's a rather good historian of the subject of this book. His views on many matters are not attractive to me and I think are wrong, but there's nothing in this book about Hitler's generals that is such.
And I know Jim Rose was really disappointed with me. And it was one of my first tests because it was in the first six months of my Penguin years that this test came up. And I think I continued to be a very good liberal, and I was a very good liberal by refusing to censor the book. Whereas, Jim wanted me to be a good liberal by censoring the book.
So, little did I know I would be faced, down the corridor of time, with other issues like this. For example, the Salman Rushdie case. But I'm not one, normally, for the cancelling of books.

What developed out of our publication of Salman's book was not anticipated in any way by us, although it could be that Salman himself, coming out of a world in which Islam was a central determining factor in many people's lives, it could be that Salman had some intimation, not, certainly of the fatwa, but of a reaction, a negative reaction, that the book would have in certain circles.  As a creative writer, comma… comma - I'm editing already.  As a creative writer, he wouldn't necessarily have written the book differently, even if he had known everything that we came to know.
That's a central point in this discussion, because it is, to me, at least, all about not religion, not a personality, not Salman's or anyone else's, but about the principle of a writer's right to write whatever he pleases, a publisher's right to publish whatever he pleases, a bookseller's right to stock and sell and merchandise any book that seems to him to be important for cultural or commercial purposes, and the right of a reader - every reader - to read what he chooses to read, without a filter, without any intercession.  These principles are very much ingrained in our Western society.  And Salman, although he comes from the subcontinent originally, worked and practiced, and works and practices, within the confines and, you might say, moral rights of individuals, as we perceive both moral rights and the individual.
And the difficulty arose, in many cases, with respect to Islamic theology, which I'm hardly any expert on, because the separation of church and state, which is a cardinal factor in our lives in the West, is not accepted as an operative element of the lives of people in, within Islam.  So that we have, in the case of this book, almost the first, at least in our time, effort by a minority to impose its will on a majority.  Generally speaking, we accept the obligation to have the majority still protect minority rights.  This was one where the minority felt it incumbent upon themselves to enforce the rights of the minority, even if it trampled on the rights of the majority.
This was further exacerbated by the fact that this was a work of fiction.  And I don't know if Islam makes as much of a distinction between fiction and non-fiction as we do.  And it also came not from the minority within a country, but a fatwa issued by the religious leader of another country.  So, there were - what shall I say? - early tremors of what we are experiencing today, I don't want to say all over the world, but in many parts of the world.  And it has led to violence and unstable governments and societies.
Well, we had no idea when we published The Satanic Verses that this book be a significant, or the significant factor in the revelation of what was to come.

Just before the publication of the book, I read the manuscript on a plane.  I don't know - 20 hours, 26 hours - I've forgotten exactly how long - from New Zealand to London.  I've forgotten how the agent, who will have been either Gillon Aitken or Andrew Wiley, got it to me, or whether they simply sent it to my office.  My office managed to get it to me in New Zealand.  I don't know today, but I did read it.
And one of the other issues that emerged from that reading was how ignorant I was - and I could say that of nearly everybody I know who is not a Muslim - of the Koran, or of Islamic practice.  And, for example, I didn't know, when I, in reading The Satanic Verses, I didn't know that Mahound was a dirty word for Mohammed.  And I certainly didn't know that there was a strict prohibition on the, certainly, visual depiction of Mohammed, which might or might not extend to literary usages of either Mohammed or concepts of Mohammedism.  And I certainly didn't understand what represents blasphemy within the Koranic tradition.  And I certainly didn't realise how powerful mullahs were separately interpreting a book.
And I certainly didn't know that the ayatollah could read English.  Because, in fact, the book was available only in English.  I later found out that he did not know English.  So that, when the ayatollah issued his fatwa, he almost certainly had not read the book.

Referring backwards to Salman, perhaps.  If Salman had a thought that the book would be incendiary, well, he didn't share that with me.  I did see him before we published the book, and I'm sure he told me that the book would be unpopular, or spoken against, or written against.  Well, that doesn't bother a publisher.  We are always publishing books that someone or other doesn't like.  As I said earlier, I don't think for a moment that Salman thought violence would ensue.
And, at our first meeting, which is after this trip, and probably after we bought the book - at auction, it has to be said - other publishers bid for it, too; we just happened to get it, I guess.  I liked it more than anyone else.  But the sums offered by two or three publishers were all in the same ballpark.  They were rather large sums of money, and everybody who bid for it presumably thought it was a book of interest, commercially speaking.  And when I say commercially speaking, not that the book is commercial, it's that it has a commercial value, insofar as a great many people may want to read it, buy it and may want to read it.
We did get an advice from New Delhi, India, from our literary advisor there, a gentleman named Khushwant Singh.  And he suggested that we not publish the book [there], so he may have had some special insight or not, but he certainly knew something about Muslims and their relationship to Hindus, Christians, and so on.  And, as India has often had what is described very often as communal riots, his advice to us in London was not to publish it there.  And we ceded to that request because there was a history of Hindu-Muslim conflicts.  And the order that we had in hand, Patrick Wright, our sales director, told me was less than 200 copies.  So it didn't seem a very big deal.  And so, we assured Khushwant Singh that we would at least initially not publish it in India.  That's the only knowledge we had of anything, and it seemed as though India was a special situation.

Then, later, I think because Salman lived in England, in Britain, we decided to publish the book first in Britain and then later in the United States.  I think it's hard - it's many years since then - to remember what went into the decision-making, but very often, in cases like this, we, a publisher, look at where the initial impact of a book will be greatest, because one can use that impact in other countries and other markets, and we thought Britain was the place where Salman was best known, would get, therefore, the best reviews, and we could use that publicity attention in the United States and other countries later.
That isn't actually what happened.  The book was published in Britain first, I think to generally good reviews; I haven't made a review of the reviews.  But I think, somewhat curiously, it was even reviewed in Tehran, in an English-language newspaper - English language yea, yes, but in Tehran. Presumably, the people who worked on that newspaper knew something about the religio-political situation there, particularly as it was backgrounded by the Iran-Iraq War.  And the review was very favourable.  So, again, there was no reason for us to postpone or not publish the book.
And we did publish it… we did publish the book in Britain.  Then, some months later - I don't know if it was as long as six months, but anybody can look this up - we proposed to publish the book in the United States.  It was announced.  And that's when all hell broke loose.
I don't think the hell broke loose first in the United States, although it was closer to the time of the American publication.  The book had already been published in England, to not much controversy.  And little did we imagine that the US publication would engender much more.
Well, it did.  But not because of anything American, but because the ayatollah chose, for whatever his reasons were, to speak out at a time when the question of the US publication was happening.  And I think many people believe - and I'll certainly mention it now on tape - that the ayatollah used the book and his superior religiosity, evidenced by the fatwa, to rekindle his declining influence at that moment in respect of the Iran-Iraq war.  I've already said he couldn't read [the] book in English.

It was Patrick Wright who called me [in New York] from London and announced, or said, that this fatwa had been put on the book and on Salman and the publishers of the book, or maybe even the publisher of the book.  One would have to read The New York Times or a British newspaper of that date and see what the exact wording was.  And Patrick said, what shall we do about it?  There was a demand to withdraw the title.
Well, it was not part of my remit, and not part of my background, to withdraw titles because people were offended by them.  So I certainly said on that telephone not to do that, but to take precautions, to keep me informed while I was informing myself.  And I, of course, the next 24 hours, read everything there was to read and the interpretation by every pundit and social and religious journalist.
And the complaints about the book were now truly incendiary, in England more than in America.  There were riots, demonstrations and riots in Bradford and other places which had large Islamic populations.  I think… my father always said you can rent a crowd.  I think many people, even Muslims who protested the book, did not wholly understand the issues.  They had been simplified and reduced by the mullahs in their communities, as someone intentionally, Salman intentionally insulting Islam.  And certainly, hardly any of the people protesting the book had ever read it.
And I think this started to have an effect on all those publishers in other countries who had acquired the book, and therefore meant to publish it.  And there were, must have been queries in every publishing capital of the world.

Well, it's very difficult to assess what happened, because this was the beginning of worldwide protests and the setting up of committees in many countries in defence of Salman Rushdie.  Our principle, of course, was in defence of Salman Rushdie, but it was more the right of people to read this book, any book that we published and we found it much more awkward then than one would today that something that offended one group could bring forth threats of violence.  I never thought that publishing was an occupational hazard.  And, but we learned that perhaps anything is to people who can be moved to think one thing or another.  I've already said that I think a lot of people who protested took to heart what their religious leaders said, that this book was blasphemous and that the author intended to commit a blasphemy, and that… they didn't know if that was true or not true.  They didn't know if it was fiction or non-fiction.  They hadn't read the book, but they were out there protesting and calling for the books interdiction and Rushdie's death.
So, when I mentioned at the outset my father said you can always rent a crowd, you can always get people's resentment and ire up so that they behave in ways that don't make any kind of objective sense. They haven't really considered the issues, they haven't really been informed.  And nobody has asked them, well, you came to Britain, and Britain is a land where you can insult Moses or Jesus or anybody and not die for it.
I don't know if they had ever thought about that.  Many people come to England or the United States or any other country for many other reasons other than their sophistication about the rights of man, the rights of individuals, the relationship of the individual and the state or the individual and society.  They want a better life, presumably, when most people come; it's a reason to travel.
And what we discovered is, they… that many Muslims had integrated very poorly into British or American life, because they were espousing the values of their religion in respect of the way that religion was practiced somewhere else.
 

Penguin itself was riven by controversy.  There were people, many people, including myself, who certainly never meant to give offense to anyone.  We were not Islamic as a company or as individuals.  We were publishers of a major fiction by a major writer.  That was our work.
But some of these people - I was not one of them - who thought the book should be withdrawn for quite a number of reasons.  One of them, oh, well, we've hurt some people who are a portion of our now multi-ethnic society.  We don't like to hurt anybody.  That was one view.
There were other people who wanted the book withdrawn.  The issues notwithstanding, they said it's dangerous.  I've come to work at Penguin Books not because I'm an ideologue.  I'm just a person who wants to earn a living.  And I work in the warehouse, and I lift boxes.  And I could as well lift boxes of Kodak film, which has very little political issue attached to it.  Or I could be employed by Penguin Books to publish and distribute joke books, children's books, whatever.  I was never involved, might some have said, with the content of these boxes that I was lifting.
And you could say that, when someone says Penguin Books, well, that's a corporate entity made up of hundreds and, at that time, thousands of people all over the world, not all of whom are connected with the content.  So, people misuse a lot of phrases, including those phrases of corporate entity.
People probably mostly sensitive to these issues were the editorial people.  I doubt they are 5% of the staffing of the… of Penguin, and not all of them were even involved in the decision to buy it or publish it or how to do so.  And the ayatollah in Tehran would have known even less than anybody who walks down the streets of any British town… But there were questions in all the countries to… which had acquired the rights from Aitken and Wiley whether they should publish or not, whether it was dangerous to publish or not, how to publish so it would be least dangerous, and so on and so on.

The British government fairly quickly, as I recall, took a protective stance with respect to our publication of the book and Salman's life.  And I don't know at what point Mrs Thatcher's government decided to give Salman, I think, around-the-clock personal protection, and to, in the case of Penguin, to station… to cordon off the area and to station… the area of our office, and to station policemen with guard dogs there.  But that didn't calm anything.  It may have protected some people.  Salman went into hiding.  I didn't know where he was, but I did know how to contact him.
But the Muslim community got more and more excited, egged on by their leaders.  Egged on by Tehran as well, as I mentioned also earlier.  The ayatollah recaptured the faith and support of millions of Iranians by this move to ban a book they hadn't read.

I wrote a piece for the Index on Censorship.  I had been asked by The Times, for a very fancy sum of money, to write an account what was going on, or what had gone on.  Don't remember exactly when it happened, and I didn't want the money.  But I did, accept, years later, an invitation on, I think it was the 20th anniversary of the fatwa, to write a piece for the Index on Censorship; the only piece I've ever written about what we lived through.  Because I thought our freedoms were the central issue.
It's easy for the public to focus on an individual, on Salman, who was certainly innocent of any wrongdoing in respect of our Western attitudes and mores.  And for all I know, innocent even in other, in the context of other countries.  But I'd rather just talk about our own country.  He was absolutely innocent.  But, increasingly, people sort of took sides on this, because the issue didn't go away.
I also have a view - it's not a popular one, but maybe it's the correct one - that all the committees and speeches by friends and authors and intellectuals and so on didn't help Salman at all.  May have made him feel good that he was supported intellectually, but these people were totally unknown to the mobs in the streets.  And the British government I don't think cared about these - or the American government either - about these feel-good demonstrations.  Actually, the people who were defending Salman were his publishers, Penguin, who would not withdraw the book.  There was a sort of self-congratulatory aspect of the support for Salman Rushdie and so on; I don't think it, frankly, did anything to lessen the terror.
And terrorism works.  There were images, there were rumours - maybe there was something real to them, I don't know - of death squads that had been sent from Tehran to those capitals in the world where the book was being published.  Maybe that was true; maybe that was not true.  Nobody would have thought it was impossible for there to be death squads.
Many people died.  There were communal riots in India, although the book was not published there.  And I think 60 or 70 people died.  Died means dead.  Died in India over this book.  Two Belgian clerics, moderates, died in, I think, Brussels, because they took the view publicly that the book should, or could, be banned in Islamic countries but should not be banned in countries where this book was legal, in Western countries in other words.  They were offed right away.  A Norwegian publisher was shot in the back and lay in hospital for, I don't know how long - five or eight months, till he was better.  And I don't know if he ever became best again.

This was real stuff.  And the issue of the book then became exacerbated by issues that Salman threw up, I'm sure thinking he was doing the right thing, and who's to say what is right and what is not right in a world that had never encountered anything quite like this before?  And his view was to have Penguin publish the paperback [soon].  Well, we always were going to publish the paperback, but he wanted to be the lead person in deciding when the paperback would be published.
And we, who had battened down the hatches everywhere, we had security against Semtex bombs -   powder coming out of Czechoslovakia which apparently can be detected in an envelope, so everything coming into Penguin offices had to be screened - that was true in the US and UK; many policemen with guard dogs - this going on in all our offices; one of our employees going mentally off the rails.
I'm no hero.  I was as frightened as anybody.  Maybe more frightened, because the fatwa was against Salman Rushdie and his publisher.  And the fatwa is still in force because, as I understand fatwas - and that's not my main area of competence - the only withdrawal of a fatwa can be done by the party who imposed the fatwa.  As Khomeini is dead, the fatwa goes on.
What did happen was, over the years, the government in Tehran disassociated itself from the killing aspects of the fatwa.  And so, that would have meant no more bands of killers, if there ever were any - I don't know.  But they removed their public endorsement of the fatwa.  So the fatwa still exists in an Islamic sense, as I understand it, but not in an Iranian governmental sense.
However, I had letters put into my letter box.  I didn't live like a monk or like a hunted man.  I chose not to.  I was advised by many to live like a hunted man and change my address, change my car, move into a hotel which we did one night - my wife and child and I in New York, when we started getting cackling telephone messages, laughing and saying how we would all be killed.

There were all sorts of issues.  Peter Carson and I, he was my closest associate at Penguin, he was our chief editor.  He's unfortunately no longer with us.  But he certainly knew of every step that I, we would take.  He was part of the committee that regularly met to decide what to do.  And we had meetings with Pearson, our owners, about what we should do.  Michael Blakenham, to his eternal credit, Lord Blakenham, was in support.  I think he was very nervous about it - so was I - but he said, Peter, you're the head of Penguin and if your decision is to refuse to throw in the towel, I'm in support.
I think there were many people, or some people, on the Pearson board who had the views that I mentioned earlier about some at Penguin who perceived that a harm - maybe unintentionally - but a harm had been done to the Muslim community, and they wanted or would have liked to have seen me want to withdraw the book
I took the view, and I take it today, that, once you give into terrorists, you're finished.  I'm pretty tough on this subject.  I think, and I respect and understand, people being terrorised by terrorists.  Violence is frightening, and terrorism is frightening.  I think it's, sadly, one of the prices we have to pay for our freedoms, but if we give up our freedoms, then we've given up everything, right back to the French Revolution.  So, as I also have said, the issue for us was freedom and censorship, and we never backed down and never considered backing down.
But, I got letters in my letter box, as I started to mention, written in blood, telling me that either I would die or my daughter would die.  Funny, they never mentioned my wife, but they always mentioned me and my daughter, and I turned those letters over to the government people who were supporting us or guarding us.  I did that in both Britain and the US.
I was up for, getting qualified to buy a cooperative apartment in New York, not because of this, but the… that was just something that was happening.  I was living somewhere else, and either a rented accommodation or someplace that I wanted to sell, because I am now living in America or whatever.  And you had to be voted on by the board if you were a proper person to live in their midst.  And I had to defend myself in front of them, because they thought that I might be too dangerous to have… to live in their apartment house.
And I remember saying at a board meeting, you mean I, who am victimised and who have done nothing wrong - I've only kept to the rights and privileges that we all as Americans have by publishing this book - you mean I am too dangerous for you?  You mean you are too cowardly to stand up for our rights, including your own rights.  They said, well, what if the gunmen come and want to kill you, and they knock on the wrong door and they kill my children?  I said, oh, you mean if they knock on the right door and kill my child.  That's okay with you.  Is that what you're saying?  Well, we didn't mean to say that.  But you're saying you don't want a bad man or bad people to knock on your door and kill your children, and you won't run any risk for that?
And British Airways had a similar view with regard to Salman, that he may… he may have been too dangerous to fly on a British Airway flight.  I think he was not permitted to do so.  I believe.  You'll have to check this.  Because you might endanger the other passengers.
Well, Salman was innocent, and so it was a case of punishing the innocent.  And Peter Carson and I gave, each year, a party at the Hessischer Hof, a restaurant hotel in Frankfurt at the time of the Frankfurt Book Fair.  And the hotel cancelled not only our celebration, but also our rooms - we were sleeping there - because they took the same view, that we were too dangerous.  So I remember threatening the Prince of Hesse, who owns the hotel, and I said this sounds like the Nazi period, the National Socialist period, because the innocent are the ones who are blamed for everything.

There was, of course, much, much more, because the battle ensued over the paperback.  I took the view that Salman, wonderful writer that he was, he had his reasons to want the paperback out.  I think he thought that the issue of this book would be ended by the publication of a great many paperbacks of The Satanic Verses all over the world.
He may or may not have been right.  We don't know.  But I did know that I had hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of people all over the world who... for whom I had some responsibility, and who were threatened, and I thought that having won - if you could ever use that word - having won the battle to keep this book alive, that was enough contribution to make right now, or right at that time, when the anger about it was still there.
And so, I said, we'll decide when we publish the paperback book.  We will publish the paperback, but we'll decide when it's safe to do so.  I have a great many people to worry about, who look to me for some kind of comfort and security, and if I think it's unsafe, or I'm advised by the Home Office or the Metropolitan Police or by anybody else that it's unsafe, I will now, having fought a battle not paying attention to our safety, I will now not stick a poker in the eye of the people who are angry about this book, and I'll let things calm down.
We had at that time book stores, and one of them was bombed.  Happily… I think, actually, more than one was bombed, but one was bombed on the day when our board met, and in a three- or four-hour meeting, decided to proceed with the paperback, because we thought it was safe.  And on my way to Heathrow - we had the car radio on - we heard that one of the bookshops had been bombed, no one dead but bombed, and I turned around in the car and I said, I'm not flying to the US today, I'm going back to our office, and I'm going to further postpone the paperback.  Because Salman may believe that it's the solution of all time to put the paperback out, but I have to worry that it may be something that will inflame [those who are already inflamed].  Even… not only is the book not withdrawn, but even more copies are printed, and even cheaper!  So, Salman can't know the outcome of that.  There's a risk doing things either way.  And as I felt that Penguin had already performed by refusing to let this book die - it was available in libraries all over the world, and in foreign languages and so on - the book had been preserved.
And, for me, that was a very cardinal aspect of the whole thing, to present myself as a publisher who supported a right to write, read, purvey, and so on.  I saw myself that.  Did I not think about Salman's wellbeing?  Well, of course I did. But you have to act in a timeframe, and I said we'll publish the [paperback] later.
We… through this entire period, nobody at Penguin gave statements to the press.  We didn't permit pictures of anyone at Penguin to appear in the newspaper.  Salman took a different view, for whatever reason.  His picture was everywhere.  He knew it.  Want to say he liked it or didn't like it.  But he thought it was important to show the flag, show his flag, if you like.
But, of course, he was guarded.  We were not.  We had to go home.  Each one of us individually, from the office to the tube, or walking, and in many countries.  We had literally no protection.  The premises that we worked in were protected, but individually, we didn't.  Whereas, Salman had individual protection.
I'm not saying anything negative about Salman whatsoever.  I can appreciate his argument.  But I had different concerns: the concerns of the people who worked at Penguin.

The most devastating aspect of an entire career, which I never thought was a dangerous one, but which in fact was a dangerous one.  And it's not the danger that makes me give you this answer that it was the most significant thing that happened to me in the course of some 60 years or whatever in publishing.  It's that the issues that it presented are the largest issues for a free society.
And I do say, as I also said in the Index on Censorship piece, which is the only thing I've ever written, that I think we won the battle but we lost the war.  In other words, the book exists.  Salman is alive.  Most people involved in this book are alive, too.  But today, publishers are very nervous about flexing their muscles.  I do know that, if you don't use your muscles, they turn to pap.
It's very difficult to disassociate the person – Salman or me – from the… egalitarian and libertarian and constitutional issues that surround it.  But, as we look at what is happening in Nigeria, or Iraq and Syria, or Egypt, or many, many countries where Islam is an issue, we have to be aware that there are forces, not necessarily arrayed against us, but arrayed against these ideals of freedom and the rights of the individual vis-à-vis the state.
And I don't know how it will come out in this battle of civilisations, but I know that, when the opportunity arose, we were not found wanting.  But today, many publishers will not publish either a cartoon or a novel.
