philip.roth

The fame of the American writer Philip Roth (1933-2018) rested on the frank explorations of Jewish-American life he portrayed in his novels. There is a strong autobiographical element in much of what he wrote, alongside social commentary and political satire. Despite often polarising critics with his frequently explicit accounts of his male protagonists' sexual doings, Roth received a great many prestigious literary awards which include a Pulitzer Prize for fiction in 1997, and the 4th Man Booker International Prize in 2011.

I was born almost 78 years ago in 1933 in Newark, New Jersey. And I was raised in Newark and I stayed there until I went up to college. My mother, whose name was Bess, was a homemaker as they used to say in those days. She was born in Elizabeth, New Jersey, of immigrant parents. My grandparents on both sides were immigrants. My mother's parents came from the region of Kiev in Russia [sic], beyond that I don't know anything. My father's parents were from... Austria-Hungary, the province of Galicia, a town called Koslov, which is about 25 miles or so from what was then Lemberg, is now Lviv.
My grandparents spoke Yiddish, of course. I didn't understand them so there was a… a strange distance between… between the kids of my generation and those immigrant grandparents, in that you felt all their feeling for you but you didn't know what they were saying, and so it increased the pathos really of the relationship because the feeling was strong. And my parents were American born as I've said. My father was born in Newark right next to Elizabeth and he was born 1901, my mother was born 1904. My father was educated only to the 8th grade, my mother went to high school. In my father's day in Newark, the statistics are shocking, and that is that two out of three immigrant children – the children of immigrants – didn't go beyond the 8th grade, two out of three. Where did they do? They went to the factory.

My father had four or five siblings and only one of them went... went to high school as far as I know. My mother had two sisters and a brother… three sisters and a brother and they all went to high school. So my... my mother's family's a little better off, not well off at all, but a little better off. My father was essentially raised in what was a slum at that time, a Jewish slum in Newark. I grew up in a... in a different neighborhood from my father in Newark. I grew up in what was called the Weequahic section and that is the section which was really settled in the 1920s or so by the post immigrant generation and it was a Jewish neighborhood. The city of Newark had about 400,000 people at that time when I was born, the city was divided up really into ethnic villages. There... there was our predominantly overwhelmingly Jewish neighborhood, there was an Irish neighborhood, there was an Italian neighborhood, there was a Slavic neighborhood.
The Slav's, the Italians, the Irish, tended to sometimes live together, they were Catholic together, they had that in common. Then there was a black neighborhood – then called the Negro neighborhood – and the Negros, and the Jews were the smallest minorities in the city. So I came of age in this Jewish neighborhood and in my recollection, I think in fact, it was a wonderful childhood. I didn't feel… I was too young to feel the depression. I didn't know how little money we had and my memories really begin with the war. My memories really begin very vividly with December 7th 1941, the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Two days later, I think, Hitler declared war on the US as well. So there we were in the Second World War and from that moment forward my childhood becomes quite vivid to me.

The war made a big impression on me, maybe it did on... on the other kids around me as well, I don't really know, but I began very young to follow the war in the newspaper. My father and mother talked about the war news all the time, as did all the neighbors. They listened on the radio to the famous newscasters of that day and followed the war that way.
The newspaper came to the house every evening, my father brought it home from work with him, and so did the voices before the war of Hitler and Father Coughlin, who was an anti-Semitic priest who broadcast out of Detroit, Michigan, who my father would listen to on Sundays and go crazy. So although I never knew anti-Semitism directly in my young life and have barely known it in my life at all, I did know that it existed out there and that it was dangerous and that the Jews outside our little neighborhood were menaced, you know, both in the US and abroad, because anti-Semitism flourished in 1930s America, just as it flourished everywhere in the 1930s, America was no exception.

I had a brother five years older than myself, named Sandy. He also was a big factor in my life, he was as kind as could be, he let me go wherever he went, he let me follow after him, his friends used to say that if Sandy stops short, Phillip's nose will go right up his arse. And he wanted to be… very early on he wanted to be an artist, he wanted to be a painter and he went to art school on Saturdays in New York City, the Art Students League on West 57th Street. And I had an uncle who was also a painter, my mother's... brother, and so I saw that people had occupations outside the common place ones, you know, and he had all his art equipment in the dining room and would draw there and paint. Whenever we went anywhere on a bus together he was drawing, all the time he was drawing the other… the other people, and I was amazed by what he did. It was… it still amazes me. He's... he's now dead, he died two years ago at the age of 81, I think. My mother and father, of course, died some time ago, about 20 years ago my mother and about 12 years ago my father. So I'm the last one standing.

I was eager… by the time I got to be 16, 17… I graduated high school when I was 16, I wanted to get out of the neighborhood. I'd loved the neighborhood, I had lots of good friends but I was at that point being oppressed by my father's response to my growing independence. He was very anxious for me when I began to go out in the evening and he didn't know where I was and eventually we had a tremendous argument and I felt that if I stayed at home any longer I would kill him. And so I... I went off to college, and I went to a small college in Pennsylvania on the Susquehanna river, called Bucknell University, and in those days it was quite small, and amazingly, because it was a… at that... at that point in time, a mediocre school, but amazingly and luckily, there was a very strong English department and I got a very good, vigorous English education. I read a lot, had to write a lot and had some very excellent teachers, some of whom I remained friends with for the rest of their lives. They died 20, 25 years ago.
At the school… there were virtually no Jews in this school. It was the first time I was in a non-Jewish environment with kids who weren't... who weren't Jews. I think growing up in the neighborhood and in growing up in my high school, I maybe knew two or three non-Jewish kids. Now I was one of the two or three Jews and then there was the rest of the school which were… the kids were largely middle class Christian kids from small towns in New Jersey, Pennsylvania and New York.
I began to come into my own in college and I began to… I edited a literary magazine. I acted in plays and I did other things, above all, I studied, I was studious.

After Bucknell, I went for a year to the University of Chicago, in 1954 to '55, where I was a graduate student in English and got a master's degree. That was the right place for me to go to, I enjoyed it. I developed a real affection for the place, the neighborhood, Hyde Park, and for the university, and I made some dazzlingly smart friends. From Chicago I went into the army. The draft… the Korean War draft was still on then. The Korean War had ended in '53 I think, but in '55 the draft was still on.
I went into the army and I went in for two years and I got injured in basic training. I injured my back rather severely and by the end of the year I was in the hospital and then from the hospital I was discharged. So I spent a year in the... in the army. The injury… the back injury it turned out to be a bit of a plague for the rest of my life and I've had to put up with pain from time to time. Back in the year 2003, I had surgery on my back and then about three years later I had a second back operation. And all of that is traced back to that injury.
When I was in graduate school and in the army, I began to write stories. I had written some stories in college but they were... they were terrible and… they were highly sensitive and very terrible. But now I began to write different kinds of stories. And in the army I was in the public information office in Washington and there was... there was a typewriter in the office and so at night after dinner I'd come back into the office and I began to write these stories, and some of them were stories that wound up in Goodbye Columbus, my first book.
 

When I came out of the army I went… I was invited back to Chicago to teach in the composition… freshman composition programme, and so actually I went and for the next two years I taught there, and I would teach all morning and then I would write all afternoon and then at night I would do my papers I had to do and so on. And it was my first true taste of... adulthood. I was 23 or 24 and I had a job, I made money – not very much – and wrote stories. In about '57, I guess, or '58, I began to publish stories in commercial magazines. First I had a story for... in Esquire Magazine, for which I got paid $800, and with that $800 I quit my job and I came to New York to be a writer.
I... I thought that in those days I could live on $100 a month, and I did. And then I wrote a story that wound up in The New Yorker, and so I made a little more money, and that story was called Defender of the Faith, and it brought me my first headaches as a writer. I didn't know what I was getting into.

Defender of the Faith was rowdily condemned by various Jewish establishment figures and by readers of The New Yorker who cancelled their subscriptions. It was condemned as anti-Semitic and I was denounced as a self-hating Jew, and I was stunned by this response. I didn't have any idea whatsoever that this story was going to be offensive or so offensive, and when I re-read it at the time I could see how you can misread it that way, but none the less, this was my introduction to being a writer in the real world. The New Yorker answered – in a formal letter of some kind – answered all the people who wrote to them. I got a telephone call from the B´nai B´rith Anti-Defamation League asking if they could see me. Now, I had great respect for the B´nai B´rith Anti-Defamation League, it was one of the few organisations in America at that time that was fighting bigotry and discrimination. And I had been a kid… as a kid in high school I'd been highly alert to bigotry and discrimination in the great world and aligned up against it of course. So now here I was described as a bigot.
The B´nai B´rith people called me up, and could I see them? I said sure, so I went to lunch with two guys and I was... I was still in my middle 20s, and they were wonderful actually, because they said, look, we have a constituency and we have to represent them, but we don't agree with them about you and this story. So I had my supporters and that was good, I didn't want to feel aggrieved at the time, I mean it would have been a terrible to feel aggrieved going into a career.

I moved to New York in whatever year it was, '58, I'd say, yeah. And I got a basement apartment on East 10th Street, near 2nd Avenue, and set myself up as a writer. My first book appeared the following year, '59, and that was Goodbye Columbus, which was a novella and it appeared first in the Paris Review, and with the novella there were five stories, three of which appeared in the Paris Review and one in The New Yorker and one in the Commentary Magazine. And the book came out and it... it got respectful reviews but nothing much happened to it. I got a Guggenheim, it took me abroad, and I went off to live in Italy for a year. And I was living in Rome that next spring when I got a telegram from my editor telling me that I'd won the National Book Award. So that was nice. And so there we were.

In Rome I was working on my second book called: Letting Go, a novel, and I worked on it there and when I came back from Rome, I went to teach at the Iowa Writers Workshop in Iowa City, Iowa, and I wrote Letting Go there. Letting Go was… Goodbye Columbus were the efforts of a young man, they... the stories were spontaneous responses to my background. I had no literary theory, I had no literary agenda, I was just spontaneously writing, and that's what... that's what came out. With Letting Go I became more literary in my intention and wanted to write a... a big novel and with lots of people in it and various places in it and lots of dialogue and language and color. And when I wrote it I began to discover the joys of writing a novel rather than a short story, which are really the joys of amplification and you can just keep going and put things in and work on a bigger scale.

Letting Go was received okay, it got some respectful reviews, but then I entered into a dry period and I've never gone so long between books as I did back then, I never did before and I never did after. But between 1962, when Letting Go was published, and 1967 when When She Was Good was published, my third book, I published nothing. And I published nothing for several reasons, I think. One is, I was stymied in a way as to what kind of writer I was, and now things were getting serious and I didn't… I didn't know what to do next. I didn't know what subject to cease hold of next, I didn't know how to cease hold of it. Letting Go had been very different from... from Goodbye Columbus and now I was wondering what do I do after this. And secondly, I had been married for a couple of years – from '59 to '62, I think – and that... that broke up, that marriage broke up, and it was a very difficult period for me, and that too prevented me from feeling free enough to work easily. But... in '67 I published When She Was Good, which was a book with no Jews in it.

I had learnt a lot about small town life in the Midwest from my wife's family, the wife who I divorced then. I had been with her family, I had hung around a little bit in her town and I wanted to use that material, that background, as my subject and so I did. And I lost a certain amount of color, I think, in writing about a world I didn't know very well, but I thought that the portrait of the young woman whose... whose anger makes the book go forward, I thought the portrait of her was well done. I thought that and about six other people thought that.
So there I was living in New York and… living in New York having published When She Was Good in '67. I began by... at this point to teach at the University of Pennsylvania and then in Philadelphia – I'd go down to Philadelphia one day a week and teach comparative literature – and I'd settled in to New York and I'd made friends here. I'd never lived in New York before in my... in my life except for that year or two in the '50s, and among the people I met were a group of Jewish fellows, all highly educated, who were very funny and when we all had dinner together it would get raucously funny. Sometimes these dinners involved the wives and so on, but there was six or eight of us all together and I... I discovered that I was one of the funny ones and that I could make people laugh, not by cracking jokes – by telling stories. There was another excellent storyteller named Alan Goldman, who was a friend of mine at that time, who worked for Life Magazine as a rock critic; Bob Brucestein, who was... started the Yale Repertory Theatre and the American Repertory Theatre at Harvard, was one of them; Jules Feiffer, the cartoonist, was another.
And so there I was having just written this glum book called: When She Was Good, having previously written a very dark book called Letting Go, and now I was making everybody laugh and it dawned on me that I might be able to do this stuff in writing. I hadn't dared to before, and that I could do this uninhibited play acting, which is what we were doing really, uninhibited play acting on the page, or could I? And I...I suppose some of my earlier stories had a sort of comic air to them, but this was richer stuff. We were talking about our backgrounds, the friends we'd had in school, our friends we'd grown up with. And so I began to write some stories about a guy in analysis... talking.

The first story was called: A Jewish Patient Begins His Analysis, and that was in Esquire Magazine and it turned out to be the opening chapter of Portnoy's Complaint. I then wrote a... a story which continued that first one called: Whacking Off, and it appeared in of all places, the Partisan Review, which was the... the Mecca of modernism here in America, and that got a tremendous response with people. I mean, Partisan Review has a very small audience but that small audience is located in New York. And it dawned on me that I should keep going. And so I wrote chapter after chapter of this book about a patient in analysis, who was Portnoy, and I'd never done anything like this before or after. I... as I finished a section of the book I gave it out to a magazine, the magazine in question was called The New American Review and the editor was one of my close friends, a guy called Ted Solotaroff, he and I had been in graduate school together. And as soon as I wrote it, Ted published it, and the book began… these stories began to get a huge following, and so… and the stories eventually became the whole book which was Portnoy's Complaint, and Portnoy's Complaint was published in February, I think, 1969, I was 36, and it was a sensation. Nothing like that had ever happened… has ever happened to me since, and... nothing remotely like that, and certainly nothing... nothing had happened... like that before. And I'd say that there are a very few writers who've had such an experience in America in my time.

Portnoy's Complaint was published in... I believe it was February 1969, and it was a sensation. It was an experience unlike any I was ever to know in the future and unlike anything that had happened to me in the past, really, and I would go so far to say that out of my contemporary's, none... none of them has met with… no book of theirs has met with such a reception, though many of them have written excellent books and they've been well received, because this was a scandal and my whole education… nothing in my education prepared me to be a scandalous writer. I thought I was going to be a serious writer and I didn't… but the moment I became comical and free-wheeling in this way, I became a scandalous writer. And if certain Jewish organisations or eminent Jews had been irritated by Goodbye Columbus, this was a disaster in their terms. This was the… this was the anti-Semitic book to end all anti-Semitic books. Gershom Scholem, the... the Jewish scholar and who's now dead, denounced the book in the Haaretz, the Israeli paper, as the book that all the anti-Semites have been waiting for, for years.
So that was pretty much the tenor of the criticism. But... it hardly… it didn't get criticism only, it was... it was wildly received and made me so recognizable that I completely lost my anonymity in the street here in New York and after two or three months to about… two or three months after the publication, I left New York to avoid being so visible. I... I didn't like walking down the... street with people pointing at me or calling out to me, 'hey Portnoy', and so on. I didn't… I didn't like it, maybe I should have. And I was... I was thrilled to be successful in this way and the book became number one on the best seller list, but I was not thrilled to be visible in this way, and so I... I left and I really never… I really didn't return for 20 odd years.

I went first to the artists' colony called Yaddo up in Saratoga Springs, New York, where I had been a guest in the past, and I spent about two or three months there. And then I found a house to rent in Woodstock, New York, which is way off in the hills, and I went there. And then two or three years later I found my house in Connecticut, which is also off in the hills. It was on two dirt roads, it was perfect for me – nobody could see it, nobody could get there, and so I moved in there in 1973 – or '72 or '73 – and I've been there ever since, and stepped away from this problem that I didn't like so much. But I did become... someone to conjure with, you know, and I was kind of stunned, I was kind of stunned. So I made many friends as a writer and I made many enemies as a writer and many enemies as a Jew. I was not quite as innocent as the boy who'd published Defender of the Faith in... in New Yorker in 1958, and a year or two had passed and I'd begun to learn a thing or two. But still, I didn't want to be around for the hoopla.

After Portnoy's Complaint I took a strange path, it looks… that's how it looks to me now, but I know what I was doing – what I was doing was trying to find out how far I could get with farce. In a way I'd begun that of course in Portnoy's Complaint, which is a farcical book, they treat people… people are treated farcically. Portnoy treats himself as a figure of in farce and of farce. The satire is self-satire most of the time, so I wanted to see how far I could go with comedy, farce, satire, slapstick, grotesquery, whatever, and I wrote a series of books in which I... experimented. The next book I wrote was called: Our Gang, and Our Gang is a flat out broad satire of Nixon and the Nixon administration. I never was an admirer of Nixon's, I couldn't stand him, I thought he was awful and so I wrote this book.
 
 

Every American writer has to write a book about baseball, it's in the contract, you know, Malamud [Bernard Malamud] had written a good one and Mark Harris had written several good ones and I think Coover [Robert Coover] wrote a baseball book, and Updike [John Updike] wrote a brilliant essay about Ted Williams, the great baseball player, and so I wrote a book called: The Great American Novel, which was about a homeless baseball team and I threw in it everything I knew about baseball. I don't believe there's one thing I knew that isn't in that book and I knew a lot, I knew all… I knew the... the real story of baseball, I knew all the law of baseball, I knew about the baseball player from my era, and I wrote this funny book about baseball. At one point I went up to the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, New York, one winter day and I stayed there about three or four days and had access to the library there and their archives, and heard some wonderful recordings of ball players and so on. And I was… I was absolutely surrounded by baseball books by everything, this was before the internet of course.
So I wrote that book, one of the farcical books, and then when I finished the baseball book, I think virtually the day I finished it, I had an idea about a story about a man who turns into a breast and so over the next six months or so, I wrote a story… I wrote a story called The Breast, about a man that turns into a breast. So all this was happening over a four or five year period and I was in very high spirits during those years and very happy and I think that out of this happiness and high spirits and out of the literary experiment with farce, these books were born, you know.

The next book I published was, a sequel to The Breast, it was called A Professor of Desire, and what I thought I would do is take this character, Kepesh, and now make real what was so real in The Breast, put him in another landscape entirely, put him in a realistic landscape as opposed to a surreal landscape which he's in The Breast. And some years later, I wrote a book called: The Dying Animal, which is the third part of this Kepesh trilogy, which is really about the history of the sex life of this man.

In the 1970s, I made a trip to Europe one year in about '73, I think, and… to several cities, one of which was Prague. I'd never been in Prague before, but for the preceding three or four years at the University of Pennsylvania I'd been teaching a lot of Kafka and was immersed in Kafka, I didn't know him when I was younger, he was... a great revelation to me as he is to anybody who picks him up, but I... read and taught the novels – all the novels, really – and the major short stories, and Max Brod's biography of Kafka, and I was riveted by Kafka. So when I went to Prague I was really going to Kafka's city, I wanted to see Kafka's city, and accidently I found something more, something more important really. In 1968 there had been the Prague Spring, in which the Russians had put down the Czech's movement for freedom and put a lid on Czechoslovakia, so it was really... Communist dominated totalitarian Prague that I entered.
And I went… I knew I had a publisher there so I... I had found out the name of the publisher before... before I went to Prague and I showed up one day at the publisher's office and… one morning, and I was welcomed by the chief of the publishing house and he got all the editors in one room and we... we had a drink and we talked and everything looked okay to me, but afterwards one of the women who was there – spoke perfect English, a full bred student in Florida – she said, would you like to have lunch with her, I said, sure, so we went to lunch and the first thing she said to me was, they're all swine, and then she told me what she meant, that is the original members of the editorial board of that publishing house had been swept out by the Russians and these were the lackey's who were now running the publishing house.
And it was through her… it was through her that I began to meet the dissidents, and I… I met several and then… my holiday was a short one, so I came back and when I got to New York I began to look around for exiled Czech's in New York, and I found several and they all became close friends. The most important to me was a guy named Tony Liehm, L I E H M. Tony had left in '68 in August, thinking I've got to get out, and was teaching here in Staten Island at a community college, I think, and Tony was my teacher and he put me on to Czech books, he put me on to Czech history, mostly recent history, and also he was teaching a course in Czech film at the college, and I went over – I took the ferry over to Staten Island once a week and I sat in his class and watched all these films by Czech directors, several... several of whom were here in New York.
One was a guy named Jiri Weiss, the other was a fellow named Ivan Passer, the third was Milos Forman, and these guys were tremendously intelligent, tremendously talented, all spoke English and they became my friends and I began to learn more and more about what was going on in Czechoslovakia, so that the next spring I went back there for a longer period of time and I began to meet people who would become my friends, among them Ivan Klima became a good friend and his wife Helena, Milan Kundera and his wife Vera, Rita… Budinova was her name, who after the liberation of Czechoslovakia, became Havel's Czech ambassador to the US.
Rita had grown up in the Upper West Side during the war and she was Czech and we could talk, and the thing was I was not locked out by language. And I met several others, Vaculik and Hrabal and Holub, a Doctor. And I threw myself into doing what I could do for these people and helped get money to them which they needed desperately – they'd all been thrown out of their jobs and given menial ones instead. And then eventually I started a book series under the imprint of Penguin called Writers from the Other Europe, and began to print, publish books by Eastern European writers that had already been published here in... in English, but disappeared, and tried to bring them together in one place where they'd get some… where they'd be noticed. And the series began with Kundera and Vaculik, and we know what happened to Kundera and the others – the others were Hungarian, Yugoslav, Polish, mostly.
And that took care of my spare time during those years – my spare time here when I wasn't working – and through this series I met an awful lot of terrific people, Polish writers who came through the United States, Poles in the United States, more Czechs, Yugoslavs and so on. So that's sort of the backdrop to my writing in those years, so I was teaching at the University of Pennsylvania, I was doing the Writers From The Other Europe series and I was writing my books.

What happened was after my four or so, visits to Prague, I began to think of an idea for a book in which a character, a writer would… who had enjoyed a kind of crazy success of the kind I had, then goes to Czechoslovakia and sees the consequences of their art, what happens to these people as a result of the political system and art clashing. So I began to write that and it didn't… it didn't work out, there was too much going on and so I thought, break it down into... into books, there's something wrong with what you're doing. This led me... this led me to writing the first four Zuckerman [Bound] books: The Ghost Writer, Zuckerman Unbound, The Anatomy Lesson and The Prague Orgy. The Prague Orgy is the book about Zuckerman's experiences in Prague, and everything up… everything else… excuse me, leads up… leads up to that, but what it leads up to it is substantial material, I think. So I... I was able to write the book I set out to write, a very different way from the way I had imagined it but this happens all the time.

I thought I was through with Zuckerman until, lo and behold, in the mid-1980s I... I wrote a book called The Counterlife, and here… Zuckerman's intelligence… Zuckerman's intelligence was what I needed in that book and he's not the main actor of the book, he was the main actor of the previous books but he's not the main actor in The Counterlife, but numerous others are – his brother, his family, his wife to be, in London, her family, and the book… in this book I... I left America and the book is planted in London and in Gloucestershire, and in Jerusalem and the West Bank of Israel. And it allowed me to expand my... my vision and make place… make place important, this really wasn't true in the previous Zuckerman books, so one, the focus is not entirely on him, but two, his intelligence is contemplating the material, and three, it takes place in new worlds for me. And it made me expansive, it produced – if I remember correctly – it produced a different kind of prose that I had been writing earlier and I felt that I had enlarged my view, really.
At this point I was living… in 1985 I was living in London half the time. I had begun living in London in 1977 about, so… and I would stay there six to seven months a year and come back here for the spring, the summer and the fall. And so I'd come to know something about London, very little I admit, but enough to fool people in that book, I think. I hope I fooled them!

I wrote a little book about adultery called Deception, and this… it's just the two adulterers talking and they talk from beginning to end about… and what interested me was the portrait of the woman – young and married and unhappy – and there it is. It was a slight book really, accurate, however, I think. And then after Deception, I believe I wrote a big book called Operation Shylock and there I cut loose rather as I had back in The Great American Novel, the baseball book, but now about something more serious, but I was advancing, I think, with that robust free wheelingness that I'd had... I'd had in The Counterlife. 
The… lots of Operation Shylock takes place in Israel and was based to a large degree on observation and experience, that is in about 19… sometime in there in the '80s I began to visit Israel. I had a few friends – one, the writer, Aharon Appelfeld, the other the writer, Amos Elon, and through Amos, particularly, and Aharon, I met other people and I began to talk to them about what was going on. No one ever… no one hesitates to tell you in Israel, you don't have to beg for information or for... for an attitude, so I got all kinds of voices, and voices on the left, voices on the right, voices full of contempt for the Arabs, voices full of contempt for Israel and so on.

Israel and its Jews gave me my subject. And it happened that a couple of years before I wrote the book I'd been lucky enough to land in Israel for a visit, when the trial was on of Ivan Demjanjuk, who was supposed to be... allegedly the vicious sadistic guard at Sobibor and Treblinka. And I... I happened to see in a newspaper that the trial was on, in the Jerusalem Post, and so I went over there to the hall where it was being held, and I went every day for as long so it was on. And I was riveted; to be sitting so close to this man was an astonishing thing, to be sitting so close to his victims was an... his alleged victims, was an astonishing thing; and watching the drama play out with him and his son who was there and his lawyers, and on the other hand with the... the Jews who... the Jewish survivors, who claimed he was the guard they'd known at Sobibor — it was compelling. So I wrote this book which has everything to do, as I remember it, with not just Demjanjuk, but with all... with other Jewish menaces and ghosts and phantoms and memories. 

Operation Shylock and... and The Counterlife launched me into a series of books I wrote in the '90s which were all distinguished by their amplitude and bitterness, I think. And I had a good run then, because after Operation Shylock I wrote a book called Sabbath's Theatre, and I... my energy was running very high when I wrote that book, as it had been for Operation Shylock. But I felt at the top of my energy, my knowledge and my strength as a writer, and Sabbath's Theatre is a different story, its hero is... was distasteful to many, I found him wonderful, and he was my lucky discovery.
You know, you find the character, and the character dictates the book, I don't mean that the character, as they say, writes it for you, you write it for yourself, but his potential as a person, his life's work, his passions, his hatreds — if you get the right combination, you're on fire, you're on fire, and I felt on fire with Sabbath's Theatre.  And he's... he's a wicked man, Sabbath, and… but when I finished writing about him I didn't want to write about a wicked man anymore, I wanted to write about the opposite. I wanted to write about a virtuous man, or certainly, he's... Sabbath is conventionally wicked, and the other man is conventionally virtuous. And my idea for American Pastoral didn't come out of Sabbath's Theatre directly, of course, but it did shape my sense of... of the hero, Swede Levov; he is everything that Sabbath is not, and Sabbath is everything that he is not.
The idea for Sabbath... for American Pastoral came to me some 20 years earlier, but I'd never been able to get anywhere with it – which is not unusual, by the way. You can... you can have an idea, it seems charged to you, you sit down to work it out, and you get to page 70, and it just peters out; so the best thing is to keep it, because you don't know what 20 years later you're going to make of it. Well, 20 years earlier I had written... begun a book about a girl, an anti-war activist, a young girl in her adolescence, who blows up a building in the town where her parents live. And I couldn't get anywhere with it, and so I… but I always knew there was something in it, so whenever I finished a book, I would take out these 70 pages and read them, and I'd think it's no good, and put it back. But when I took them out after finishing Operation Shylock... or Sabbath's Theatre, I took these pages out after reading, finishing Sabbath's Theatre, I saw a way to... to attack it. And the ways to attack it, I don't remember now what they were, but I suddenly, I didn't feel locked out of the material, and I began to write American Pastoral, and I felt that same kind of energy and excitement that I'd... that I'd felt with the previous two books I'd written in the '90s.

I had a certain amount of investigating to do, I put this... met this guy in the glove business, leather was a big industry in Newark, and the glove business, there were some glove-makers there, and so I found glove-makers here in America, talked to them, found out about glove-making, I forget how I found an old glove-cutter up in Gloversville, New York, who cut a glove for me. And then he gave me a piece of leather and let me cut a glove; and that glove is… you can wear on your foot, I think, but I learned how to do it, and it brought me back enriched to the book.

The book is about, I think it takes place in 1970, American Pastoral, but it was based on my experience of living through the '60s. Nothing like that happened to me, that isn't the way it's based on your experience – it's based on your knowledge, I should say. The '60s, from say, 1963, the Kennedy assassination, till 1974, I think that's the Nixon impeachment or resignation, those years were unlike any years I've ever known in America. They were alive with horror, the horror of the War, they were alive with menace, the menace of the sexual revolution, they were alive with the comedy of the sexual revolution, they were alive with the politics, the resistance to the politics, they were alive with resistance, resistance to authority, nothing like that had happened before, in my time.
And I somehow wanted to get all that into American Pastoral, but not through me, through this glove-maker; and I think I did. I don't know any more that's useful that I didn't put in that book, you know? 

After I wrote American Pastoral, I literally said to myself: what other period of your life was... – historical period – was anything like as vivid as those Vietnam years? And I realised that there was a period, and I knew quite a bit about it, which was the anti-Communist crusade after World War Two when the Cold War started up, and the anti-War crusade started up.
How did I know about it?  Because I was a wide-awake kid, and in 1946 I was 13 and I was full of politics as a 13 year old can be. And I had some relatives who were also full of politics, guys on the Left – older than me – guys on the Left ranging from Communist to Socialist to New Deal – Roosevelt's New Dealers. And I listened to them talk, I listened to them argue, my father was one of them, and they weren't scholars, they weren't historians, they were just ordinary people talking about the world they lived in, quite passionately, and I threw my two cents into... to these discussions, I remember. And so I decided to write a book about the Communist period which began before McCarthy. McCarthy doesn't come around until 1950, but the investigation by the House Un-American Activities Committee into Communism begins in 1946.
And I talked to people, some of them my relatives, I did a lot of reading in newspapers, and I remembered... I remembered. And so I wrote a book about the Communist — the anti-Communist crusade — which had had, I suppose, an impact on me similar to what the '60s had, when I was still just a boy. Having finished I Married a Communist, I thought do it again, do it again! What do you know? And in a sense, you're saying to yourself, what do you know? What do you know where you'll feel secure in writing, where you can find out more if you want to, but you know from the outset, something?
And what I knew, I realised, was that moment which was in 1998 when Bill Clinton was being tarred and feathered for his affair with Monica Lewinsky.

There was an awful lot of tarring and feathering going on from the Right and from the Left; and… but the tarring and feathering on the Left came to me as political correctness, and on the Right it was, the scapegoat was Clinton, to drive him out of power, to drive the Democrats out of power. So — and this was going on around me — so the challenge for me was to treat the present as history; the history of the present moment. I hadn't done… I hadn't done that before, and so I came up with The Human Stain.

The... the germ of The Human Stain was provided by... from the life of a very dear friend of mine now... now dead, a guy named Mel Truman [Melvin Tumin], who taught… a sociologist at Princeton. Mel's expertise was in segregation, he wrote the first sociological books on segregation in America back in, I think, in the '40s, and when I'd taught at Princeton we'd become good friends.
Near the end of Mel's life as a teacher, he had a class in which two of the students didn't show up, week after week. And he'd take the roll week after week, and they wouldn't be there, and finally in the sixth... sixth or seventh week he said to the class, 'Does anybody know these people, or are they spooks?' And it turned out that they were African American, these two kids, and they went to the Dean and said they'd been insulted by Professor Tumin, by his using a pejorative about Blacks — the word spooks. I wanted to use that story, but as I contemplated it I... I found that it was just another... it was a commonplace, in a way, of… there were people who'd had a lot of those kinds of experiences in colleges in those years.
And then it dawned on me that the guy should be Black, a pale-skinned Black, as we had many in America, many, many; miscegenation was the name of the game in 19th and 20th century – in 19th century America in particular, 18th century America. And so that clicked for me, and I thought of make him... make him this White Black, and then make it up…  so I began to make it... make it up, and that became The Human Stain... and... and the end of that little cycle of books, of American Pastoral, I Married a Communist, and The Human Stain.

At the dawn of the new century I kind of changed gears, not because of the new century but just because of my writing energy, I guess — my writing interest — and I began to write a series of short books — why, I don't know. I... I remember that Saul Bellow, who was a friend for years, near the end of his life began to write these short books called The Actual, and The Bellarosa Connection, and so on, and I said to him, 'How do you do it? How do you do it?' He just laughed, Saul would laugh and that would be it, but I wondered, how do you do it? I had written some shorter books, but I'd been writing these long books for so... for over a decade now, beginning with Operation Shylock and ending with The Human Stain; and I thought, how do you pack a punch in... in a third of the pages? I know how you do it in a... in a novel, because there's the power of the... the power of the amplification provides you with the punch, you know, but when... when you're reducing and reducing, how do you do it?
So I thought I would try it.  And before I tried it, however, I'm leaving out one book, I think, and that is The Plot Against America. It's hard to remember all these books, it's easier to write them – The Plot Against America. 

The Plot Against America came out of my reading Arthur... the historian, Arthur Schlesinger's autobiography. Alas, Arthur died before he could complete it – there's only the one... one volume, but I got it in galleys and I read it.
And I remember I was reading about the 19… and I was extremely interested in reading about the period before I was born, from 1918, let's say, the end of the War, till 19… till the Roosevelts came around, because you never — as a kid you'd never get them in school — you'd never get the decade before your birth, you know? And so you'd hear the names, but you don't know anything, unless you become a major in history, or something, or a historian. So I was very curious to read about Arthur's young life and about the 1940 election in America, because that's the first election that I remember as a kid. I mean, I was only seven then, but I remember Roosevelt and... and Willkie [Wendell Willkie].
I should say, by the way, that I was born the month that Roosevelt became president, and I knew no other president until I was 12 years old. He died in 1946, in April, I think, of 1946; I was 13. And so the president had always been Roosevelt, the party in power had always been the Democrats, and... I was curious about what those early Roosevelt years were like, and so on.
 
Well, in 1940 Willkie – the Republican candidate – was up against Roosevelt; and I was reading the book, and Arthur explains that Willkie was not an isolationist, as was the majority of the Republican party in 1940, but he was an internationalist, not unlike Roosevelt.  He didn't have Roosevelt's power, he was only a voice, but he was an internationalist, and on certain other domestic issues he was quite Liberal as well.
 
So the point... the thing is that they couldn't possibly have beaten Roosevelt in 1940 with this candidate, because they had the real thing in Roosevelt. And Roosevelt was, despite those who hated him, he was... he was... he had an enormous following in the country. And they were still finding their way out of the Depression in 1940, but they had found their way partially out of it. But I... I thought... and then Arthur said that some of the Republicans wanted to nominate Lindbergh, Charles Lindbergh, the aviator, who was extremely right-wing. And I remember writing in Arthur's little book in the margin, what if they had? What if they had?
And I had lunch with... with Arthur Schlesinger and I talked to him about Lindbergh, and I was groping for... I was groping forward for my book, The Plot Against America, I had no idea what it would be, let alone that it would be called that. And so  I... I may just have written The Dying Animal, I don't remember — and I thought: write this book about Lindbergh, and what would it have been like if Lindbergh had been elected president?  It's a wonderful question to ask yourself: there are these what if books, half a dozen people have written them in the last… in recent years; but I said, what... what if Lindbergh had become president?
 
And then... and I have of course I had no idea what. And then what would it have been like for us, I thought, us — my mother, my father, my brother and me, and our family? And how... how I could use my family exactly, an exact portrait, and just have them behave as I think they would have behaved in that situation; and so that's what I did. Now, I really did think, what would my mother have done here? What would my father have done there? What would I have done?
My brother didn't come off so well, because he would never have done what I had him do in the book, which has become a kind of Lindbergh-ite. But I just, I... I asked him to forgive me when the book came out. But I just had needed that in the book, I needed somebody in the family who goes over to Lindbergh, and that's the story of that book. 

When the book came out, there were those among its readers who thought it was an allegory of the Bush administration and the... the coming of fascism to America. But I never believed that Bush would bring fascism to America, and I never… and Lindbergh himself doesn't in my book. So the book had to do not with Bush, but it had to do with this question I'd asked myself which intrigued me, what would have happened.
 

Now, the shorter books — two of them were continuations of a sequence — The Dying Animal was a continuation of those Kepesh books, The Professor of Desire, The Breast, then came The Dying Animal, which was an entirely different book. And I thought of these three books as three different dreams or nightmares of an erotic nature that a man has: he goes to sleep, and he dreams he's a breast, and then his girlfriend is in it and his family is in it. And then he… the dream is over and later in the night, he dreams that he... his girlfriend and his family are in this dream again, but now they're all as they are, which is The Professor of Desire. And the erotic side of the book is... is much more poignant than it came to be in the first one.
And then I wrote The Dying Animal, because somebody told me a story about himself and a woman, and the story was sad; a Dutch... a Dutch friend of mine that… he'd had an affair with a young woman – he was about 50 years older than she was – had an affair with a young woman, and he had a... an aesthete's passion for her breasts; and he couldn't stop telling me about how perfect they were and how unlike any breasts he'd ever seen they were. And then a year or... after, so a year or two later after they'd broken up, she called him one night and asked if she could come and see him; and she came to see him she said: 'I have breast cancer'.
I don't know what happened after… whether she… she was alive when I spoke to him; this was many years ago, he told me this story. Well, how can I resist that story?  That's just the skeleton, but it's a... it's a strong skeleton, and maybe some other writer could resist that – I couldn't. But I thought, well, let this happen to... let this happen to Kepesh, the guy who'd been the breast, the guy who'd been The Professor of Desire, let this happen to him. So it's the third dream. And you wake up in the morning, and you say, jeez, I dreamed, I had some funny dreams last night, and that's the end of it.
But my job was to do something with those dreams. And so I told the story of The Dying Animal. I had to make, recreate him, I had to, of course, create a woman for him, and... and a scheme to tell the story. But, so what you start with is... is — Henry James's word for it was a germ, and that's the right word — you start with a germ. But it germinates, and you help it germinate, you make it germinate.

The other sequence I finished was the Zuckerman books [Zuckerman Bound]. I didn't know they needed finishing; The Human Stain might have been the last, but I thought something was necessary. Some... the music wasn't finished. And the scheme of the Zuckerman books — which only occurred to me as it... as it evolved, I had no such scheme in mind — was that there were the early books in which Zuckerman is the main... the main character, and it's his life as a writer, both here and in Czechoslovakia, that we read about. Then there's a middle book, which is The Counterlife, in which he ceases to be the person at the centre, and he's involved with his brother, with London, with Gloucestershire, with the West Bank; so the place begins to loom much larger there, and he begins… though he is the mediating intelligence, his personal life is not the central issue.
And that led me to the last three books in which he doesn't… his life is not a matter of any concern to us. But rather, he is the brain, he is the eyes, he is the voice who tells you the story: The story of Swede Levov in American Pastoral, the story of Ira Ringold in I Married a Communist, the story of the guy in The Human Stain whose name is Coleman Silk; and Zuckerman is an observer in there. Moreover, he has no sexual life whatsoever — he virtually has none in the earlier books either, by the way. I gave the sex life over to Kepesh, not to Zuckerman — you know, you... you parcel out your experience to different characters — and in these books he's had prostate cancer and he's had his prostate removed, and he's been rendered... rendered impotent and incontinent. So he's out the game; he's out of the game. Coleman Silk is still in the game, but he's not in the game.
And now I got to the end, I thought, I've got to come back to this guy and to his life. And tell me, I said to myself, what happens to him? Tell me what happens to him? And where and when it happens, and who's along for the ride, really. And I thought up the story of Exit Ghost, of his attempt to re-enter life from his hermit-like existence; his attempt to re-enter life and his flight from it; and his flight from learning the feeling, the implications, of his impotence which, as long as he's living by himself in a cabin somewhere, I don't think it can make a difference.  But he comes down to New York and sees somebody... his beautiful young wife and he thinks, I can't have that, I can't have that.
And also, his involvement... their involvement in the election of 2004. So I wanted something to be happening, so…  and moreover it... the last book, the, Exit Ghost, refers back strongly to the first book, The Ghost Writer, the characters show up... the characters who were in The Ghost Writer show up again. So I... I don't think it's too neat an ending, I... I think it's unexpected and... but it was done; and when that was done, I knew that I was finished with Zuckerman. 

So now I've written The Plot Against America and I've written The Dying Animal for Kepesh, and I've written Exit Ghost for Zuckerman – what am I left with?  I'm left with four books that I wrote independently of one another, those short books — I mentioned that Saul only laughed when I asked him how did he do it, and so I had to find out how to do it.  And it was... it's strange doing it because you, you're looking for the impact, where is the impact supposed to come from?
Maybe I'm more troubled by this than others, but I think I'd spent so many years writing long books that I didn't know where does the kick come from, you know?  So they were… let's see, what are they called, those books?  The most recent was Nemesis, and the one before that was The Humbling, the one before that was Indignation, and the one before that I can't remember — it'll come to me. Everyman. Everyman, Everyman, Everyman. 

What do these books come out of? Different things… the first one, certainly Everyman, came out of experiencing the deaths of one's friends. My... my grandparents died in the '30s and '40s, my parents died in the '70s and '80s, and I thought, well, that'll be the end of it. Everybody's dead, now it's fine, you know? But lo and behold, one's friends, one's dearest friends, with whom one ate many dinners and laughed many laughs and went swimming with and walked around New York with or… and they die; and I must admit to being shocked.
And so you're shocked, and you're shocked over and over again. I remember when my father was an old man, and his brother, his younger brother died in the same year in which several of his closest friends had died and my mother had died. And when my uncle died, my father called me and said, 'Philip, I can't look into another hole in the ground again.' And this is… he was in his 80s, and he'd buried so many people; and so I said, 'I'll go as your representative, and I'll tell my cousins that I'm here for you.' I would have gone anyway, so… but I went. But I didn't know what he was talking about, then.
But I guess you reach a point where you can't look... look into another hole in the ground again. You know, you reach… it's not the first one, not the second one, but the 15th one, you know?  And so I thought I would tell a story about a man's mortality from the perch of the operating room, that is, the history of his diseases... I would tell his story through history of his diseases; and the ones as a child, the ones as a man, and then the ones that... that kill him in the end.
And... and there was a story a friend of mine had told me years ago about – he... he's dead too, so I can tell the story — and he had, he'd been having an affair, and his... he went off with his girlfriend to another city, and of course, you know, his wife was away, and she came back. And when they were going to leave that city to come to New York they were in a terrible storm, and they couldn't get out. And so he was gone – he didn't go to work, he didn't come home, and so she figured it out.
Well, that story interested me, so I gave it to the guy in... in Everyman – it happens to him. He's in Paris with his beautiful girlfriend, and he gets stuck there. And it gave me the opportunity to pretend to be the wife, the indignant wife, and I wrote a… I think I wrote a... gave her a wonderful speech, it goes on a page or so; her... her indignation is wonderful, and I generally end up at that end of the conversation, you know? So I was quite... I was quite pleased to play that role, because when you're making the speech from the point of view of righteous indignation, you're so fluent... you're so fluent. Anyway, so that was Everyman. 

The Indignation book I... I was thinking about when I was in college and the Korean War was on; I went into the army after the Korean War ended, but when we were in college, we were all scared the God-damned thing wasn't going to end, you know.  And so I wanted to remember that period and also the tremendous repressiveness of that period – sexual repressiveness in a college of the kind I went to. It was probably like most others, but it was really on the repressive end. And... and then, as I said to you earlier, my... my father was shaken by my independence when I got to be 17, 18, and was really driving me crazy; and so I... I took that stuff and put that in those books too. And so you mix a lot of stuff into the bowl, you know.

How do you know one thing goes with the other?  That's the gift... that's the gift.  I mean, and also, it may not go, one thing with the other, and that's the.. that's the screw-up. But, by and large, the power of a book lies in choosing, juxtaposing the right character with the right historical circumstances or personal circumstances, so I couldn't have Mickey Sabbath in American Pastoral. He wouldn't care if his kid blew up a building, you know. And likewise, I couldn't have Swede Levov in Sabbath's Theater; they don't... they don't… it doesn't... it can't hold it's mind, you know? And so that is the writer's work, that's the work that he or she does best.

Years ago I'd heard another story about an actor who couldn't act; a distinguished actor — came out on the stage, and he was like me or you would be, you know — and he couldn't act; and the notion of someone losing everything like that is interesting.  And so I've been, I made... invented my actor in The Humbling — he's humbled. It's funny, in many languages apparently there is no word for humbled, so the book has been translated as The Humiliation, which is not what it's about. But he's humbled, and then he gets involved with this young lesbian girl who he… who he... who becomes heterosexual with him, which is also an interesting situation as well; and he loses that too, so he loses everything.
And I've never had a character… I think I've only had one other suicide in any book of mine, and that's in Everyman; and it's not the main character, it's a subsidiary character who is... husband has died, and is racked by back pain. But the character in The Humbling is the first major character I ever had who committed suicide; and I remember when I was writing it, I wanted to see if I could get there — I mean, could I... could I make the suicide inevitable — surprising, but inevitable — just as suicides are? And whether I did I don't know, but that's what I wanted to do. 

I came upon that by doing something that I often do before I write, before I start on a new book, is, I'll make lists sometimes — lists of events or… in this case they were lists of historical moments that I'd lived through that I'd never tried to deal with in fiction.
And I made a list, and in the list, about two-thirds of the way down, it just dawned on me — it was polio. I was thinking rather in terms of… I think like the assassinations and so on, but this was more telling than any assassination. And so I... I put it away for a few days, and I went back to it and I circled polio; I thought: all right, take a crack at it; I'd lived through it, I knew what it was like, and I knew what the... what the terror was like, mostly in the parents – less in us kids. We only felt the terror when some kid died, or the same... some kid got crippled – then we realised it. But otherwise, you know, we didn't really bother, and we thought our parents were crazy for worrying about it so much.
But it was a horror, it was the horror of the first half of the 20th century, of life in cities, even in rural areas. There was the horror for kids – you got off from school, and now you were confronted by this menace called polio. So I started from scratch: who... who's going to be at the centre here? Where, where is it going to take place?  What's going to take place? What's the story? And I came up with a hero – this guy named Bucky Cantor, and he's a playground director and a grade school gym teacher.  I remember those guys; when we were kids we looked up to them terribly, and they could be very nice, they could be very sweet, those... those male gym teachers in our era. There were also the marine drill instructors, but that I got in college.
And so these… my characters aren't modelled on anybody I knew, I just knew about what the life on the playground was because I hung around there all the time when I was a kid. And then I knew what the city was like when the polio threat was around. And in the summer… and then the second half of the book shifts to a summer camp, and I taught... I taught… I didn't taught [sic], I was a counsellor in a summer camp when I was a kid in college, and so I knew what the camps were like, and that's the story. I didn't talk to very many people. I talked to one guy who had polio, and I happened to run into him accidentally. I was in the locker room at the pool, the pool where I go swimming, and this guy, he took a brace off when he came in; and he was about my age, and I said, 'Did you have polio?' And he said yes, and so he talked to me.
But it always helps to have some reliable testimony, because it's not the centre of your book, it's what you jump off of. If you have something solid that you know, then you invent off of it. I mean, polio was real, and I could find out things about it, but then I must invent off of it. So that brings us up to today.

How is Nemesis told? It's told by an unknown narrator, at least, for two-thirds of the book the narrator is unknown, but the book begins with someone talking about polio and the neighbourhood in Newark, and he says we, we did this, we did that. We… and I got that idea — it wasn't my own idea, I have very few original ideas — but I got that idea from 100 years ago, reading Madame Bovary.
I was always charmed and interested that in the first chapter of Madame Bovary, first five pages maybe, maybe no more, a voice who had gone… a boy who had gone to school with Charles Bovary who… elementary school, talks about young Charles and so on, and says we, we…  and then you can't find hide nor hair of him again – he is gone; I always liked that. And I thought, I'm going to do that. I liked… and I thought, here you're talking about a community that's in peril, so we is good.  We did this, we thought this, and so on — who is the we? Well, I have to find that out too. And so I found it out when I got to the end of the book and the storyteller turns out to be one of the boys from the playground, from Bucky's playground; moreover, one of the boys who got polio.
So then I go back to the first — second or first chapter — and put in that he's one of the names of the kids who gets polio. And say: so there it is. And what I wanted… I didn't want the I to be Bucky, I didn't… I don't know why... well, you know why?  Because he's not so smart; he's not so smart; I don't want to make him smarter than he is. This is something writers do all the time. A great example would be Bloom in Ulysses, but John Updike did it with his character Rabbit, in those Rabbit books, and he gets… by the way, both Joyce [James Joyce] and Updike get away with it, but it's a trick, and…  but I didn't want to do that with Bucky, because he's an ordinary guy.  And so I… but I wanted somebody who was there, and actually I wound up with this problem, which I solved very easily, I think, and then in the end he emerges much more fully as a voice. And he's crippled, too, by polio, so these two guys who have been crippled by the polio epidemic of 1944 in Newark are talking... talking together.

I was born in 1933, at the height of the Depression. I was born in the very same month that FDR became president, and remained president for the next 12 years. And my father was not a big wage-earner; he was working, luckily, for the Metropolitan Life Insurance company as an insurance agent, as a salesman, and he probably made about $80 a week, which… even at that time it wasn't much. But I didn't know it; I didn't know that we were poor. My mother was a tremendous organiser of... of our household, of our finances, of our clothing and our health, and she was... she was remarkable, really. And so the orderliness of the household made a big impression on me as a kid, and helped to convince me that we weren't poor.
We lived in a nice flat — in those days apartments were called flats — and in a two-and-a-half-family house. A two-and-a-half-family house was a house that had a three-room apartment at the top and two five-room apartments below, on the first and second floor. So there was room enough for all of us; it wasn't huge, but it was comfortable. I was happy; I... I think I… my moods ranged from general contentment to extreme happiness, and particularly happy when I discovered school.

The school was just a three minute or five minute walk down the street, at the end of our street.  It was a brand new school, and I just took to school: it just seemed to be the most wonderful invention, you know.
I remember being particularly intrigued — I must have been first grade — by the frieze, the alphabet frieze that ran around the top of the blackboards. The capital A, the small a, the capital B, the small b, and I was riveted by it, really, and so I learned to read and write.  And I was a smart little fellow, and so I skipped grades. I don't know if they still have that in American schools, but if you were at the top of your class they moved you ahead. And so I skipped once in the fourth grade, and I skipped once in the eighth grade.
There it is. I think the teachers were probably pretty good for that era, I don't remember much from then — I learnt to read. And in about fourth grade I discovered the library; I don't mean the school library, I don't even think there was a school library, but the local branch library of the big Newark Public Library. Now, we didn't have any books in my house. There were… I can think of four books... four books that were in the house while I was in grade school, and I know the four books because I read them. There they were, and I read them. They were all books that had been given to my mother or father — I think my father – when my father had been in the hospital. He had a serious illness in the early 1940s and people had brought him some books to read. My father was a newspaper reader, he wasn't a book reader, so home these books came. They were Sir Walter Scott — just what my father needed — Kenilworth, Ivanhoe, and another one whose name I can't remember. Another book was by William L Shirer, it was called Berlin Diary. I said I could remember the four, but I suppose I can't. But I read them; I didn't know what I was reading.

But I'd go to the library, and then a few years later when I had a bicycle, I'd bicycle to the library after school. It was about two miles away, and I'd load the basket on the bicycle up with books, and bring them home. I probably was imitating my brother, because he... he had done that, but I had the desire, and I began to read. Of course, what I read were kids' books. There was one writer in particular that I was fond of named Howard Pese, P E S E; he was, he wrote about the sea, and they were adventure stories for boys.
A few years ago I became curious about Pese; I thought of him, and I ordered about half a dozen of his books off the internet to see what they would be like to read. And I had a good time with them — they were good, they were good. They're boys' adventure stories, full of mystery, full of fog in San Francisco Harbor, and so on.
As time moved on, I began to read the books of Howard Fast. Howard Fast was a popular... a popular writer in the '40s, and he wrote about American historical moments. He has a book about the battle at Valley Forge called Conceived in Liberty; he has a book about... called Citizen Tom Paine about Tom Paine, and so on.  And they were very left-wing; I didn't know this as a kid, but Fast was a Communist, and I believe he also wrote for The Daily Worker, which was the... the daily of the Communist party, so this was a kind of Marxist slant on American history.  And I... I gobbled it up, probably in about the seventh or eighth grade.
 

Then in high school I read what we had to read for school, and I think it was in my second year of high school that my brother came home from the Navy. He'd been two years in the Navy after the War, and he enrolled at Pratt Institute, which is in Brooklyn. He was an art student; he was studying commercial art, and one... probably in summer, I was probably 13 or 14, one summer he brought home a newspaper, the college newspaper, and there was a list of books recommended for summer reading for the students. And I... I took that, and I went to the library, and I found all these books: Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, Ulysses, Sinclair Lewis - Babbitt… Let's see, what else was on there? And, Look Homeward, Angel, by Thomas Wolfe... and Sherwood Anderson's Winesburg, Ohio. 
And when I began to read Look Homeward, Angel I was transported; Wolfe... Wolfe transported adolescent boys in the 1930s and '40s. He lived only to be 38, he died in 1938, and he was... half a genius, not a whole genius. But what his hero was living was an epical existence: his hero was all appetite — sensual appetite, intellectual appetite, geographic appetite — he'd go wandering through cities, walking the streets, and so on. And he was a kind of colossus. And the, he… and the prose was highly lyrical and very propulsive, and I just swooned. There were... there were four big novels that Wolfe had written: Look Homeward, Angel and Of Time and The River are about a hero named Eugene Gant, who grows up in the south, as Wolfe did. And his second two books have a hero named George Webber, and they're called The Web and The Rock, and a very famous one called You Can't Go Home Again.
And I read them, and they're about 800 pages apiece, and I got my friends to read them. And I was... I was excited; I had no idea of being a writer myself, of course, but that list that my brother brought home was... was tremendously helpful to me. I had no guidance otherwise, and this was guidance, you know?
 

To go back to what I said earlier about there being no books in the house… Why was that? First of all, it wasn't unusual in our neighborhood. We… we teetered on the edge of the middle class; we probably were a bit lower middle class, you know, and nobody bought books, they went to the libraries. A lot of people just didn't read. These were the parents – my parents and others – were the children of immigrants – Jewish immigrants – and none of them had a college education; there wasn't a single family in which a mother or a father had a college education. And as I said, my father went as far as eighth grade, so too did many of the other fathers. So there were no books, there was… there was no money to buy books and there was no culture of buying books. So my father didn't read books, anyway, he read the newspaper from cover… from cover to cover, page after page. He was… he would get very riled up about politics.
My mother did read, and so she went to the local rental library; I think these things are long gone. But the pharmacies… the pharmacy would have a rental library of several shelves, on which the best sellers were there. They were wrapped in cellophane covers and you could take them out for, let's say, a nickel a day. And so I remember because I went… she would send me to get Louis Bromfield or somebody and so I'd go around the corner, I'd go to the pharmacist and give him a quarter for five days and she would read this book. What she read mostly were best sellers, and her favorite writer was Pearl Buck, who was at that time the favorite writer of many, many middle class Americans. Pearl Buck, as you may recall, won the Nobel Prize; I think she may be the first American writer who won the Nobel Prize, or maybe Sinclair Louis won it before her. And she was not a very good writer, but she did write about exotic things in China and so on and her books were made into movies that were big smash hits. Dragon Seed was one, there's another… The Good Earth was another. And my… my mother took us all to New York, which we rarely went to, to see The Good Earth and Dragon Seed when they were made into movies, and they were played… they played it through Radio City Music Hall and it was a terrific treat to see this.
My brother read, and he read from the library, so that was… we didn't have a phonograph, we listened to the radio. The radio was the… the entertainment and the information center of the house. Radio was relatively new when I was a born in 1933. And what did we listen to on the radio? We listened to the news – my father listened to the news. We listened to popular music, which my brother and I liked to listen to all the time. And we listened to the… radio comedies, and on Sunday night they were a treat. They started at six o'clock in the evening and they went through 10 o'clock that night, and there were people like Jack Benny and Fred Allen and Fibber McGee and Molly. And I still remember those programs very well. My brother was attached… so attached to those programs that in the… his lifetime – he died a couple years ago – he would get copies of all those old radio programs and listen to them, with great pleasure. So the radio had a big influence. That was, as I said, the… the thing through which everything came that was outside our house, outside our lives.
 

As I remember, we had one radio in the living room – a kind of a console radio – and then we had a little one in the kitchen that my mother listened to during the day when she was doing whatever she did in the kitchen. And then we ate… we ate in the kitchen, so the radio was on while we were eating; there would be the news and then the music, you know. Eventually, my brother and I had a radio in our room and… that was great fun, because after we were supposed to be tucked in bed, lights out, we could turn the radio on and hear stuff. It seemed very… that was the height of my childhood transgression – was listening to the radio after 10 o'clock. We… we didn't have… we had some... as I said, we didn't have a phonograph; it was… it was a luxury. We weren't destitute, don't get me wrong, but it was… it was a luxury, and neither of my parents had any interest in classical music so it would have been pop music, and pop music we could get on the radio. I… I only know of one of my friends whose family – my four or five close friends – whose family had a phonograph.

We did have art, we did have paintings on the wall, which is unusual. And the reason we had paintings on the wall was because of my mother's brother, my Uncle Mickey, who was a painter, and he was unlike the rest of the family. He wasn't a bohemian, but he was certainly not conventional, and he spent a lot of time in Europe where he would paint in the Louvre and he would be copying paintings. He was a portrait photographer by… by trade and he would make enough money to go… to go to Europe and he would close up his studio and he would go to Europe. My father didn't approve of this, but I found him an interesting man. So… and he was very important to my brother, because when my brother became interested in art my uncle, although he was a very sardonic man and tried to discourage him, he nonetheless gave him some books to read, some books to look at. There was a very famous anatomy… anatomy teacher at the Art Students League on 57th Street here, whose name was Bridgeman; I think his first name was George Bridgeman… it may not be George. And Bridgeman's anatomy book my uncle gave to my brother, my brother brought… brought it home, and there for the first time in my life I saw nude people. They were drawn, but they were nude. And my brother went on Saturdays – while he was a high school kid in Newark – he went over to New York every Saturday, which was quite exotic, just to take a course at the Art Students League in… in life drawing. And he would sit in a room with a naked woman, and I would debrief him when he… when he came home, and he would have his… were they charcoal drawings? I forget. He would have his drawings of this nude woman and I couldn't get over the fact that he was sitting in a room with a nude woman, of all things drawing.

So this… I guess I'm talking about my… my budding cultural life. I should add that even though… oh, I said we had my uncle's paintings on the wall. The families in our neighborhood – it was a Jewish neighborhood – were all hell bent on getting their kids educated. And every kid I knew, knew in the second grade that he was going to go to college, even though no parent had gone to college. And they did, they all went. Moreover, the high school I went to, which was the same kids I went to grade school with, had more students who had gone on to advanced degrees and professional degrees than any other high school in the state. So this… this neighborhood had a mission, and their mission was to give these kids, and I was one of them, every advantage they could possibly have through education, because they weren't going to get that advantage through money; nobody was going to inherit any money.

My father was a hard working man, to put it mildly. He knew he had no credentials and all he had to offer his employer was his intensity and his energy, and that he did. And so I saw that growing up, that my father was gone in the morning when we got up at 7:30, and he came home at five o'clock and we had dinner that early, as most families on our street did. But he went back to work at six, and he was an insurance man and he would go back at six o'clock at night. When the husbands would come home, he would go to the houses and sell them insurance if he could, and he would get home at nine o'clock at night. So… and he did that on Saturdays as well, and sometimes on Sundays. But Sunday was reserved for family. So I saw this hardworking father at work and he was an extremely dutiful person. He couldn't resist a person in need, within the family. I… I saw him later on in life when he did the same… behaved the same with people outside of the family. But at this point when we were all family oriented he couldn't resist; he… if someone was in the hospital he was there to visit them. If something terrible had happened at somebody's house – an illness, a loss of some kind – he… he was there to comfort them. He was extremely responsive and responsible to his mother, who as I say, was an immigrant. His father had died when I was six years old and he… he and all his brothers looked after my grandmother.

We went to see my grandmother every Sunday. They lived in another… another part of Newark; she lived with her daughter in another part of Newark, and every Sunday my brother and I went down there and we spent a few hours with my grandmother on my father's side. In the afternoon we went with my mother to visit her mother on my mother's side. So that's how we spent Sunday. I remember liking it. My brother says he hated it. Maybe I didn't like it as much as I think I do now. But I… I remember the family life was intense and I… you know, Max Brod says about Kafka – he was spellbound in the family circle. I wasn't spellbound, but I was gripped by the family drama, and… and in my grandmothers the pathos of their lives. Both of them had lost their husbands, neither had ever had any money and they didn't speak any English. They spoke Yiddish, this increased the pathos because between my grandmothers and me there was a lot of feeling; they were very loving women. But we couldn't speak to each other and this created a… a pathos in the relationship, so I got a good emotional education.
 

My father succeeded… in life and his business. He was promoted by the Metropolitan, the life insurance company until he made a very good near the end of his life and retired on a very good pension. He died at the age of 88 in 1989.
My mother was comme il faut. She was… she took pleasure in doing the proper thing and it was her style. She was… well spoken. My father wasn't ill spoken, but my mother was the one who was well spoken and she had the social graces and she was a very loving mother. She… she taught me how to type when I was a boy. I must have been 10, and she had been a secretary in a law office before she got married and she was an excellent typist and stenographer. And she… she luckily, blessedly taught me to type and I was a kid and I loved learning it from her – she had a typewriter – and I loved learning it from her. It was easy to learn and I could type. But mostly she was there as a… as a mother. She was very active in school affairs, she was president of the, what's called the Parent-Teachers Association for several years and so she knew all my teachers, which excited me. And she had many women friends and she… she had a wonderful life, I think, until the boys – my brother and I – went away, and then she was quite bereft

Of course I had problems growing up, more with my father than with my mother. From the time I started school when I was five years old my mother was afraid of me. She knew that I was quick, and I was extremely stubborn; I was known for that in the family, and she didn't really want to cross me. And she didn't, there was no need to. I did all my homework, I hung out with the right guys and so on. My father, when I became an adolescent, became to be very unnerved by my independence. And when I… my last year in high school, my first year of college, he was driving me crazy and we had a tremendous fight once, a verbal fight. And my brother said afterwards about that verbal fight, not too many years ago, he said to me, 'You claimed your independence that day'. But it was very painful to claim, it was very painful to claim.
When I had problems, who did I talk to? I talked to my brother. I didn't know who else there was to talk to. I had no teacher I could talk to. None of us did, really, although they were probably intelligent people, but it never dawned on me I could take a family problem in to my teachers.

I had a cousin, an older cousin – my cousin Florence, who recently died – she was about 12 years older than I was and she married a guy after the war — who came back from the war — a guy named Irv Cohen, and Irv became a great figure in my life. I had… the war had made an enormous impression on me and I had been a student of the war as a kid, and I knew the names of all the places where the battles were and I knew everything. And I carved airplanes that were the airplanes that were used by the US forces and so on, out of balsa wood. And when Irv came back from the war, here was a real ex-GI, and I… he was left-wing, very left-wing, and I was just getting to that stage in my life where I was becoming political myself, as much as a boy can. And he talked to me a lot; a lot of it was bullshit, but it didn't matter.
I… I dramatized him in my book, I Married A Communist. I modeled the character Ira Ringold after my cousin Irv. Ira Ringold in my book kills somebody, but my cousin Irv never did that, but he was a hothead and I was of course interested in this hot head, you know, who was against everything – against everything in America, against the status quo, against capitalism. And we had good times together. We went to baseball games together, we… he… he worked on a truck delivering orders for an uncle of mine, and I would go out with him sometimes on the truck, very rarely, but occasionally, and we would talk in the truck and I felt like a real American man on the road, you know.
And all that… the heroic rhetoric of the war and the heroic rhetoric of the left-wing popular front had gotten into my head and… and the heroism implicit in Thomas Wolfe's Look Homeward, Angel, the manliness of the guys who'd been in the war that tested their manliness, all of this was in my head in 1946, '47, '48 and my cousin Irv embodied… embodied this, you know. And he… you say, who did I speak to? I don't think I brought family problems to him; I don't think I had very many family problems, but what I brought to him was my appetite to be a man, you know.

What was the fight about with my father? It was about coming in late. 'Where the hell were you?' I said to him – my brother happened to be home from college that weekend – I said to him, 'It's none of your business'. That didn't go down very well, and that produced a bang up fight the next morning. I went in my bedroom and went to sleep but the next morning and the next day we had this raging, raging fight. He was frightened for me. Was it… was it a pathological reaction in him? I don't think so, even though I think it was a stupid reaction. But he had had three brothers die when he was a boy. Two – not when he was a boy, when he was in his 20s – two older brothers who he worshipped. And then later on about ten years later his younger brother, who was the family pride… this was a guy who… the first one in college… the first one who was going to college from a whole clan of seven children. And he took these blows hard and that was the history he brought to our encounter. And he used to say to me, 'You're a plum, you're a plum' you know, which implicit in Europe plum is: don't fuck it up, you know. He didn't say that, he just said 'You're a plum'. He was afraid that something was going to happen to me. Something did happen to me, but it was inevitable that something would happen to me. But that… so we had that… that fight and then we made up… we made up. I didn't even go back to college the next day, I stayed and had a dinner out in New York with him and my mother, which was a big deal, and everything was okay. But… and in fact, I'll tell you something, in the 1980s after my mother died my father would go to Florida in the summer… in the winter time and I would come from London where I was living to… to Miami to see him and we would hang around together for a few days. And so one evening we were taking a walk in Miami – Miami Beach – and I said, 'Do you ever think about that argument we had in 1951?' 'What argument?' I said, 'Remember I… I came in later than you thought I should and you said where were you and I said it's none of your business and the next day we just screamed at each other all day'. 'No, I don't remember.' 'Are you sure?' And he had a good memory. 'Are you sure?' 'No, I don't remember.' And he wasn't lying. There it is. That's also the man, that was also the man. But all those blows in… as a young man with losing his brothers… three… there were three died and three lived. And what else I can… I don't know what other ingredient there was. Except his father… his own father was extremely strong minded and tough, and maybe he thought that's what he was supposed to do, you know? We… we survived it.

I've borrowed many things in my books, many, many things from my background, my history. And the things get twisted and turned so that they're unrecognizable and they get assigned to different characters and so on. But of course I've drawn very heavily on… on my background, but primarily on the milieu itself and on the community, because that's the other side to this story of growing up, which is I felt myself a member of a community, a neighborhood. It was called the Weequahic section, that's an Indian name, and it was in the southwest corner of Newark. And there was only… begun to be… houses only began to be built there around the time of the First World War, so it was the last section of the city that was settled. And into this neighborhood the Jewish children of the original immigrants moved – which was my parents' generation, and these are people born around the turn of the century; their children were born in the 1920s and '30s. And I lived in this; it wasn't a shtetl – that misrepresents it – it wasn't a ghetto – it was a community. And, you… I felt, and I think we felt collectively, an allegiance and a loyalty and a comfort taken from this place. You know, it was predominantly – overwhelmingly, I should say – Jews. There were two non-Jewish families on our street; one next door to us, an Italian family, who I in a way use in The Plot Against America, and then down the street another Gentile family, a fellow named Whitey Sable, who was my great friend. But aside from that the whole entire street was… was Jewish, and so it would be on other streets as well. There was a comfort, as I said, to be taken in this, because we knew that we hadn't felt it on our backs, we certainly knew about hostility to Jews, distaste for Jews, discrimination and bigotry against Jews, we knew it... how did we know it? Our parents told us and the world told us. After all, Hitler was around in 1933 and the persecution of the Jews started almost immediately, and by the time 1940 and '41 came around when I was old enough to know what was going on, people knew that things were not good for the Jews in Europe. The extent of how bad things were for the Jews, one didn't quite know yet, but some people surmised.
We also knew on a local level. My father worked for a big insurance company, the Metropolitan Life, who didn't have Jews at the executive level. I think there was one Jew at the executive level, he was the treasurer, so he was involved with the money, but otherwise there were no Jewish executives. Nor were there even district managers who were Jews, except for one or two. And my father in 1943, I think it was, decided to go into business with some friends of his in the frozen food business to get out of the insurance business where he… he couldn't advance. He couldn't make $100 a week for the rest of his life, he had two sons who had to go to college. Luckily, my brother had the GI Bill and by the time I came around he had begun to recoup some of his losses from that business. But he wanted to get into a business where he could make the money to send his kids to college and other things, of course… buy a house, whatever.

So I knew from my father's experience that Jews were… not despised, but were kept out, they were kept out. I knew from the radio that they were despised. How did I know? Because there was a Catholic priest in Dearborn, Michigan – maybe he was in Detroit, maybe he was in Dearborn – named Father Coughlin, who broadcast his weekly sermon on the radio, and he was a dyed-in-the-wool anti-Semite and sometimes my father was reckless enough to listen to it, you know. He didn't want to, but he couldn't resist. He would… he would go crazy in the living room. 'Listen to that son of a bitch.' So… so I knew. I knew from Hitler, I knew from… from the newspaper, I knew from the Metropolitan, I knew from Father Coughlin, I knew… from Henry Ford, from Charles Lindbergh; the two most famous men in America. And in many ways two of the most famous men in the world were avowed anti-Semites, Charles Lindbergh and Henry Ford. And they were major figures, of course, and Lindbergh's flight was in 1927, Henry Ford, the assembly line begins in about 1920. So no, I never felt it in the neighborhood, but I knew it was there, as did all my friends.
And… stories that my grandparents had told my mother or father, they would repeat to us. My… one of them from the region of Kiev – my mother's mother – and one of them from Polish Galicia – my… my father's mother. And… so you see where the comfort derived from. We had nothing to worry about here.

Eventually, of course, it became – living there – became, not suffocating, but… I thought I could do more, I thought there must be more. There must be more… What are all these other Americans like, you know? You can put that question several ways; what are Christians like? And I had my Whitey, my friend down the street, and I had the… Tony next door and… but I couldn't piece it together, I didn't know. It was a blank; it was a great blank. America was a blank for me and I wanted very much when I got to be 16 to get out into what I called America. Not that I didn't think our neighborhood was America, but it was one America and there were loads of Americas. I read about them in Sherwood Anderson, I read about them in Theodore Dreiser, I read about them in Thomas Wolfe, and through those books that I read, because my brother brought that newspaper home, through those books I read, I wanted to get out into the big thing, and I wasn't alone… I wasn't alone.

And so how did I get out? I got out by going… going to college, and I deliberately chose a school… I didn't know anything about the damn place, but I knew that they were mostly not… they were not Jews, and I was curious. What will it be like? What will it be like? So I went and I discovered something, I suppose. I guess I became familiar… I began to become familiar with the Others and was at ease with the Others.
[Q] That's the Others with a capital O?
Yeah, the Others with a capital O. All the Others… and now, it was a very conservative school. The Others there were all white, all Caucasian, mostly from… mostly from American stock, as opposed to immigrant stock. So there… now, I don't want to make it sound too planned, that I planned this, or that I went out there observing, I had my job to do, I was a student, I studied, I had friends, I had a girlfriend and so on. But I was in a new environment and there wasn't a Jew in back of me, and alongside of me and in front of me, which was interesting. I think that was the beginning of my… of my little discovery of America.

What kind of idea did I have about who I might turn into? I didn't have any idea. I had no idea how anybody turned into anything. I was what I was. I was this… this kid, this boy. I… when I started college I wanted to be a lawyer, but I didn't want to be a lawyer, I just thought that's something… I didn't… that's something you could be, and I was very interested in equality and justice in America, partly I suppose from growing up Jewish. And so I thought that if I was a lawyer I would be marching in the cause of truth and justice. But within a year… and for the first year or so I took prelaw courses and so on, and I enjoyed some of them, but I began to take literature and the bell rang again and that just overwhelmed everything. And so I thought then that I'd be a college professor, that I'd be an English teacher, and that's what I thought throughout college and then I went to graduate school to get an advanced degree to become an English professor. And I… I wasn't interested in commerce. I… my interest in material things was negligible. I didn't want to get a lot of dough and so I thought I'd be a college professor, and in those days college professors were paid very poorly. Maybe they still are. And then I began to write stories. The first ones were no good, they were terrible – little college stories – and then I got better somehow and I began to sell some stories, not to… I didn't make huge sums of money, but people were recognizing that I was… had something. And then I… I sold a story to Esquire Magazine in 1958. I was 25 and I got $800, so I quit my job teaching at the University of Chicago and I came east with my $800, and thinking I could live for $100 a month. I did it and then I was off on… then I was off on becoming a writer. But no, I never dreamed of it, I never wanted it, I never thought of it.

You came all this way. My sexual awakening; well I guess it began when I was about 12 and I awakened. Nothing happened; there was nothing that could happen. You have to realize that I woke up to sex in a tremendously repressive era, and I didn't know anything, you know, what I could gather from the other boys, and they didn't know anything either. And the girls were… the girls were straight jacketed, you couldn't get near them. You could kiss a girl, you know, but… and maybe you could even touch her, but that's… and you had to struggle for that. Elaborate wrestling matches ensued, you know. So I was 12, 13, 14, 15 and that's… that was my experiencing of sex, just what I described. In my last year of high school I had a girlfriend, Betty Rogo her name was, very sweet pretty girl; now dead. I don't know what we did, we wrestled, you know, and we panted and we secreted. But… we never had intercourse. It was out of the question, it wasn't in the cards. And then I went off to college and it was pretty much the same. I took out some girls who I found very pretty and I wrestled with them. And finally I got a girlfriend in the last few years of college and we became lovers and we learned with each other. We were clumsy and then we were less clumsy. But it wasn't much to write home about, nor would I have written home about it. The thing… now we're in 1954 and this is… this is what it was like in the '50s, maybe not for everyone, maybe there were some lucky guys, you know, who had more vivid and varied experiences, but I didn't. I don't say this with any regret or remorse, those were just the rules of the game. The girls… no… you couldn't go inside the girls' dormitory if you were male. You couldn't bring a girl into your dormitory. You couldn't… you had to live in the dormitory. You couldn't have a car. Where was… where was this thing supposed to take place, you know? And it took place… something took place at the end of the night when you'd walk the girl back to the dormitory and there would be all these couples, vertical couples in each other's arms doing the best they could do standing up, clothed. Things have changed. So that's what the era was like, and I try to write about it in Indignation. When I wrote that book I wanted to write about several things. One was having Korea hang over one's head while you were in college, the war, and the other was the social norms, which are so wildly different from the social norms today; wildly different. Who'd have thunk it, you know?

The war, World War II, was the most memorable historical event of my… of my childhood. I wasn't conscious of the Depression, but when I came into relatively full consciousness at the age of eight, nine the war was on. And members of the family – my older cousins – all were drafted, went into the Army, some went into the Navy. So suddenly these guys who I've been seeing all my life, all my older cousins, who I heroized anyway were gone and in peril. Several were in the Normandy invasion; a few of them were fighting on ships in the Pacific and so on. This… this impressed me. I wrote V-mail letters – they were called V-mail – V-mail letters to my cousins in the Army and they would disappear through an APO box as it was called, and then go on to them in Europe or the Pacific, I knew that. I saw the newspaper headlines. Bataan falls, Corregidor falls, Wake Island falls. It scared… that scared me when I was a kid; the first year of the war when everything was collapsing, when America was being defeated.
And then there was the radio and we listened religiously to the radio to get the war news and to hear the commentators. And the most important commentator was Walter Winchell. And I put Winchell into The Plot Against America because he was a big figure in the… in the media life of America at that time, and he had a distinctive voice and… 'Good evening, all the ships at sea and… good evening, Mr and Mrs North America and all the ships at sea, let's go press.' Wow! Telegraph key. And we would listen and down the street you could hear everybody had it on. So in the warm weather when the windows were open you would hear, if you walked down the street, you wouldn't miss a word of Walter Winchell, you know, he'd be in every house, and he talked about the war – he talked about many things – he talked about the war. There was another commentator named Gabriel Heatter – had a distinctive delivery too, and we listened to him. So the war came in through the radio, through the newspaper, through our relatives' kids who had been drafted, and then the school. The school would launch drives, all the schools did for tin foil, for instance, like the lining of cigarette packs, and we'd make big bowls of tin foil and bring it to school. I don't know why. Newspapers… newspapers were collected and they were recycled in some way, I don't know, for the war effort. And then there were the war bonds and war stamps, which we were encourage to buy as children, and which all of America was encouraged to buy. And so they would sell war stamps in school. If you had a nickel, you buy – a quarter, I think – and you put a stamp in a booklet and eventually had $18.75 and you got a $25 bond, which would… which would mature in 10 years. Magic. But that was for the war; everything was for the war. One… one got a course in geography as a kid because of the war. Little eight-year-olds who knew about Russia and France and China and Singapore. There, did you know the names, you knew where it was. Now this is all fundamental stuff of course. It's not the stuff of intellectual life, but it did strongly color my childhood and the childhood of my… my friends.

What did Korea mean to me? Well, it meant a threat. I was in college. The Korean War started in June of 1950. I started college in September of 1950, and all through the first three years of college the war was raging and we all wondered whether we were gonna have to fight there and I… cause if you left college you were gonna wind up in Korea. And there was an ROTC unit at Bucknell and you had to take one semester of ROTC, Officers… Reserve Officers Training School, Candidacy rather… and I just took the one semester and didn't go on. If I'd gone on for another year and a half I would have become an officer when I went in. I was quite stupid and didn't do that, but I had something in my head about the military on campus and some… some principle, some high principle that I had… quite stupid. And so I didn't go on to become an officer. And then it ended. It ended in '53 and we were safe, except that the draft didn't end, and so everybody was drafted.

The fear of being drafted to Korea is important to the book I wrote called Indignation, and that's what I wanted to write about, which was the fear, and then… and then the inevitability in the case of my hero.

I don't think my father was happy about my deciding to become a college professor. In fact I know he wasn't. Because he never said… after this fight we had, he never said anything to me about… anything to me that registered disapproval, you know. But I had a… my brother had a friend who was a very smart guy, he was a lawyer, just become a lawyer, and my father took him aside and said, 'Clive talk to him about this college professor, he'll starve', my father said, 'He'll starve'. And he thought well Clive could convince me to become a lawyer. And so Clive and I sat in my bedroom one day and Clive began to tell me what he wanted to tell me, and I said, 'That's it, that's enough, that's it', I'd won, you know what I mean. I'm not going to fight the fight again, that's enough, and he just... he just left the room and that was that.
And then my father swallowed whatever doubts he had. If you think it was… I was going to starve as a college professor, imagine what was going to happen to me as a writer. And I'm sure he bitched to my mother about it in some way, he didn't bitch to me. I... that event, the fight, had a winner and a loser and he lost.
[Q] You knew you weren't going to starve at least for a few months?
That's right. You know, I didn't worry about starving. Of course I didn't want to starve, but I didn't take it seriously. I... I thought that I could live on nothing. I thought, so long as I was on my own, without any responsibilities to anybody else, I could live on virtually nothing. And that I could live on $100 a month, in 1958. And that was cutting it close, but it was... it was doable, it was doable, just. And I didn't worry about after that, I just… maybe I was stupid. I don't know what it was, but I didn't… I wasn't concerned about money. I wasn't concerned about money. Not that there was anybody behind me to prop me up. I was young, I was healthy, I was smart... let's see.

There are the writers who work hard and continuously, and there are the writers who don't work hard and continuously, and for whatever reason. And I was one of those who worked hard and continuously. I... I just applied the same ethic I had applied to my work at college, and as a kid even, I suppose. And I said earlier, I liked school, I like that kind of work. I liked looking at that frieze along the top of the classroom that says, A a, B b, C c. I wanted to be around letters and words and... and solving the problems of how to put them together. That started very, very, very, young.

I read. I read a hell of a lot in college. I had a very rigorous literary education at this school, strange to say. And I read a hell of a lot in graduate school. I think when I came to New York with my $800, that I was mostly writing, and I don't think I stayed in at night to read, I wanted to go out. And my reading really began again, post-University, when I began teaching literature, which would be in about 1964 at the University of Pennsylvania. And then I read a lot, and I taught there for quite a few years and I educated myself through teaching… through teaching novels, and I read just about every major writer and taught books by every major writer; European, British and American. And... educated myself.

You know, I… did I have literary influences? I would answer and say literature was my literary influence. Reading all kinds of books was my influence. Not because I took from those books, but I began to be educated about literature and the range, the possibilities. But I never set out to imitate anybody as an adult. I think that in the early… the middle '50s… early '50s and middle '50s, I discovered two writers, American writers, who did indeed influence me. And I'll tell you who they are and then I'll tell you how they influenced me.
In 1953, my last… next to last year in college, I read The Adventures of Augie March by Saul Bellow. I had never read anything like it before in my life, who had? In a way, I had read something like it, I should say, when I read the books by the half genius Thomas Wolfe. But Bellow was a whole genius. And so he… the gush… the gush in Wolfe, the, as I said, the taste for an epical existence, the portraits of people, all of this Bellow did marvellously. But the influence came not through the literary genius, but through his subject. And his subject were Jewish… were Jew… they were Jews, these people. And not all of them, but the Chicago people, and Augie himself. And you could write about Jews like this. You could write about your neighbourhood like this. You didn't have to write like Conrad [Joseph Conrad], you didn't have to write like Henry James. But he was seizing hold of Jews and their lives and turning it into wonderful, wonderful, literature. That was a revelation to me, I was a college kid. Then I went back and read the earlier books which I didn't know, Dangling Man and The Victim, and The Victim is another wonderful book. But Augie March was something else, the gush of it was something else.
And then a year or two later, Malamud [Bernard Malamaud] published The Assistant. Malamud had written a baseball book called The Natural, which I liked very much because I like baseball and was interested with what he did with baseball. But The Victim… excuse me, The Assistant, was something else. Once again, he was down in the neighbourhood in Brooklyn in a grocery store. A grocery store. And the older Jewish… not old, middle aged Jewish proprietor of the store, and his daughter, and his wife, and these people talk… he's trying to approximate a certain kind of Yiddish tinged English. And so there was the next clump on the head, which is you can write about the Jewish poor, you can write about the Jewish inarticulate, you can describe things near at hand, like a grocery store, a counter in a grocery store, the produce in a grocery store. And that had a terrific impact on me.
And then I read those books a couple of times over, and I thought, I can use my stuff.

I'd written some stories in college that were very poor of course, and… but they didn't have a Jew in them. They didn't have Newark in them. They didn't have anything in them that I know anything about. But I didn't see how I could make literature out of these Jews, you know. And so I… I don't know if I've put it in one sentence, but it occurred to me at a certain point, that I can use the guy next door to us, who was an adulterer, who owned a soda water company, and I wrote a story called Epstein about this guy. And then someone told me a story about a kid tried... threatening the Rabbi to jump off the roof, and so I wrote it. My good friend Arthur Geffen told that to me, and a mate of mine at Chicago, and I said to Arthur, I'll give you five years to write it and if you don't write it, I'll write it. I didn't give him five actually. I wrote this book, the story called The Conversion of the Jews. And now I was beginning… these are not great stories these first stories, but I was hitting my stride, you know. I was… I found that I could use what I knew and I just had to find a way of speaking, I had to find a voice and that you find slowly, with effort.

Well, you don't... you don't find a voice by looking for it. You... you try one out. I'll give you an example from my beginnings. The voice that narrates Goodbye, Columbus is not the voice that narrates Letting Go, my next book. The first voice is colloquial and it's not exactly in the vernacular, but close to it. Letting Go is much more, I should say, artificial maybe, and further away from spoken speech. I'm not speaking about the dialogue, I'm speaking about the narrative. Further away from spoken speech. I was writing... I was writing a big novel and I wanted, as it were, a big and impressive voice. I don't think either of those books is successful, by the way, I'm just telling you how I... how I began.
When I got around to my third book, which is called When She Was Good, which takes place in a mid-western town in the 1940s, I tried to find a plain American voice that would not overwhelm the subject, and it's a little spare, and probably lacks colour, you know. But those were my first three shots out and each one I did something else in response to the material. The voice is a response to the material.
And then my fourth time out I wrote Portnoy's Complaint, which was total… the voice is totally unlike the voice in the first three books, but I found my colloquial freedom and I, sort of thought anything goes, anything goes. And... I used a psychoanalytic session as the prop. That is, the book is... the book is said to be told… it's said to be told by a patient speaking to his doctor in a psychoanalytic session. Well one of the rules of psychoanalysis is you say anything and everything, you don't censor yourself. And so this gave me great latitude of a kind I never could have taken without the psychoanalytic session as my prop, but I had… I found my freedom in that book. I wasn't going to use that voice again, I never have, actually. And those would be four instances of a writer, a young writer, finding a voice appropriate to the material and changing each time.

[Q] Voice is different from a character, it's not… it's not the same thing as finding a character then?
No. A voice is the sound... the sound of the prose. A voice is the organisation of the prose. A voice is the... the rhythm… the rhythm of the prose. A character is something very different.

I began Portnoy's Complaint without a book in mind. I just had an idea of writing a story about a patient speaking in analysis. And I wrote a very modest story called A Jewish Patient Begins His Analysis, which I think appeared in Esquire, and it was 25, 30 pages. And I wouldn't say that I had found my freedom there. I was laying something out rather carefully. And I had no idea I was going to go anywhere with that, at all. I… it triggered… but that first quiet chapter triggered something, because I realised the amount of freedom that was possible to me by having a psychoanalytic setting… a psychoanalytic session as the setting.
And so, this… going forward I began to write this completely unbuttoned chapter about masturbation. By treating masturbation as a comedy, which it is… which it is, and it's a very funny thing to do. And treating it as a comedy and talking about what it was like for this guy as an adolescent, all of it in the psychoanalytic setting, and I was free, as I hadn't been in the first chapter. But had I not established the premise of the first chapter, I wouldn't have been free. And I had a good time doing that and I was delighted by it. And I'd never done anything like that before. It was look this was new for me too, you know. And this isn't what I studied literature for at the University of Chicago.

So I wasn't just… I was overthrowing my education… my literary education. I was overthrowing my own first three books and I was overthrowing my… the literary seriousness that had accompanied my education and that had launched me into writing in the first place. But that was chapter two, Whacking Off, it was called.
And that was really what unleashed the, to use the word I've used before about others, a gush, the plenitude... that Whacking Off chapter.

And the next chapters were bigger and what I realised, I'd also gotten with the psychoanalytic session wasn't just the freedom to say whatever I wanted to say, but to move however I wanted to move. That is, I didn't have to tell the story chronologically, and since the principle of association of ideas dictates the speech of an analytic patient or should, I too could move back and forth from one thing to another without any… without any seaming connection, you know. So there could be excursions off to the side. There could be digressions. The only book I knew that had operated through digression, digression, digression, was Lawrence Stone's Tristram Shandy, which I'd read in college. But I didn't… I wouldn't count that an influence. But it's there, you know.

What I was doing in that book was making contact with my non-literary self. That is to say I was making contact with the clown that I knew I could be, with friends in life. The performer, the wild man, verbal wild man. And when I came to New York in the '60s, I fell in with a group of guys who were themselves pretty gifted at this, and we would have… there'd be dinner for… they'd be eight of us at the table say, four men, their wives, their girlfriends, and we would spin out a surreal version of the life we'd known growing up. And what I did in Portnoy's Complaint, was I exploited my talent such as it is, for performance. I'm not a professional performer, I have… I can only perform with friends.
But, those performances that we gave and… were outlandish, were outlandish. And the outlandishness was now coming into my work. Hooray, hooray! Who were the friends? There was Jules Feiffer, the cartoonist, who could be quite funny. There was a friend now deceased, named Al Goldman, who was wonderfully funny. And Bob Brustein who was the… ran the American Repertory Theatre at Harvard. And I guess there were other people who came in and out. But we would do 20 minutes bits, unstoppable, uninhibited, unbuttoned, clever, and then everybody appreciated everybody else's performance. And those were wonderful days and I remember thinking, actually I guess about the time I wrote When She Was Good, how can… how can you get that into your work, you know? There are no laughs in When She Was Good, fewer in Letting Go. So how can you get that in there? And the how was solved for me by the psychoanalytic session. This gave me the permission somehow.

We would be having dinner and somebody would say something. I wish I could… I wish they were recorded. I don't remember the specifics. Somebody would say something and someone else would begin to tell a story, and we would roar with laughter and he would then get higher and higher on our laughter and then someone would jump in with something else, and it was a wonderful moment. It was improvisational theatre, it was improvisational theatre. And I got that spirit in Whacking Off and in the chapters that come after that. And so it was… writing it was wonderful, writing it was wonderful. I was riding a wave.
[Q] It must have been, kind of, exhilarating to give a title… a chapter the title Cunt Crazy?
I wasn't going to say… I'd not been saying that, you know. You've… Cunt Crazy… Cunt Crazy and The Jewish Blues I think are the… Cunt Crazy, oh it was great fun, you're right. It was great… it was great fun. This was… I shared the propriety of my education, and I say to you I had an excellent education, but it was going to… it was holding me down in some way. It was worthwhile while I had it, but I couldn't be impeded by it as a writer.

I'll... I'll tell you what happened with my parents. Before the book came out, I was concerned for them, that they... they had to be shepherded through the publication of this book by me. I just couldn't leave them alone out there when this book came out. And besides, I spoke to them every Sunday from wherever I was in the world. I was in touch with them all the time. When they were living in New Jersey while I was living here in New York I saw them every couple of weeks, you know. Sometimes I'd go over there, sometimes they'd come over here. And so I... I called them up and said, 'Why don't you come over to New York, we'll have lunch' one day.
And I took them to a restaurant and I said, 'Look I have to tell you something. I have a book coming out in February, something March, and...' this was now January, or December. 'I have a book coming out in February and it's going to be a big sensation. And it's going to be sensational because there's a lot of obscenity in it and it's going to be sensational because it's about a Jewish family, and first I have to tell you that you are not… you are not the parents in this book'. I said, 'I borrowed some characteristics from the two of you and even… and from me too, but it's not about us, this is about a fictional family. But what's going to happen when the book comes out is you're going to get calls, telephone calls, maybe even visits on your doorstep from journalists, and they're going to want to talk to you about this book. And there'll be TV people, and there'll be newspaper people, and there'll be magazine people, and they're going to descend on you. And you should really figure out beforehand what you want to do'. I said, 'as far… if you want to talk to them, that's fine with me. But if you don't want to talk to them, then I'll tell you how you can deal with them. And you can just tell them thank you, no, but they're journalists they're going to insist. So, you... you can tell them a thank you no, three times and then you can hang up. You can hang up on a journalist, it's perfectly all right. Don't be nice to them.' And this conversation went on.
And then they got a taxi and went back down to the Port Authority bus and took the bus home to Elizabeth. That's the last I heard of it, until after my mother died. I was with my father in Florida and I said, what… 'Remember that conversation we had years ago?' I'm always reminding him to find out what happened. And he said, 'Yes mother got into the taxi cab and she began to cry'. I said, 'Why did she cry?' She said, 'he has delusions of grandeur. He has delusions of grandeur and I can't bear to think of how disappointed he is going to be.'


Two or three months later, I now had some money and my parents loved cruises so I... I sent them on a cruise. I thought it was good to get them out of the United States anyway. And here's what happened on the cruise. My father was… my father was tremendously gregarious, would meet people and start talking to them. And when he made a little circle of friends he said to them, 'How would you like a copy… an autographed copy of my son's book?' Poor people stuck there on a cruise, they can't get off the ship. So they said yes they… that's the last thing they needed was a book, but. So, he went down to his cabin and he brought with him about a dozen copies of Portnoy's Complaint and he opened them up and he autographed it by saying from Herman Roth… from Philip Roth's father, Herman. And this is the book that he gave to them.
So that's how they manage. I don't... I don't know what suffering they suffered. They may well have been hurt by things in the book, but they weren't... they weren't those people. My father was hardly like that and my mother was hardly like that so. But they never… they never were aggrieved as a result.

But my mother did say to me at one point, she… something was bothering her. She finally said to me, 'Philip, are you anti-Semitic?' And so I said, 'Ma what do you think? What do you think? You've known me since kindergarten right, and before?' But they were getting that from the Rabbi, you know.
 

What caused the scandal? Well it was an extremely intimate sexual portrait of a man's life. And I suppose people weren't accustomed to that. The raucousness with which it was told didn't help any, it seemed highly irresponsible, I suppose. In those years Jewish nerves were raw. Even in 1969, 25 years after the war. Jewish nerves were raw and they… by they, I mean some Jews. They couldn't bear the fact that a Jew was being represented in all his nakedness, in all his nakedness, with no regards to decency and dignity. So this was hard for them to take.
I read… I was teaching back in the '90s. A friend of mine was teaching a course in my books and I went to visit his class and he was teaching Portnoy's Complaint, so I had to reread it, because I couldn't remember it well enough to speak about it. And I found it scandalous. I found it scandalous, raw, disgusting, and I was glad when I read it that I somehow had the gall, back in the 1960s, to do it. I could never do it now. And I couldn't have done it before. I was helped… I got an awfully… one awfully wonderful push from behind by the times. By which I mean the 1960s. I was helped immeasurably by Janice Joplin and Jimmy Hendrix. I was helped immeasurably by an improvisational group that was called The Thugs, here in New York, and the shows those guys put on. I was helped by Barbara Garson's play Macbird. I was helped by Claude… I think his name is Jean-Claude van Itallie's play America Hurrah. These were all outland… it was all outlandish art. Good art, bad art, crap, it didn't matter. Everybody was pushing, everybody was pushing against something. And so I pushed with what I had to push up against. But that doesn't mean it went down very well with people who were concerned about the image of the Jews and the persecution of the Jews. That's the best face I can put on it, you know. I... I understand it.

No. I'm not ashamed of it. You know, I'm ashamed of the stories I wrote in college, the proper little stories. You know I'm not ashamed of it, it was a moment in my life and it was a moment in the cultural life of the times, and it came out of that moment. I was in control of it, I made it happen. But it came out of that… even the raucousness with which we would have those dinners – came out of that moment in time. And how old we all were, we were all in our middle thirties back then. And in every instance Jules, Al, Bob, me, [Jules Feiffer, Al Goldman, Bob Brustein], we were all highly responsible citizens. But we weren't responsible when we clowned and performed like this for one another, you know.

The books that followed it, Our Gang, The Breast, and The Great American Novel, were also attempts at outlandishness. I... I was trying to see what outlandishness could do for me, you know, and I knew it. I knew it. I just thought keep going, keep going, go beyond Whacking Off. I published a story at that point called: On The Air, which is far and away the worst thing I've ever written. But it... it went so far, it went over the top really. My friend Ted Solotaroff published it in the New American Review because his magazine was doing that too. Every... Everybody was doing it. Let the impossible in, you know. Let the indecent in. See what happens.
And so those books all attempted to... to treat the material as farce, as... as wild comedy, as slapstick, and that's as far as I went in that direction. I've never written a book like Portnoy's Complaint again, except perhaps for Sabbath's Theater, which I think is a far better book. And I found the right character in this guy Mickey Sabbath and I found the right adventures. And I think that's the… that's the best performance I've ever given, really.

Of course even though I was very young, I became conscious during the war of... of the treatment of the Jews in Europe – but only in a vague and hazy way. And I certainly as a kid, eight, nine, ten years old, had no concept of death camps or of gas chambers or the burning of bodies. Only when the war ended in 1945 and we began to see photographs of the people – the survivors of Auschwitz and Dachau, and the other concentration camps – did I... did all of us, even this boy, realise the extent of the torment… begin to realise the extent of the torment and the torture of these people.
And then in 1948 the dramatization of The Diary of Anne Frank came to Broadway and it had a huge impact on everyone, not just those who went to see it. Prior to that the book had come out, The Diary of Anne Frank. And I don't know when I read it, probably about then I would be about 15 or so, and it's not directly connected to the torment and the terror and the torture. But it had this family and the family were sympathetic and… so that broadened one's understanding of what happened, but it still didn't educate you as to what truly had happened.
In 1962, I think, Hannah Arendt's book Eichmann in Jerusalem, came out. By then I was a grown person and I read it, it was in The New Yorker and I bought a copy, and this further educated me, you know. Also, in Commentary Magazine, which was the magazine published by the American Jewish Committee, there were articles about what later came to be called: the Holocaust. I don't know when exactly that word became the name for that phenomenon, I believe it was Elie Wiesel's word, and it may have been some time in the late '50s or early '60s. But the persecution... the persecution of the Jews was a subject in… in the pages of Commentary.

In probably around 1958, there was an... an article in Commentary about a man named Gans – G A N S – who was appointed by the Nazis to oversee the Jewish ghetto, I think in Vilna – I may be getting my facts somewhat wrong, but essentially what I'm saying is correct. And his job was to oversee the ghetto and be its... its administrator, its… the mayor of the ghetto and also to give them… yield up to the Nazis X number of people a month to be... to put on the trains to go to Auschwitz to be killed. Let's say he had to give them 500 people a month. Quite a job.
I was very struck by this article about Gans and decided to write a play about it, because there he was doing what he was doing. If he didn't do it, then his notion was the German's would do it themselves in a very horrible and ugly way and they'd lose more people than he had to lose each month. But nonetheless he had to be responsible for the selection. Well the... the situation begged for dramatization I thought – and so I wrote a play.

I wrote this play for television. I met a television producer back then in 1959, a guy by the name of Robert Alan Arthur – who's now dead. And Bob was the producer of, I think it was Playhouse 90 it was called. And he commissioned me as it were, to write this play after I told him about it. So I did – and this is before the Hannah Arendt book – and the network turned it down. They were correct to turn it down. Not… let's assume the play was good, it probably wasn't, but let's assume it was good. The fury it would have aroused in Jewish viewers would have been enormous. So to present a Jew as the one who's doing the selection for the Nazis, but it was just that moral horror that excited my imagination.
Then I went out to teach at the University of Iowa in 1960 – in the writers' workshop – and I had a friend named Howard Stein out there. Howard was in the drama department and I told him about the play and he read it and he said, 'let my students read it, and do a reading', his drama students. So they did. I don't remember anything about it, but I remember that my engagement with the horror – the holocaust – was of course tremendous. In the writing... writing about this, in writing this play and thinking about it and reading the material for it. So that was my education, it was a kind of self-education.

My education was deepened many years later by being in Israel sometime in the, I'd say '80s, and visiting in Israel and going to the trial of John Demjanjuk – the Ukrainian guard at Sobibor and Treblinka, who was called by the inmates of Sobibor, 'Ivan the Terrible'. I... I stumbled upon that trial. I happened to be in... in Israel and saw in the papers that it was going on and so I went there every day and I sat there three or four hours a day while it lasted, and got to know Demjanjuk's lawyers. I was interested in them, one of them was an Israeli, an Israeli lawyer. He got plenty of death threats, he was the defence lawyer. I also talked to other people who were around the case. I didn't get a chance to speak to any of the survivors, partly… – who had testified against Demjanjuk – partly because they didn't speak any English, they spoke either Polish or Yiddish or Russian or in Hebrew. But their testimony was pretty, pretty powerful.
And I couldn't get it out of my mind either and so I wrote Operation Shylock. I used the real Demjanjuk case in the book. So, the holocaust has made its way into two of my books – not as the main subject of the book – but made its way into the books, and also into a third book, which would be The Ghost Writer, in which the character of Anne Frank is summoned up. She's not there, but she's summoned up. And so... so partly it was a self-education, and partly I read all the books that other people read – that we've all read. I've seen Shoah, the Lanzsmann movie documentary.

Primo continued my education, he and I became friends for a brief time after I had a conversation with him in Turin on the publication of one of his books and that conversation appears in my book Shop Talk. And education didn't come from Primo directly, it came from reading his books, and they're... they're positively brilliant I think. The first book, which was called – in English, here in America – Survival In Auschwitz, which was called in Italian If This Be A Man. And the second book – I forget what it's called here in America – but it's called The Truce... The Truce in Italian, about his journey home to... to Turin from Auschwitz. And there is no chronicler more valuable than Primo and it's a... it's a masterpiece for ten different reasons. Just to have the moral poise that he has in reconstructing his days there in Auschwitz. And then he exceeds that even, in his book called The Drowned and the Saved, which is really a... a reflection, a meditation, on Auschwitz. Whereas the first book Survival in Auschwitz is a record of his... of his time there. 
I have other... friends who are survivors. I can think of two others right now, both of whom I did… both of whom appear also in my book Shop Talk and I'm sure I was drawn to talk to them and converse with them and write about them, because they had this experience. One is Aharon Appelfeld – the Israeli writer – and I did a long conversation with him in Shop Talk, and Aharon had been in the camps as a boy... as a child, a boy of eight or nine. And his story is hair raising because when he got to the camp his parents were taken away and they were immediately incinerated, and then Aharon found a hole in the fence and... and escaped. I think he's nine years old, escaped from the camp and lived out the war in the woods, in peasant villages and so on. Hair raising story. He's... he's written it several times over in... in several of his novels. And Aharon is a close friend and I see him whenever I... whenever I go to Israel, when he comes here I see him and we're very close. 
The other friend is a Czech Jew named Ivan Klíma, and Ivan too as a boy went to Theresienstadt which was the camp where the Czech Jews went on the... on the way to Auschwitz, you know. Kafka's sisters were in Theresienstadt on the way to Auschwitz. Fortunately for Ivan he... he didn't get passed on to Auschwitz, but he grew up in the... in the camps… camp. So I've been drawn to these men because they have experienced what they've experienced, and also because all three of them are... are wonderful writers, you know.
[Q] And do you have anything to say about it now? I mean, about the Holocaust?
Not really, no.

In August 1945, I was 12 years old, and the war had been going on since December 1941. And the war was coming to… we knew the war was coming to an end. We knew that... that the Germans, indeed the Germans had been defeated already and just left the Japanese, and that there... they had no longer had an air force, etc. We were advancing on the mainland. So the war was going to end in the next six or eight or 10 months, so it came as a surprise – in I think it's August 6, 1945 – when the... when Hiroshima was bombed. What did I think? I thought it was great. My parents thought it was great. People came out in the street with pots , we... we were at the Jersey shore for the summer, sharing a house with three other couples. There were four couples sharing this little house, and the people came out on the street with... with their pots, and hammer on their pots with kitchen instruments, you know. And... then a few days later there was the bomb on Nagasaki, and the war was over. And there was a great celebration in the streets in a tiny little town on the Jersey shore, and the town emptied out onto the streets. It got dark in the evenings, and people went on to the boardwalk, and there was a great celebration. I was with the kids, you know, and we had what used to be called a conga line. You know what that is… a kind of dance… and we made this long conga line, and we... we went all the way up and down the boardwalk with this... this thing.
You would see people on the boardwalk, sitting there – there were benches all along the boardwalk – who weren't celebrating, who were sobbing and I remember being struck by that, as who wouldn't have been? And there would be… in my memory it was mostly women; there probably were men as well… these – I thought then and I still think now – were probably the parents of... of boys who had been killed. The war was over and it was a wonderful thing, but not... not for them. They would have this grief forever. So, that's what Hiroshima meant to me, at the time. I remember hearing my parents and their friends sitting... sitting on the porch that night, the night after the bomb went off, and I can remember my... to this day, my father's voice saying, 'wait, you'll see now. Everything's going to be atomic', you know? So that's the sum of it, really.

Well, I was no child when the war in Vietnam began, and so I was aware of it mightily, responded to it – in my way, mightily – and lived through the tumult and turbulence on the home front. I guess Vietnam begins in the early '60s, and like everyone – mostly everyone else – I... I wasn't really alert to what it meant at the beginning, but once Kennedy died and Johnson began to increase the number of troops in Vietnam and the war expanded, I was unhappy. And you saw it. You saw it every night on the television, and it was so... monstrous and... so unnecessary. That's a political judgment, but that was the one I came up with, as did many other people. And it went on and on and on and on. It didn't really stop until 1974. That's about... 10 years. And I was vexed by it. It wrote letters to the editor, I marched in marches – one thing I really don't like doing very much is marching in marches, but a lot of people who didn't like marching in marches, marched in these marches. And I was in New York at that time… I was living in New York… and the... one of the centres of the anti-war activity in America was here... here in New York, and I went to teach-ins. I didn't perform in any of them. I believe I... I went to Southeast Asia in the... in 1969 or '70 for about six weeks, and I... I didn't go to Vietnam; I went to all the other countries around it. And I went there because I had an... an assignment from Look Magazine, and I don't know what I wrote about it. I don't remember any longer, but I was able to see some things, which were all the GIs who were in... in Bangkok on R&R. These traumatised bodies, you know.
The... the Vietnam War did not influence my work right off. I would say that the noise... the noise and the theatrics of the '60s, which certainly had been stimulated by the Vietnam War among other things, but the noise and theatrics of the '60s had worked its way in my bloodstream, and so I wrote Portnoy's Complaint. It isn't the only reason I wrote it, but it helped.

Early in the '70s, I wrote… I had an idea for something, a story, a novel, about a girl who blows up a building in her home town as a protest against the Vietnam War. And... probably I wrote this in about '72, perhaps '73. – the war was finally coming to an end. But I couldn't get anywhere with it. I think now I... the reason I couldn't get anywhere with it then was the war was too close. I was responding to the war in a very immediate way which wasn't...  didn't help what I was writing. But after... every book that I wrote in the years following, as soon as I finished the book, I would go to my drawer and take out this 60 or 70 pages of manuscript that I had written about the girl who blew up a building, and say to myself, there's something here. But I couldn't for the life of me figure it out. And every single book ended the same way. I'd finish the book—I'd get it out of the drawer.
And then in the 1990s, the mid-1990s, after I wrote Sabbath's Theater, I took the 70 pages out and I suddenly saw how I could write this book about the girl who blew up a building. In part, it was because I had written Sabbath's Theater, which is about a...a mischief maker, a terrific mischief maker in Mickey Sabbath, not a man to everyone's taste. And I enjoyed writing that book, but now I felt like writing about a very different man, and that man was Swede Levov, the character in… the father of the girl who blows up the building.

And finally, I saw the way to write this book, which was to take this man, Swede Levov, and put him at the centre of it. And then I could tell the story about this girl and her anti-war activities and what it was like in those years. I couldn't tell what it was like in those years, in those years, but some 15 years had to pass and then I could tell what it was like in those years. I was no foe of anti-war activists at all. I was, in my way, an anti-war activist, but there was an extreme edge of the anti-war movement which was violent. And the girl in the book – her name is Mary Levov – is wooed by that anti-war... that radical edge of the anti-war movement. And so that's what I wrote about.
So I never wrote a book about Hiroshima. It never touched my life immediately, nor did I have knowledge enough to write such a thing, but I did write something that had to do with the persecution of the Jews in World War II, in The Ghost Writer. I did that again in Operation Shylock at the Demjanjuk Trial. And then I wrote this book about... about the... the domestic turbulence created by the Vietnam War.

What happened there in the mid-90s was that I... I saw the family. In the beginning, all I saw was the war, and that's why I... I hit a barrier and couldn't go any further. But when I saw the family, then I had a story to tell, which is how this family was ravaged, destroyed by the war – not because they had a boy fighting in the war, but because they had this daughter. Now, what interested me about the daughter, right off, was that I was writing about what was... what had really gone on. A strange thing happened in the Vietnam era, and that is for the first time in American history, with perhaps one exception, there were a body of young women, anywhere from 17 to 23 or 24, who were in the forefront of a political movement, a violent political movement. Now, in the Suffragettes, in the Suffrage Movement there were plenty of young women there, but it wasn't violent. And there were half a dozen names that I read in the paper, young women I read about, who were arrested, in jail, and some of them wrote autobiographies. I read those books, and I was interested in this phenomenon. Where did this come from? What was driving the violence in these young women? In the young men, what was driving the violence – among other things – was that they themselves stood to be drafted. But these young women didn't stand to be drafted. Their rage was kind of pure, you know, purified of any personal motive. I don't say that to celebrate them. I just say that to describe them.
So that's how I got the idea for the girl and not for a boy, for a... for a son. There were plenty of sons who were in that movement as well.

How... how else did I unlock these 70 pages? By working; I didn't have any plan beforehand, just I... just sitting down and writing and beginning with two words. I began with two words which were Swede Levov, the name of this character. Once I had those two words, I had hundreds of pages to write. Who is he? What is he? What happens to him? Where is he? Where does he live? Who are the people around him? How is... how is he destroyed? How is he destroyed? This... this stellar citizen, this wonderful man, really – good looking, intelligent, athletic, star athlete, a good businessman, a hard worker, a loving father, a loving husband. He marries a New Jersey girl who is Miss New Jersey at the Miss America contest, I think in 1948 or something like that. So he... he has everything, as some people do, and he's brought down by a cataclysm in his family. So I had plenty to write.

I don't remember what it was like writing that book. It took a couple of years. I'm sure I had my bad moments, but on the whole, I had the propulsion. I went forward with it. I... I can no longer… it's 15 years or so ago… I can no longer remember what the process was.
 

If I remember the scene correctly, he's in the car with his 10- or 11-year-old daughter, and they've had a wonderful time in... in the ocean. They've been playing in the ocean and it's... it's been wonderful and thrilling, and they're both very happy as they get into this car to drive back to the house. And, if I remember correctly, the little girl, 10-year-old girl, turns... turns to him with her bathing suit on, wet and so on, and he has his suit on, and she says to him, 'kiss me the way you kiss mother'. And he does. He does. And he then wonders for the rest of his life if that lapse – that unconscious lapse, actually – isn't what turned her in the wrong direction. Why does he think that? Because he's trying to find anything to explain how his darling daughter could have grown up to be this bomb... bomb maker, bomb thrower. And he thinks... he thinks of a thousand reasons. The book is full of people speculating and speculating as to what made her do it. I don't have a... I don't have a clue as to what made her do it, but I know that what happens in such cases is people speculate about what made her do it.
So the kiss… How did I think of the kiss? I don't know. A guess,,, It's a guess. It's a guess. You... you don't know what you're doing when you're writing, by the way. That should certainly be said in these six or seven or eight hours. You're... you're going forward and letting invention have its way, and if the invention seems silly or preposterous or outlandish, you think, let it sit here. Just keep going. Live with it for a while. Live with the... the outlandishness for a while. Maybe it'll pay off down... down the way, you know? Sometimes you... you follow something that seems outlandish at the time, and it leads you down the wrong... the wrong way, the wrong path, and you have to junk it. But this I... I kept. This little dialogue, this tiny little dialogue, she says, suddenly out of the blue, 'kiss me the way you kiss mother', and he… I don't remember the paragraph in which he decides to do it… I don't think he does decide, I think he just does it. I got lucky. I got lucky. You get lucky in a... in a book, you know? And if you can pile your luck up, pile the chips up, you know, you can cash them in.

Well you ask, how do I come up with making the girl into a Jain when the father discovers her. Do I know about that beforehand? Am I writing my way towards that? No, I have no knowledge of it whatsoever. The... the book, page by page, advances your understanding of the book. I remember now about Mary's being... being a Jain. Some years earlier, let's say 10, I had become interested in Jainism… or is it pronounced jahy-niz-uhm? I'm not sure. I did some studying and I made some notes. No... no reason whatsoever, there may have been an immediate reason, but I forget what that was. And when I was writing American Pastoral, somehow I came… luckily, I came up on these old notes about Jainism and I thought, great, that's what I'm going to do. Accident plays a tremendous amount of importance is all this. Now, especially in... in the last half of a book… it's always so – if the book is going well – that things begin to come at you... from the air, from the newspaper, from what you're reading, which has no relationship to your book… that belong in the book, and you stick them in. They just adhere to the book because you want a sense of randomness in the book, too. You don't want it all pointed in one direction. And... so it should have a... a random-seeming surface – at least, I like that – while it's moving forward. And, I remember coming upon the Jain stuff in my notes and then writing the scenes where her father goes to see her in this little hovel she's living in as a Jain, and, of course, I was thrilled by that discovery.
There is the excitement, you know. If you can make it through the ordeal to the excitement, you're home free. But there is the excitement when you see it... that it's alive, it has vitality, it has variety, it has knowledge. Whose knowledge God only knows; it isn't mine. But somehow there's... there's knowledge there. And this all comes out of the invention. It all comes out of the invention. So I... I begin a book with virtually nothing. There may be others who start with more. I... I'm not sure there are many. I have nothing. I have some sentences. I have some words. I have a predicament that someone is in. And then I advance my understanding of the book by writing it.

What are you doing? You're making an object out of words that purports to be reality, and my goal is to make the object, to make the object whole, to make the object complete… these are ideals… to make the object solid. I don't… I'm not striving for anything else. I have no political ambitions for my books, political agenda. I have no moral agenda. I have no ethical agenda. I'm being driven by the ethic of the novel as a work of art. That's why it's often very peculiar, when the novel is published, to read about it. Because whatever is written, however intelligent it may be, has very little to do with what was driving you. So in a way, what's written about it is none of my business. I once had lunch years and years ago with a baseball player named Keith Hernandez. He used to play first base for the Mets. And so I asked him all the fan questions, and I said, 'Do you read... do you read the sports page the next day?' He said, 'Why should... why should I? I was there. I was playing in the game', you know. Likewise, with the novel... that's my game. I'm playing the game.
 

There is the excitement in writing that comes with discovery, completion, novelty, a new idea, so one is sustained by those... those various forms of excitement. But fundamentally, in my experience, it's an ordeal. I didn't know that at the beginning. Had I known it at the beginning, truly I might not have done it. But I was innocent, of course. I was young. I wanted to be a writer. So I began with these short stories, and a novel, and so on. But somewhere around the 10th year, it occurred to me that this wasn't a piece of cake, and I was sweating it out, sweating out realising the book in the early stages, sweating out coming up with a new book after I had finished, and so on. And as the books piled up, I... there was more and more of the ordeal. If I had a child who wanted to be a writer, I might try to discourage him or her. Many jobs are very hard. This is one of the very hard ones.

You're on your own. You don't have any assistance. You wouldn't want any. You have to figure these things out for yourself. For me, in silence. I don't have the radio playing. I can't even stand if my neighbor's radio is playing. When I was first living in New York, I had to move from a rather nice apartment to another one because my neighbors wouldn't stop playing their stereo all the time. I can't take any noise, I can't even have a cat in the room with me – that's too much distraction. Of course, it's very inward. You're ruminating, ruminating, ruminating, and then you start typing. And so there's no one there with you, and you work. You must work for a good number of hours because if you just work for one or two hours, you couldn't get anything. Often what happens in the first few hours is... is nothing. You have to have... to tolerate failure and frustration because many, many days there's nothing or there's half a page. I always tell myself if I have a page at the end of the day… this is when I'm beginning the book… if I have a page at the end of the day, that's fine because a page a day is 365 pages in a year. So I never… I try not to rush, and I try to be content with very little. It's hard to be content with two lines. It's hard to be content... it's hardest to be content with nothing. And that happens, repeatedly, when you're writing your first book, your 15th book, or your 30th book.

Someone said writing is rewriting. I rewrite while I'm writing, and I rewrite when I finish the draft. I'm always rewriting. I rewrite the paragraph. I rewrite the sentence. I rewrite the page. Everything goes through the mill... quite a few times. Then you have a draft and you re-read it, and you can have a terrible time after you've... you've re-read your first draft because it's... the book is terrible. First drafts are terrible. What you have to do now is use your good critical sense to figure out what's wrong, so you're... you're not a... a writer for the moment. You're your own sternest critic. What the hell is wrong here? And then you become a writer and you think, what can I do to rectify that problem?
So these are the... these are the processes that you use to write... to write the book. When you're done finally, you're not certain you're done. You know that you just... you've exhausted all the possibilities you can think of for the book. You can't think of anything more to stick into this book. That's it.
I give my books – when I finish them – to various friends to read, three or four or five people. And they read them and then I'd go and sit and talk to them for an hour or two. And, when I hear all of them, I go back to my typewriter and I think: what have they said individually and collectively? What have they told me about this book that I didn't know and I didn't see? And very often you can crack it open and go back into it because of these other voices, you know. You may not rewrite the thing in its entirety, but suddenly scenes occur to you, sharpening people occurs to you, and so on.

Of course, your... your knowledge isn't sufficient for the book you write. You have to find... go and find some things out. I don't count on research to a great degree, but I do find things out. And when I... as I'm writing when I come upon something which is... where I realise I don't know enough, I generally stop and go out and find out then or I wait until I'm done.  I just keep writing. I write out of my ignorance, because that can be useful too. I... I can make up the Miss America contest and get it all wrong, except that I've invented some things that I wouldn't have invented had I been locked into the knowledge of it.
I'll give you an example. In Miss... American Pastoral, Dawn, Swede Levov's wife, participates as Miss New Jersey in the Miss America contest that used to be in Atlantic City. I... I don't know why I… I don't know why I... I don't know why, I don't know why. I don't remember why I wanted to make her a beauty pageant winner. It was the fun of writing about something I didn't know. But then at a certain point, it was not fun because I didn't know. And I happened to be having a dinner one night with my friend Ron Silver, an actor who is now dead, and Ron told me that he was having an affair with an ex-Miss America. I think her name was Tawny Little, and I said, 'Would you mind terribly if I telephone her? She's in California', I think she was an anchorwoman on some television station out there. No, he didn't mind. So I called up Tawny Little and we talked. The trouble was that Tawny had been Miss America very recently, and my Dawn would have been Miss America in the 1940s, and I said, 'Do you know a Miss America from the 1940s?' And she said, 'I'll call you back'. And she called me back and told me that she had contacted… I think she was Miss America 1949… a wonderful woman named Yolanda Betbeze – B E T B E Z E – she was Miss Alabama, and Yolanda became Miss America. And so I phoned her, and she came to see me right here, I think. And she was terrific. She was very smart, very funny, clearly she had been spectacularly beautiful although she was now probably a woman in her late 60s, I guess, maybe... maybe middle 60s. And she just opened up whole ideas for me that I couldn't have had on my own, and I asked if I could see her scrapbook from when she was Miss America, and she showed it to me. And I proceeded... I proceeded now knowledgeably. And so the wonderful thing about the knowledge is that as you're writing, you invent off of the knowledge. You... you're not hesitant. You're not frightened. You're emboldened by what you now know. So that's an example of very pleasant research, I must say.

Let me try to remember first. It'll take a moment... What did I have to find out to write Plot Against America? Once again, I didn't know what I had to find out until I reached the point in the book where I didn't know it. So I don't do research in the commonly understood sense of the term, which is I sit down in a library and I read 50 books, take notes, and then go home and think about them and then start the book. I... I find things out as I'm going along which, once again, it... it allows me the freedom of invention. I can... I can invent the most outlandish thing if I want to. I'm not bound by the facts. I can correct it later if I have to, but you never know where that outlandish thing is going to land you.
In The Plot Against America, I had to... I had to begin, if I remember correctly… I had to begin with imagining what happened, that is the... the nomination of Lindbergh at the Republican convention, which never happened, and the election of Lindbergh in the 1940 race against Roosevelt, which never happened. And that didn't involve any research. That was just my fable-making mind at work. Now, I did at some point read a biography of... of Lindbergh and... and some history books about that period. I imagine I was looking… I didn't want to get Lindbergh wrong. I wanted to invent a coherent alternative life for him, a parallel life for him, and I didn't want to caricature him or revile him – or Mrs Lindbergh. I wanted to imagine this other reality as true to the facts, as close to the facts as I could make it. Inasmuch as this Lindbergh administration never happened, and inasmuch as I have written the only history of the Lindbergh administration in existence, I... I could… I didn't need books. I didn't need books. I had to make up legislation that the Congress would have enacted under Lindbergh, and I just made that up the way that people in Congress make up legislation themselves. I just made up legislation. Legislation I invented was vaguely... hostile to the Jews, but only vaguely so.
I... I didn't want to… when the book was published, by the way, people wrote about it and said it was about fascism coming to America, but it wasn't. The... The Lindbergh I have in my book is not a fascist. He's just somebody who unnerves the Jews, and that's something else. That's real. That the Jews are unnerved by – or were in the old days in America – were... were unnerved by certain politicians is absolutely true, and that I knew about. That I knew about. My father was very vociferous about... about politicians, and I knew who he hated because he thought they were enemies of the Jews. So... and then there were people who weren't politicians, people like Henry Ford and Father Coughlin, Gerald LK Smith, another character from those years, who were hostile to the Jews. So although I was making up my counter-reality, there were places in the reality I... I had known as a kid that I could look to for verification.
[Q] That was a game to do that, I suppose?
Yes, it's a game. It's a game. A game is a good thing to call it.

The characters in The Plot Against America are the Lindberghs as I imagined them in this story, Charles Lindbergh and his wife, Anne Morrow Lindbergh, and my family, among others: my mother, my father, my brother, me, my aunt, and my cousin Alvin. But there was no cousin Alvin. I needed a cousin Alvin, so I created a cousin Alvin. So I wasn't locked into my family as it was – I used my family whenever it yielded something, and if I needed somebody else, I brought them in, invented them. Alvin is... goes in to the... goes to fight the fascists in Europe and loses half his leg and comes back and, because there's nowhere for him to live, he lives with us and he sleeps in my bedroom with me. That never happened. I have no cousin Alvin. All my cousins who fought in the war are older cousins. None of them was wounded or killed, miraculously, and none of them ever lived with us. None of them ever slept in my bedroom with me. So where does it come from then?

Well, in about 1945, when I was 12, my mother had an older sister named Ethel. My mother and she were just as close as they could be. They were only two years apart and so on, and lo and behold, in 1945 when Ethel was probably about 45 herself, 44, she came down with cancer of the mouth, the tongue, awful stuff. And because of her house, her family situation, there was no one to look after her after she came out of the operation... out of the hospital after the operation, and so my mother and father came to me – my brother was in the Navy – and said, 'We want to have Aunt Ethel come here while she's recuperating and we want you to know about it'. And you... you can have your choice. You can sleep… I can sleep in the bedroom with my father – and my mother can sleep with my aunt – or I could sleep in my bedroom with Ethel, who I was very fond of. And, because I wanted to be manly at 12 and to be up to everything and not to be frightened of things, I said I'll sleep in my... my bedroom.
So she came to stay with us, and it was... it's an experience that's deeply imbedded in my memory. I can virtually remember the days, what happened, you know; the evenings, what happened. And... she was very weak, and she was doomed, and she was in bed during the day when I was in school. And I'd come home from school, my father would come home from work, and whenever he came home from work, my father would get her out of bed and say, 'Come on Ethel, you've got to take your constitutional'. And he'd walk her around the living room, and she would hold on to each piece of furniture she went by. Which was quite an education for a kid. I... I don't remember her crying. I don't remember her being in pain. I remember her tremendous weakness and what she looked like – she looked like... she looked like... like she was dead. And then she got so sick that she couldn't stay with us anymore. And she left, and she went to a nursing home and within a month or so – my mother would go every day to the nursing home – within a month or so she was... she was dead. That was it. That was 1946, and it was a strong experience. I'm glad I had it. I'm glad I had it.

At... at the time, was I upset? I must have been. I don't think exceedingly upset, but I must have been upset sometimes and... and frightened probably.
So there we are. It's 1946 and now we come to 2000, the year 2000, half a century later, and I need a... I need an Aunt Ethel. I need something horrible to witness in my book. And so I invented Alvin, the... the cousin who goes to war… for the British, I think, because America's not in the war. He goes to war and he comes back with half a leg, and he's... he's in bed in my room. And then I have to invent what happens. Well, it's a pleasure to invent what happens. I... I have an idea what it's like to... be in the room with somebody who's in terrible trouble, you know, and... but I... I veer away from that almost immediately because the trouble he's in is different from the trouble she was in. He's a young man, and so on. So I went out and I got some books on amputations. I probably still have them if you want to borrow them. But I got them from 1940. I wanted to see what the amputations looked like and what the prosthetic devices looked like in 1945, so I got a book on prosthetic devices. You can get all these online. Anything you want, you could get, but I had to get them from then – 1940s books. And I was, of course, as fascinated as I was when I was studying gloves for American Pastoral. So it was less... less like research and more like studying.
 

And then, lo and behold, I realised that I knew somebody who was an amputee. I'm so used to seeing him walking around, I forget he has a prosthesis on. It's a neighbor of mine up in Connecticut. And, so I called him up and asked if I could come over and talk to him. He was... he got it in World War II. And he was great. He took off his prosthetic device. He let me feel his amputation and see what it looked like. Then he put the prosthesis on, and then at some point he tried to show me what it was like to walk with one. So we did all that stuff. So the stuff starts to… the material starts to pour in. Now, you're going to have to put it through your... your mill here, you know, and refine out what's no good, but it's a great help to have this stuff. But not before – only when you need it. So I got to meet Yolande Betbeze, Miss America of 1949, I got to feel an amputated stump from 1944, about. But mostly I stay at home alone in a room, writing.

What it is to be a Jew. I'll try to make sense out... out of it. What it is to be a Jew. What it is to be a Jew, it... it changes every decade or so. There... I was... I was a Jew as a kid. I was a Jew in college. I was a Jew in England. I was a Jew in Israel. I'm... am I a Jew when I'm at work here? I don't know. But I grew up in the '30s and '40s, I'm not very conscious of the '30s – I was a small child. In a decade when anti-Semitism was... was very much alive in America.  Unashamedly alive. There was bias and discrimination everywhere, in the hotels, in the medical schools, in the restaurants, in the big corporations. And I imbibed the communal sense of unfairness and injustice and... and fear, I suppose. I don't think I was ever afraid of violence, but it was a fearful thing to be considered such an alien by so many of the big institutions that ran American life, and so I... I imbibed this sense of injustice in... when I began to be a conscious being and... which would be in the early '40s.
And I was tremendously sensitive to prejudice... as were many of the kids around me. I wasn't alone in this.

In the 8th Grade, when I was 12, our 8th Grade class refused to participate in a essay-writing contest that was given annually by the Daughters of the American Revolution, the DAR, which was quite a prestigious organisation in those years. Why did we refuse to participate? Because Hazel Scott, the black pianist – later the wife of... I can't think of it... Adam Clayton Powell, the congressman – Hazel Scott was denied entrance into the Constitutional Hall in Washington to give a concert, recital because the DAR, who owned Constitutional Hall, wouldn't allow a black performer. And so our little group of kids, when we were given the assignment to write a patriotic essay for the DAR, refused. This... this is very unlikely, it didn't happen. Refused. And the class was written up in the newspaper, what we'd done, and the class. The president of our class, a guy named Eddie Sable, was interviewed and his picture was in the paper. And then in a nearby grade school, that 8th Grade class refused to participate and that was in the paper as well.
Now the point to make about both of these 8th Grade classes is that there wasn't a black student in the class, there wasn't a black student in the school. All these kids were little Jewish kids – both in my school, Chancellor Avenue School – and the other school, Maple Avenue School – that joined us.

As a result of this action, the class was invited to send representatives to a... a convention of the CIO Political Action Committee. The CIO is the Congress of Industrial Workers, Congress of Industrial Organization or whatever it's called. It's a labor union, it's the collective labor union. It was the most left-wing labor union we had in America. And we went, and I was one of those kids that went. There were about a half a dozen of us, and we all sat on a platform and watched this convention, and they all stood up and applauded us when we were introduced. And one of the speakers, a man named Dr Frank Kingdon, he was a liberal columnist in the newspaper, walked over to us kids and - I'll never forget it - he said, 'Boys and girls, you're seeing democracy in action'. And it was thrilling.

So, how did we get sensitized to this issue? We got sensitized... sensitized to it from being little Jewish kids who knew, through our families, through experience, through hearsay, that there was this bigotry against us, that existed. And so we were sensitized to the bigotry against Hazel Scott and blacks altogether. Now that wasn't being a Jew in terms of going to synagogue and that... what I'm getting at is the experience of Jews in the world and in America had sensitized our little class to this issue.

Until I was 16, I lived in this Jewish community. I... I never thought twice about it. I wasn't a synagogue goer. At 13... at 13 I was Bar-Mitzvahed in a synagogue. I was Bar-Mitzvahed on March 9th, 1946, which is... today is an anniversary for me. And I would... of course, I wanted to be Bar-Mitzvahed, I wanted to do well at it, but after that I never wanted to set foot in a synagogue again. I had no religion in me. And even after three years of instruction in Hebrew school, I didn't know what the hell they were talking about. I didn't know who these Bible characters were. I didn't know what Hebrew was. I didn't know why I should learn it, but I did it. I did it for my parents, I did it for my grandparents, I did... and I did it because all my little friends did it.
But once I was free of that, I never went back into a synagogue... if I could help it. And when it came time to go to college, I went to... excuse me... I went to a college that was predominantly Christian. It wasn't a religious school, I mean the students were... were predominantly Christian, 95%, 100% white the college... the college was. And then there were 2% of... of Jews. I... I deliberately made that choice. I didn't know anything about the school. I certainly didn't know anything about it academically. But I knew from a friend of mine who'd gone there that it... it wasn't like our high school had been. Now why did I want to do that? I wasn't in flight from my background, I wasn't in flight from the neighbourhood. I was curious, as a kid. I'd begun to read in high school, on my own, American writers, Sherwood Anderson, Theodore Dreiser, Erskine Caldwell – I would read him secretly – and Thomas Wolfe and other American writers. And I wanted to know what the hell this America was. It wasn't that I didn't feel like I was an American kid, as... as a Jew, but what about the rest of the place? What... what is it like beyond my neighbourhood? So I went and I began to learn a little bit, I suppose. Mostly I studied my studies.

So I was one... one Jew when I was 10 years old and I was another Jew when I was in college at 20, which was I wasn't surrounded by... by Jews. Now it happened that two of my closest friends were Jews, were among the very small Jewish minority. Two... two fellows who helped... who along with me... founded the literary magazine. And then after college, I went off to the... University of Chicago, where there were loads of Jews, but no religious Jews that I could ever find. They were all deeply secularised. And that's what I discovered I was, too. And then I went in the Army and there were just a couple Jewish guys around. It ceased being an issue. It ceased being an issue. When I came to New York in the '60s and began to make friends here, I – this is after I'd been teaching at Princeton for a few years – I did fall in with a... a circle of Jewish fellows who I found wonderful. Smart, quick, funny, free-wheeling and they were my friends. But if you were to come to New York... if you come to New York from Omaha, you're going to find you're going to fall in with a group of Jewish guys who are smart, quick, etc. If you came here from Nome, Alaska, it's going to happen to you.

I began to go to Israel to visit in the '80s, I think, and that was very different. There I was confronted with this... this country of Jews and its... its problems. But I wasn't one of them, and I remember I had lunch once in the Knesset with [Ehud] Olmert – who later became Prime Minister – and he was telling me how the Jews were going to come to Israel... the American Jews were going to come to Israel in... by the boat-load to settle the West Bank. And I told him that no one's coming here. The Orthodox are coming, but none of the secular Jews are coming, not even the religious Jews who aren't Orthodox are going to. They're very happy where they are. I said, 'There is a Zion, it's called America', and he... he was stunned. And I think he's written about this conversation somewhere. So what it is to be a Jew shifts with where you are. But I'm genealogically a... a Jew, but I've been acculturated 100 times over since I was a child, by the world – the world of letters, the world of people, the world of politics – and it seems to me to have been a very fortunate trajectory. I think it's fine that it worked out this way. I have no nostalgia for some other way of being a Jew.

Jews were the Americans I knew best. Mississippians were the Americans [William] Faulkner  knew best. Middle... Mid-westerners... Michiganders were the Americans that [Ernest] Hemingway knew best. The... the Jews were the Americans I knew best. But I never felt for a second – despite the fact that I knew there were enemies out there, real enemies and... and in America – I never felt for a second that I wasn't an American. That was always, I think, the... the powerful, the... maybe my strongest identity, my most powerful identity, and I wanted to be an American. That's why I read all those books. That's why I read all those... all that American literature. And I wasn't trying to graft myself onto the tree, I was trying to find out what the tree was like in all its branches.

I... I wrote Sabbath's Theater... I believe I did the writing in 1994 and 1995, probably, so I was in my early 60s. It began, I think, because I was looking for a place to be buried. It never had dawned on me to look for such a place earlier, but I guess now that I was in my early 60s I thought I'd better take care of that. And, partly I... I guess this came to mind because I... I'd just buried a friend of mine, a woman of 42... 42 or 43 – who I was very fond of – and I found a spot for her to be buried in a nearby cemetery to me, to my house, and got a stone for her cemetery... for her plot, so I was involved with the cemetery for really the first time in my life. And it dawned on me... and then I used to go out and visit her grave in the early months after she was dead. I would go out once or twice a month and just stand there. And so it dawned on me that I better take care of this.
And I thought, well, what about this cemetery right here? And I... I found it wanting. It's a beautiful, old cemetery – probably 19th century, early 19th century cemetery – set in a little hillside and... but I just... now comes the comical part – I just thought I wouldn't be comfortable there. And aside from my friend, I thought – more comedy – who will I talk to? Now these are real, silly thoughts. So I began to go around looking for a cemetery, and every one was lacking. Why was it lacking? Because I would have to be dead there. That was what was wrong with the cemetery. And so eventually I stopped looking in nearby towns, to where I live, and came down to New Jersey one day and went to visit my parents' cemetery – which of course I'd visited in the past, but never with an idea to finding a grave there. There was no grave adjacent to them. But the... the guy who runs the cemetery, the poor guy who runs the cemetery – now dead himself – we walked around together. And he... he was inadvertently, highly comical. For instance, I pointed to a plot that was near my parents' plots and it was just where there was a gate, but it was within... you could look up and you could see my parents' grave from there. And he said, 'Mr Roth, I don't like that for you, there's not enough leg room', he said. So I stayed with this comedian for half an hour or so and gave him a tip and so on.
And then I... it began to dawn on me that a book about someone who's looking for a grave to be buried in might be interesting. In addition, especially if the guy was going to commit suicide and was shopping around for a grave – which is what happens to Mickey Sabbath in my book. That's one... one strand.

How I came upon the rest of this character, I... I don't remember. Prior to writing Sabbath's Theater, I'd written Operation Shylock, and you can sometimes figure out how a book came to be written, or... or begun at least, by thinking about the book before that you're writing in response to or reaction against the book before. You're writing a kind of corrective to the book before. But I can't figure that one out. I came upon it, is all I can say. He was... I... I made him into a puppeteer, with hand puppets and so I had to find out about puppetry. And I... somehow, don't ask me how, I met some puppeteers and talked to them and they introduced me to their friends. And I hung around with them a little bit, and then there was... there's a big puppet festival in New York on alternate years down and... and around Soho and so I went to this puppet festival two... two times in a row. And I got interested in puppetry and so I made the guy a puppeteer.
But what... those things are, I hope they're integral to the book, but they're peripheral... peripheral really to the big thing about this guy, which is that he's... he's grief struck. He's grief struck. And the... the most important people in his life die. One, his mistress, Drenka, dies and they've had a long, jubilant sexual affair, both of them in the same... both of them in their 50s and 60s while it's going on. And... and also his brother... his slightly older brother who was killed in the war, World War II, when Sabbath was a boy. And from this loss he has never recovered.

Now I speak of grief being at the centre of the book and death being at the centre of the book and yet the book is highly comic. How that came to be, I don't know. I liked his expansiveness as a man. I... I liked his cynicism, I liked his comedy and it allowed me to write a very expansive novel. Drenka, his... his lady-friend, appears in the book as well, and I think she's quite vivid and she's... there's a death scene that is quite unusual, I think. So the book was saturated in grief and death and yet it is enormously funny. So that seems to me an achievement of sorts.

I like Sabbath's Theater very much. I haven't read it for about 10 or 12 years, and maybe when I read it again sometime, I won't like it, but I... I think I will. The energy in it is genuine. The comedy is genuine. The misanthropy is genuine. And a misanthrope can be a very funny fellow, so I learned.
[Q] While this is going on, you lived with Mickey Sabbath, I suppose. You know, you go to bed and you wake up in the night, I suppose. What's that like to live with somebody... you know, you talk about him as a finished person, which he is... you've made him. What's that... can you say anything about what it's like to live for a couple of years with somebody?
Yes. Well, you... you live with the... you invent the character and you live with the character. And the fact of the matter is that there's no one in this world you know, including yourself, as well as you know the... that character. We don't know people outside of books, of fiction, the way we know them when we either write the book of fiction or read the book of fiction. Everybody who's ever read Madame Bovary knows Madame Bovary better than they know any other woman in their life. This is the... this is the great charm and value of fiction, among others, and that is that we know in ways... the reader knows in ways he or she can't know in life.
 

Inventing a woman. It's the same. The range of human emotions that a... a woman experiences is not different from the range of... emotions that a man does. Her... her interests in life, one has to imagine or ask or you've observed it. I've... I've observed many women, and have known intimately more than a few women. And the... the book itself brings forth the characters, man or woman.
In... in my book, The Human Stain, there's a character named Faunia Farley who is the paramour of the hero. And I... I rather like that portrait of her and I remember asking myself, when I was writing it, what is she interested in? What is she interested in? What does she talk about? Aside from the biographical information that you have to invent, where is she from, what was... what was her childhood like? But what – now, at the moment, in the book – what interests her? What does she hate? What frightens her? What's gotten her into this pickle, you know?
So I don't find that there's much difference between one and the other. Of course, I can... my... my books, in general, the major figure is a man. And... except for one book, When She Was Good, where the major figure is a woman, a young woman. I... I don't know that the task is any different with the one or the other.

I'm interested in sex, and have always been. Beginning when I was a young adolescent and I discovered sex. I didn't know much about it but I... I was, like most of the young adolescent boys I knew, I was terrifically engaged by the idea of it, even if I couldn't actually practice it. And I've... I... I look back on my own sexual life with women with terrific gratitude. Some of the happiest and most intense moments of my life are associated with sex or sex play, serious sexual activity. So I have had reason to think about it. And thought early on, I guess, why shouldn't it be in literature, in fiction, in a novel? I'm not the first person to... to think that, but in the 20th century, writers were given permission that they never had before to write about sex, beginning perhaps with Henry Miller in America, DH Lawrence in England, you could be open and graphic.
Now, you're not just open and graphic, you're trying to write a work of fiction so you're not advertising those moments, but sex should be integral to the story you're telling.

As for the... the sex words, they're too... writers were given permission they never had before. Beginning with Ulysses I suppose. And everybody had to discover how to use those words. A brand new vocabulary of what are called dirty words. What are you going to do with those words? Are you... are you going to use them at all? In what circumstance? And if you use them in dialogue are you also going to use them in the narrative? They're... they're strong words. Maybe not... maybe not any longer, by the way. But when I began to write in the 1950s, they were strong things to type out on the page, you know. So it's... it's...writing about sex involves fictional choices and tact, and tactlessness. And you don't want to be necessarily indecorous, but you don't necessarily want to be decorous either. So you have to have a good ear. And be able to weigh the power of the word.

Well, I don't know if I'm good at it. I do it. It seemed to me native material. It didn't seem to me outlandish. Let it in, I thought. Let it in. Deal with it, and learn how to deal with it. To go back... to repeat what I said earlier, I think that my generation of writers had to learn to handle this dynamite. And one of my colleagues was a master at it, that was John Updike. Updike in... especially in the Rabbit books... in Rabbit is Rich and Rabbit at Rest, he's... he's wonderful. Writers like [Saul] Bellow stayed away from it. There are a few sexual moments in Bellow's books and needless to say, they're masterfully done. But he... he stayed away from it. He was... he was that much older than us, Saul was 12, 15 years older, came of age in the '30s rather than in the '50s. I don't know about young writers now. I don't... don't read very much contemporary fiction. But I do know that it was something that one had to think about, you know.

Well, I'm interested in writing about sex because sex... sex looms so large in people's lives.  And at... at a certain point in their lives, not all the time.  But during... during one lifetime there are intense sexual experiences, more or less. And that's why I guess it showed up in... in Sabbath's Theater and in... to a minor degree really... in American Pastoral. In American Pastoral I... I have a few pages in which I talk about the... the sex life of the main character, Swede Levov, and his wife, Dawn. I didn't have that in the book when I finished the... the first or second or third draft of it. I remember I gave the... that final draft to my friend, Judith Thurman, to... to read. And after she read it, she said, 'What is sex like between them?'  I said, 'I didn't think it was necessary'.  She said, 'It is'.  She was right. So after speaking to her, I went home and asked what is sex like between them and then I thought, well, look, the cliché would be that because he's so proper a person, that it would be quiet and over the period... over a long period of time, inconsequential. So I said, then do the opposite, do the opposite. Make these... make this couple an unlikely passionate married couple. So I wrote those few pages, I think they're okay. 

Well, I wasn't bold, to use your word, when I started out. I... I was trying to think when did I begin to let sex into the books? And in many ways, it was by my fourth book, that was Portnoy's Complaint. Prior to that, I... I tiptoed around... around it. I... it just didn't come to mind with what I was writing. But with Portnoy's Complaint I took a big leap into the... what [Joseph] Conrad called the destructive element; 'In the destructive element, immerse yourself', he said. And I did it... I did it in Portnoy's Complaint with... I jumped in all the way. The words, the acts, the forbidden words, the forbidden acts. I was emboldened by what? I don't know what the hell I was emboldened by. I was in my 30s. I was emboldened because I was in my 30s. That's... that's probably true. I was emboldened because of the tumult and turbulence of the Vietnam war years had taken on me. I was emboldened because I had a good idea. The idea of the psychoanalytic session being the backbone of the story.
And... and then after that I was further emboldened and I wrote this book called The Breast, about a man who turns into a breast. Don't ask me where I got that idea from. I have no idea. I... I just thought simply, what if a man turned into a breast? And everything else followed from that. I had to invent what it would be like if a man turned into a breast.
I don't know after The Breast what book had sex in it. I... I guess the first of the Kepesh books, The Professor of Desire, did. And that was deliberately... it's there in the title, it was about desire. What happens... what does desire make one do? What does the absence of desire, or the loss of desire make one do? That's what the book is about, in part, which is this... this young man loses the desire for this woman he loves. It's a hell of a pickle. It happens all the time. I didn't make... I didn't make these things up.

Yes, it's... it can be very serious and it can be quite ridiculous. And I've written books like The Professor of Desire where it's pretty serious, and then I've written books like Portnoy's Complaint where it's quite... where the situation, the sexual situation, is quite ridiculous. And... and then in Sabbath's Theater where it's both serious and ridiculous. For instance, to... to skip to Sabbath's Theater and the death scene I mentioned earlier, Drenka is dying of cancer in a hospital. She's near the end. Sabbath goes to see her... it's... their affair is a secret, but he goes to the hospital to see her when he knows her husband isn't visiting. And she is hallucinating from morphine and he sees the whole situation, the... the drainage bags, what she looks like, how... how she begins to hallucinate and then at some... at some point she has an accent, she has a Serbo-Croatian accent, that's where she came from, she came from Yugoslavia.
And she says, she reminds Sabbath on her deathbed about the time they pissed on each other in a brook and the brook was in the woods, and the woods was a place they went because they could be alone there. And... the woods of a very wooded area. And a stream ran through and in... in that stream, they... they pissed on each other. And she reminds him while she's dying, of this. And she... tells him how she felt when they were doing it. And then she says, 'How did you feel?' And he tells her, that really he wasn't as... though it was his idea... he wasn't as good at it as she was. And it goes on for three or four pages and it's a very touching scene. But what are they talking about? The ludicrousness of one person pissing on another person, you know. So I love that scene to this day. I think it's as good a death scene – deathbed scene – as... as I can write, because I found the right wrong topic for them to be talking about. The right wrong topic.

Conrad's line, 'In the... in the destructive element, immerse yourself'. I... I don't remember where that comes from. I think... I think it's... maybe even in Lord Jim, but I... I'm not sure. That line struck me the first time I ever read it and it stayed with me all my life. Sometimes it's an interesting statement, if... if you're thinking of art, and it's a devilish statement if you're thinking of life. Though I, in life, have sometimes immersed myself – much to my regret – in the destructive element, so I wouldn't advise it for... for life, but in... in fiction, yes. In a way – though Mickey Sabbath isn't a murderer or a rapist or... or a thief – he's... it's... it's a destructive personality that he has. And I enjoyed pursuing that, seeing what he would do, seeing what he would do. There's a... you invent a predicament, a situation, and then, though you're the... you're the puppeteer, like Sabbath, you... you see what he does. Yet you're doing it. So it's happening simultaneously. This can furnish you with sheer delight. And you're doing it, but you don't know what you're doing. It's probably close to improvisational acting where you're... you're just back with your resources and have to produce something.
I'm trying to think of any other books where... as I said earlier, let... let the blank-blank in. Let the 'destructive', as it were, in. Let the unpalatable, in. The unpalatable deserves to be examined as much as anything else. And once again it's only in fiction or in drama, I suppose, that the ugly and unpalatable is exhibited for our education. Sophocles long ago on the Aegean – as Matthew Arnold said – Sophocles lets the unpalatable in. Literature begins with the unpalatable, The Iliad. Jealousy, rage, murder.

What... What I was thinking while you were talking, was that the power of a book resides to a large degree in the main character. But it also resides with the cast of characters. And the uncanny thing for the writer is the invention of the cast of characters. So I have Swede Levov, you know, and I begin to think about him and his problem with his daughter, and then I have to invent the daughter. Now all I know is she's going to blow up this little post office in the town, so all I know is that he... Swede Levov has got a daughter who is going to blow up – and she's 16 or 17 – blow up the post office in this town. But what is she? What is she? She just can't be a bomb thrower. What does she say, do? How does she act? And then you've got his brother and then you've got his mother and father. Then you have his daughter's handler, as it were, terrorist handler, that girl. And you begin to accrue a cast of characters and, this may seem obvious, but they have to be right. You know Emma Bovary by the men in her life. Charles is as great an invention as Emma. The... the lovers she has – the... the Duke or the Count, whatever he is, and the drapier [sic] – you see her behaving with them. So one of the gifts is the ability to people the stage, and either you have it or you don't. Either the other characters are papier-mâché characters or they're interesting.
[Q] Are you as good as Flaubert do you reckon?
Probably not. I don't think so. There's a new translation of Madame Bovary, which I haven't read but I want to read because I... I can read that book every year, you know. And Sentimental Education I can read every second year. He's... he's remarkable. And he figured out realism, you know, he figured it out.

I think most... most novelists relish the details, relish the individual line, relish the three lines of description. All the stuff that's never spoken about in... in reviews and so on – never mentioned – is where the writer's passion for thoroughness resides. There are... there were novelists who... whose passion wasn't for thoroughness, if you think of [Albert] Camus and The Stranger. It's... it's very austere, it's very slender. And... and then on the other hand there are the books rich with detail and it's your delight marshalling all the detail and finding a way of expressing it. It's... maybe it goes back to Ulysses, maybe the modern writer's education in detail begins in Ulysses. Joyce was passionate about them, had to have every detail right, and that's more or less the way I... I feel and most of the novelists I value feel.

[Marcel] Proust is... is not a writer who has had an impact on me as a writer. I... I have trouble with those sentences, and I... I don't mean they're bad, I mean that I... I have trouble holding them together in my head as I'm reading. So Proust... didn't have an impact on me particularly. No.

When my father began to be ill, with a brain tumor, in 1987, '88, I was living in London and I came back and began to look... look after him. And there – he was in Elizabeth... Elizabeth, New Jersey – I took a hotel room in... in New York because I couldn't go from Connecticut to New Jersey all the time and travelled over to New Jersey every day to talk to him, take a walk with him, take him to the doctor when he had to go. And then I'd to come back to New York in... in the evening and I found I didn't really want to see any... any of my friends, have dinner with anybody, and I didn't want to do any of that stuff. I was too down for it.
I... I tried not to let him know I was down and was falsely cheerful as people are in those situations. But I didn't know what... what to do with myself, so at night I began to write down what had happened during the day. Just to get it down. I had no other motive. But after the months went by, I had accumulated quite a few notes and it occurred to me that I was writing a book about his end. And I didn't know how the end would end, but I knew it would end, in time. And it did, of course. And then after he was dead, I put the pages together and – fortunately I had a very good record now of what had been going on – and I made a book out of it, a non-fiction book, a memoir called Patrimony. I was... I was writing it as we were going along, so it was never a burden to me, I never had to think, how will I write this? I just wrote it, and that's how it came... that's how it came to be.

The... the most gruesome, in a way, scene in the book is when my father had a brain biopsy. They went up through the roof of his mouth and took a piece out of the tumour – not out of his brain – took a piece out of the tumour and then they... it was a... it was a terrible procedure. And he... and he was a very strong guy, but by then... this point he had taken... he'd been through everything.
And then I took him out of the hospital and took him up to my house in Connecticut, and he was discombobulated by that procedure and the pain afterwards. And about a day afterwards, my young nephew and his wife were visiting him and me, and we were sitting out having lunch and my father excused himself and went up... upstairs. And we continued eating lunch and talking and then about 10 minutes passed and he hadn't returned – or 15 minutes maybe – and so I excused myself and I went upstairs, and I found that he had beshat [sic] himself. He had been unable... unable to move his bowels in the hospital when he came out and now this... this thing had happened to him. He couldn't control it and I... there... there was the house, the second floor, the hallway, the bathroom, the bedroom, all the places where he was, he'd... he'd tracked this shit, you know.
He was deeply humiliated and exhausted and I took... took him and put him in the shower to clean him off and then towelled him down, put him in a bath... clean bathrobe, put him on the bed and then I set about to clean this thing up. There are worse jobs in the world, but not very much worse. I'd never done anything like this before. It was everywhere. It was everywhere. And I set about cleaning it up, first with towelling, then with wash cloths. It was... it was like Raskolnikov finding the blood all over himself after he kills the old... the old ladies, and there's blood... blood everywhere, wherever you look, on his socks there's blood, on his cuffs there's blood, on the cuffs of his shirt there's blood. There's blood everywhere. Well, I was the Raskolnikov of shit, you know. And I cleaned it up, eventually getting down with a toothbrush and cleaning up between the – it's an old house with old floorboards – and cleaning up between the floorboards where the... where the stuff had lodged. And it was, like any activity, once you throw yourself into it, you want... you want to do... do the task, you know. But I felt this... this tremendous intimacy with my father, through this. And it was an emblem of... of his suffering. And that scene is... is in the book. I haven't read it in many years, but the task in that book was not to make things up, but to get things right. You could have left it out. I couldn't have left it out. It loomed too large in my memory of the whole adventure. No, maybe someone... another writer would have left it out, and probably there were readers who thought I should have left it out. But my temperament leads me to put that... to put that in.

At one point when he was staying with me, he wanted a bath. And so I took him into... ran the bath, took him into the bathtub... I remember – I don't even know if this is in the book – I now remember that he... he showed me how he gets into the bathtub to be sure he doesn't fall, and it was a very elaborate crawl... crawling-like manoeuvre and... and very touching, because my father had been a very strong man. And, yes, that's what I saw when I saw his... him in the bathtub. He was almost like a child playing in the bath. He patted the water, you know, it felt good. And what I was seeing in many ways was the end, the end was being... the end was being enacted in front of my eyes. There was no pain involved, fortunately, but just the... the diminishing, diminishing, diminishing, diminishing. And in the bathtub...
I haven't read, as I say, I haven't read the book in years so I don't... I don't really remember what I wrote but I think I wrote this – that needless to say, of course, I looked at his penis. Why wouldn't I? But what's interesting I probably... is I probably hadn't seen it since I was a boy when father and son do things together and it's absolutely natural, and when we would go swimming together when I was a kid, or he used to take me to the... the Turkish baths in... in Newark, my brother too, and we would all be naked, and we would have sheets around us. It was a great thrill as a kid to be amidst all the men, all his friends. These old men in their toga-like sheets, you know. And so then we all saw each other. I remember... I was a little boy, of course, being... fascinated by all these... all these balls and bellies and so on, and... and the farting. And... and we'd go on in the... in the... one room we slept in after we took the baths, we'd sleep in these sheets up on cots and there'd be a lot of men there, and there'd be this sort of concerto of... of farts, all of which delights and shocks a little one.
So I hadn't really seen him without his clothes on since I was 10 years old. And now I was almost 60 years old, and he was no longer 30, he was 80. And so the... the intimate knowledge of... of the other person floods in on you, especially in their helplessness, their vulnerability. I mean, doctors and nurses see this stuff every day, but we don't. And so I wrote that scene... that scene too.

All... all I can say is that everything in it did indeed happen and everything in it was spoken the way I have it spoken in the book. There are probably omissions, but I didn't have to invent anything. I didn't want to invent anything, that wasn't the point. It never dawned on me that I should make this into a piece of fiction because what... what was powerful for me and poignant was that it all had happened. It all had happened, it was... it was a chapter in my life. A true story. A true story. I don't think I've ever done that before or since.

My father had a housekeeper staying with him, so he... so he could... he... he ate... ate well and he could even have people in to have dinner, and he invited me over one night for dinner with him and his friend, Walter, who was a Holocaust survivor. And so I... I went. My nephews were also there, the housekeeper who was a friend of ours really, was also there for dinner, she... she made it. And... and he liked this, he... he felt like he was a human being. But the guy... I don't know if I can remember it exactly, but the... the guy was a gift from the god of writing. The god of writing looked down on me and put this fellow there for... for dinner. And my father wanted me to meet him because Walter was a Holocaust survivor and he... he'd written a book about being a Holocaust survivor and my father thought I could help him place his book. And he was a personable fellow, lively, in his 80s, and he gave me his book to read. So I took it home and I read it, and it was... it was pornography. It... it was about how – when he was living hidden away, he was hidden from the Nazis – he got laid all the time. And so... so I called my father up and I said, 'Do you know what this book is about?' 'No.' So I told him and we had a good laugh and so I put that in the book, too. But that was a gift... that was a gift from the god of writing. Yeah.

There is some physical violence in my books, very little I think. There's... more frequently, there's verbal or rhetorical violence, when people take... take extreme positions with each other and are... and are angry and are flooded with anger and rage. I... I have always liked to have characters in... strong opposition with each other, whether that's because I'm interested in... in that or not, I don't know. I've been in opposition with some people in my life and mostly I haven't, you know. So it isn't as though it's a prevailing theme in my... in my life. But it excites my verbal energy when I'm writing. So anything that excites my verbal energy I will... I will grasp hold of and then the job is, okay, it just can't excite your verbal energy, because then it's just an exercise or it's fake, but make it real. So I try to make it real.
And in Everyman, for instance, the main character goes... takes his girlfriend off to Paris for a weekend – he's an advertising man, he has an excuse – while his wife is at home. His wife learns about this. When he comes home, she gives it to him. I remember I loved writing that... that page. I wanted to see what it was like and what you say when you find yourself in that position, that the wife did, who had trusted her husband. And it was great fun.
Now it doesn't read as comedy but I was learning what it's like... I was playing a part, I was playing a role. And that happens over and over again.

When you asked earlier about writing about women, what you have to do is play the role. In The Human Stain, when the main character's girlfriend – he's an old man by this point, and she's a janitor in the college where he was a professor – when he says to her, and they're in bed, dance for me. And so she begins to dance for him, but what I describe is what she's thinking while she's dancing for him. And then she begins to needle him a little bit, while she's dancing for him, about the fact that he's an old man. And I'm playing a role. I'm playing her, and so I have to be as convincing as I'm able to be, you know. So you're constantly playing... you're playing all the roles, like Mickey Sabbath with his hand puppets, you know. He does all the voices. It's his hand puppet here, it's his hand puppet... he does all the voices. I do all the voices.

The... I don't remember the... oh, there's a very, almost pseudo-lyrical description of the... of the threesome having sex in The Humbling. I shouldn't say pseudo-lyrical, I should say quasi-lyrical. I don't remember that very well, but I do know that confronted with... with it, with the situation, the two women and the man, I had to figure out how to write it, and how to capture what was most intriguing for him to witness.
I have a... there's a threesome... this is not my spécialité, but there is a threesome also in Sabbath's Theater which is very funny. And not at all like what I was after in The Humbling. In The Humbling, it's dark and... and unusual... it's unusual. It isn't... it's a very small element in the book. I like the scene before that where they're sitting having dinner at a restaurant and he... he walks over to the bar to do something and he sees this woman sitting by herself getting drunk and he walks back to his table and says to... what's her name, the character? It doesn't matter. He says to his lady-friend – who is a lesbian, he's having an affair with a lesbian. He says, 'I've got something for you' and he walks her over to the bar and holds her around, standing behind her and they... they walk... they look at the woman... young woman he's thinking about for them... for her, and she begins to tremble with the excitement. And I like that detail very much, so I wanted to be extreme and accurate.
 

What do I make of it all? What do I make of life? I'm not able to conceptualise in... in that way. I... therefore, I'm a novelist. I have to be confronted with the... the human situation, the individual human situation, the individual encounter, the individual problem and then I can grasp it by... by presenting it as persuasively as I can. And so then I know about that and I know about that only for as long as I'm writing it. I don't know anything once I stop writing. I really think I'm quite stupid and dull outside of my writing. So I... all my intelligence is wrapped up in specific stories and I hope that in imagining the story that my intelligence, such as it is, is... is present in the representation. Not by my saying smart things, but just that my intelligence is expressed through the imagining of situations, in words. So I don't know what to say or make of life. I... I don't think I would be any more equipped to answer that question than I would have been at the age of 10. I... I look to others to... to do that, but my... all my brain power has to... has to do with specificity.

How about death. It stuns me. It stuns me. I'm familiar with it, as I wasn't say, 25 years ago. To begin with because of a family of four – my mother, my brother, my father and me – I'm the last one standing. And I know they're gone. I've known it for some time now. It's still stunning. Numerous of my friends have died, and I've been there at their funerals and at the memorial services and it's stunning. I was just in... in a church today, for reasons I won't go into, called St Bart's, which is on 51st Street and Park Avenue. I had something I had to do. And I remembered I'd been there a couple years back when Bill Styron's memorial service was held there, and I was shocked that Bill is dead. You know, I know he's been dead these few years, but being in that church where his service was, I was shocked. So I'm just shocked and stunned.

If I hadn't been a writer, I might not have been as conscious of my American-ness as I have been. But it is a subject... it is my subject as much as anything else. And particularly so in the books I wrote in the '90s. So I've been an American since 1933 in the '90s. But there in the '90s the nature of my American-ness – how I connect to America, what events I lived through have meant to me as an American – that all became prominent in my thinking, my imagining.  So once you've written books like American Pastoral and I Married a Communist and The Human Stain, you've done a lot of thinking about the country, almost as much as an historian might do.  Your... your end goal is different but you've contemplated the country and the country's impact on you in a way that you ordinarily wouldn't in a life devoted to engineering or dentistry or selling, you know.  Which isn't to say you're any less an American in that way, but you're not so highly conscious an American, necessarily.  So, yes, I have thought about the America I've lived through, for the sake of my... for the sake of my work. 

I no longer read the way I once did.  I no longer read the number of books I once did and I think I no longer read with the same energy that I once had.  My great era of reading was college, for one, where I had a very rigorous year, my senior year, of reading virtually everything in English literature and having to write an essay every week about what I'd read.  And that was a... a tremendous experience.  But my real reading took place when I was a teacher, and when I had to prepare a class for my 15 or 20 students.  What I taught usually was a kind of comparative literature course that I made up.  And then I read a... a dozen books a semester, maybe a few more, thought about them, thought about each book, wrote notes, took notes from them, prepared questions about them and prepared my own thoughts about them.  And I taught at a very good university and the students were quick and... and smart and it was a wonderful experience. 
So I was reading a novel a week in those years and those years... there... there were 12 or 15 years.  I no longer remember all the books that I read in that period.  I read a great deal of Kafka in that period, and taught Kafka.  I read and taught a great deal of Saul Bellow.  I read and taught Jean Genet, Mauriac, Céline, Colette.  Those are the French writers I... I taught.  I taught books by Mishima, the Japanese writer, Kobo Abe, and I taught books by Eastern European writers that I was familiar with.  I... and... but the richness of that experience was the reading and the talking.  And now I don't have the talking, I just have the reading, and it isn't the same.  It isn't the same.  I don't work my thoughts out with the precision that I would in the old days.  I don't hunt for the key to the book the way I did in those days.  So I don't know that my reading is over, but my reading of fiction is largely over.  I... I've been reading mostly history over the last years.  In the last six months, I've been reading all the books I could find on Roosevelt, the New Deal, Eleanor Roosevelt, America during the war. But the history... when I read history I'm compiling information.  And the pleasure is very immediate of taking in that information as you're reading.  I can't retain the information as I used to be able to.  So I do the best with what... what faculties I still have. 

Which American writers did I begin reading early on?  Those would be 19th century writers.  Melville [Herman Melville] and Moby Dick and some of the brilliant shorter things like Benito Cereno and Bartleby, the Scrivener and so on.  I was... I was mystified by that book; its plenteousness was new to me when I read it.  I read Hawthorne [Nathaniel Hawthorne] and have read Hawthorne as an adult.  Of course, I have taught a couple Hawthorne books, The Scarlet Letter and The House of the Seven Gables.  And I'm put off by something in the... in the diction, in the language, in the syntax that makes it semi-impenetrable to me.  Mark Twain I thought was wonderful.  I read Huckleberry Finn maybe every 10 years, and it's a stupendous book, and then as a figure, he's a stupendous... he's a stupendous figure.  Then I... when I was in graduate school I was very taken by Henry James.  I haven't read James in 30 years probably.  But back in the 1950s I... I took a course in Henry James and I was... and I was hooked.  It was... look, all this stuff was new to me then, so I could be hooked by Henry James and I could be hooked by Mark Twain.  Who... what two writers could be more different? 

And then in the 20th century, the writer I... I read when I was again in my 20s was Hemingway.  We all did, everybody did then.  I don't think anybody reads him at all anymore.  And the trouble with Hemingway's career, as... as everyone knows, is that he really only had a career of 10 years, in which he... in which he wrote at his.. at his best, and that is from about... the age of 25 to 35, when he wrote The Sun Also Rises and Farewell to Arms.  That's... for me the glory book is Farewell to Arms.  Both the war story and the love story are harrowing and... and touching.  And then he has the magic of that prose.  It's impossible to figure out how it's done, with such minimal means. 
Then at the end of his career, it seems to me, he wrote a few good books as well.  A book I like is called Islands in the Stream, and I don't know if that was posthumously published, I think it was.  So it may have been put together by editors, I... though I could be mistaken.  But Islands in the Stream was the first time Hemingway dealt with a man and... and his children.  The character in that book, whose name I don't remember for the moment, has about three boys.  They're... they're about 20 or so, or 18, and his life with these boys on this island is... is wonderfully done. 
And then there is two other books of Hemingway's that were published posthumously, one called The Moveable... A Moveable Feast, which is a memoir of his days in Paris in the '20s, which is very charming.  And a book that was cobbled together out of pieces by his editors called The Garden of Eden, which is Hemingway coming clean about sex, which I don't think he ever did.  And... but he introduces a hero with sexual vulnerability and a crazy young bride of that hero and I think The Garden of Eden is... is pretty good. 

The book everybody loves in America... you just have to go outside and tap somebody on the shoulder and say, which book do you love most?  They all say: The Great Gatsby.  And I am a real admirer of Great Gatsby, too.  It's gloriously fresh.  It's got some wonderful creatures at the periphery, but it's a bit melodious for my taste, actually.  And not as... I... I don't believe he's as strong a... a writer as Hemingway is.

The other writer who I... who I read in no school – you had to come upon this writer yourself – that was Henry Miller.  To begin with, he couldn't be published in America.  I believe I read... read him in editions I bought in Paris in my 20s by Olympia Press, I... I think that may have been...  His... his greatest book is a book called [The] Tropic of Cancer.  It's... it's a great book about sex and the body and the burdens of sex and the body and the delights as well.  But it's Henry Miller, I think, who educated me about letting the repellent in, let the repellent into the fiction.  Let the repellent into literature.  Let literature contemplate the repellent.  Not the clergymen and not the high school principal, but let... let literature contemplate the repellent.  And that's what he does in that work... in that book.  He does it to a lesser degree in a Tropic of Capricorn.  And then he wrote some crap, too.  But everybody writes some crap, so that's beside the point.  You... in a lifetime you write 30 books, and five of them are crap.  You didn't try to write crap, you followed a lead and it took you in the wrong direction. 

And then the... the powerhouse of powerhouses is, of course, Faulkner.  And there's a series of books he wrote between, I think, 1929 and 1932, something like that, which include As I Lay Dying, which to my mind may be the best book of the first 50 years of the 20th century, in literature, American literature.  It's... it's a remarkable book, it's... it's horrifying, it's funny, it's... it's ingenious, and Faulkner is... can be difficult.  That's not... that's not a particularly difficult book, but he can be very difficult, he is in say, Absalom, Absalom!.  So what you do when you read those difficult books is you get as much as you can get.  And don't worry about the rest.  Just don't be impatient when you're reading.  But they... they are hard, I know from teaching them to... to students.  But he's a visionary, he's a chronicler, both at the same time.  And he's a great fountain of language.  He is... Faulkner is his fountain and Bellow is his fountain and... and Thomas Wolfe is his fountain.  They all have different fountains and then there's someone like Dreiser who doesn't have a... a fountain of language, who sort of clunks along, you know, but these stories that he... he tells are terrifically powerful and for me the great powerhouse of a book is American Tragedy. 

In 1956 or so when I came out of the Army and went back to Chicago to... to teach a freshman composition, I had a friend, a good friend – still my good friend, named Dick Stern, a writer, a very good writer – and he was teaching at the... at the university as well.   And he had a class to which he invited writers as visitors and they would come one week and they would read some poems by his... his students or... if it was a poet... or some stories if it was a fiction writer.  And when Bellow was coming to Dick's class, Dick had read a story that I'd written called The Conversion of the Jews and he said he didn't have a story from his class for Bellow to read.  Could he use this story of mine?  Well, of course, I was thrilled.  And so I was a young faculty member, and so Dick had the class and I went and sat in the back of the class and Bellow talked about this story and so did the kids.  And he was very enthusiastic about it.  And that was when I met him.  So he never was my teacher, he was a... a teacher in the... at the university.

John Updike is, I think, our contemporary colossus.  John died two years ago... two years ago this month.  And he was a giant.  He was a giant.  There was nothing... no... there was nothing he couldn't write, which is to say he could find the sentences for anything.  He could describe anything.  He once sent me an essay he wrote, or a little... a little personal essay that he wrote about going to a football manufacturing plant in... maybe in Pennsylvania, where they manufactured American footballs.  And he described how the footballs were made and what they looked like and so on, and that's hard to do.  It's very hard to do without sounding... sounding  like an instruction booklet.  And... so even that... he could write even that.  He was a great writer of the erotic.  He dared... he had... I don't know if he had more audacity than I have, but I sometimes thought he did.  He... in his... one of his big books of criticism, he begins the book with some short pieces.  And one of the short pieces, you're reading along and you get to page 10, is a description of his neighbour's wife's vagina, as he imagines it.  And he does with his neighbour's wife's vagina what he does with that football.  You could make one when you're finished reading it. 
Then he could do colossal scenes.  I... I was talking about the erotic scenes,  they're... there are wonderful erotic scenes in Rabbit is Rich.  And he could write about illness as he did in Rabbit at Rest.  There was no subject that turned his prose off.  Or to put it another way, every subject turned his prose on.  He was a... he was a fancy dan, too.  He could be very fancy.  He could... he could be to the... to the English sentence what the Harlem Globetrotters are to the basketball.  He could... he could put it anywhere.  He could write short stories, beautiful short stories.  John had the ability to take an experience that he'd had the night before and the next day turn it into fiction.  Which didn't bear any surface resemblance at all to what had happened the night before, but he was inspired by an event or a person and he... he knew how to turn the thing to make it into fiction that stood on its own feet, you know.  He could write essays.  He wrote... he's... he's as good a... in his time, he was as good a critic as anybody.  Then he wrote that brilliant piece on Ted Williams, the great baseball player, when he went out one day to see the Red Sox play, it was Williams' last day in the Major Leagues and he described that day when Williams on his last at-bat got a home run.  It's called Hub Fans Bid Kid Adieu.  Wonderful.  He could invent headlines.  And then there are the novels.  The great ones to my mind are... are the last two Rabbit books: Rabbit is Rich and Rabbit at Rest.  But they're all interesting.  And there's a... an obscure book called Roger's Version, about computers, which he wrote before any of us even knew what a computer was, which is wildly impressive, you know.  So he was... it was good running in a race alongside John Updike.  It's good for writers to have great contemporaries because you can't slough off and we... in my lifetime, we've had a... a powerful American literature.  And there are... not everybody's a giant as Updike is.  Not everybody's a giant as Bellow was, but there... there's a lot of very strong talent. 

I've read... I read 19th century English literature when I was a student and read quite a bit of it, and... and poetry.  And there's some 20th century English writers that have meant a great deal to me.  I guess, Virginia Woolf is the strongest.  I... I think that just two books though.  I can't read the... I tried to read the others, I... I can't.  But the two books are... are masterpieces.  The masterpiece seems to me to be Mrs Dalloway, and very close to that is, of course, To the Lighthouse.  I... I couldn't get anything out of an English writer as a writer.  I can only get something out of an American writer as a writer.  I can be stirred up by an American writer and become inspired to do what I do, you know.  I've never found myself getting a... a jolt from an English writer, except perhaps Anthony Burgess.  I thought Burgess was very good.  And... and Virginia Woolf.  But my... my heart is here, and my sympathies are here, and my capacity to absorb is... is from books that are written here. 

Updike and I were... were friends at a distance.  We never really spent much time together.  When I would travel up to... to Boston for some reason or other, usually to see my publisher, I would call John and he'd come into Cambridge and we'd have lunch together.  And they were always amusing lunches.  Years earlier, we met on Martha's Vineyard in the '60s and John was there with his first wife, Mary Updike, and his... all his brood of children, who were then pretty young.  I was there with a lady-friend of mine and we were spending the summer there.  And we saw each other on the beach.  We laugh, there's a snapshot somewhere of... of me and Jules Feiffer with John Updike's dog, but not of... not of John.

One evening on the Vineyard that summer, I guess it was the summer of '66, we were all together at dinner at a mutual friend's house and we got to talking as we did that summer all the time about Vietnam and airing our grievances.  And to my surprise, John didn't have any grievances about Vietnam.  He supported the war in Vietnam.  And we got into an argument.  It was civil.  There was no shouting but it was... it was strenuous and I... look, I was trying to straighten him out.  He was trying to straighten me out.  And what happened is that that dialogue between us turned up in Rabbit Redux and my words are put into... into the mouth of his black hero who's a... who's a kind of revolutionary.  I forget what his name is.  And so, as I was saying earlier, nothing got by him.  Nothing was wasted.  Everything went through... through this transformation and he had this... tremendous fiction-making faculty and he had a sure hand, he... he rarely made a vulgar error.

The books I like least are – and if he were here he would say, of course you do – are the... the Beck books.  Beck, the writer who he writes about, this Jewish writer he writes about.  And he puts all his writing experiences into the life of this... a Jewish writer, Beck.  I'm not convinced by those stories. 

I can tell if it's not right for me.  I... I may... for instance, I'm... I'm not a fan of Nabokov's, with the exception of Lolita and Speak, Memory and... and Pnin, I like all those.  But I don't like Ada, Ada... Ada... a Pale Fire, particularly those two.  It's not for me, and I no longer have to read books that aren't for me.  So, one, you can tell... one you can say a book is bad, and the other you can say a book is not right for you.  If... I think it's safer to say it's not right for you. 

Yes, I have written a lot of books about assailable men and about assailable women.  So vulnerability is... is a subject obviously.  I catch them where they're weak.  They may be strong in lots of other ways but... but I seem to find them where they're weak, where life presses against them and knocks them over, you know.  I think this happens in quite a few books, going back to my first novel, Letting Go.  I'm not keen on that book any longer, but I was examining the assailability of this privileged young man writing under the... not the influence of Henry James but having been educated a bit by Henry James at that point in my career.  In When She Was Good, a book about a young – was she 19 years old – Lucy Nelson, small town in the Middle West, and she has to be strong.  She has to be strong to meet the disappointments in her life.  And to meet the challenge of the men who seem to her, to be her enemies; her father, her husband, her husband's uncle.   And she's destroyed.  She's destroyed. 
So... Letting Go is 1962 and When She Was Good was 1967 and here we are in 2011 and it's... it's all a long time ago.  But it... it appealed to me as a subject back then.  I can't tell you why.  I would imagine that human vulnerability enters into virtually any novel.  But I continued with all those books I wrote in the '90s; American Pastoral and so on.  I Married a Communist, A Human Stain, what is... what are they vulnerable... what are these people vulnerable to?  And I think what I... in American Pastoral, Swede Levov is vulnerable as a man might be to the loss of his daughter, to the violence in his daughter.  I think what Ira Ringold in I Married a Communist, and Coleman Silk in The Human Stain are vulnerable to false accusation, among other things, among other things.  So why I'm interested in... in when people crack, I... I don't know. 
 

Well, my four most recent books are Everyman, Indignation, The Humbling and Nemesis.  Each was written separate from the other.  When I began with Everyman I had no idea what... what book would come next.  I wanted to work out a book about mortality through the description of a man's illnesses in his life, and I would  rather... rather than seeing him healthy as we usually do in a book, we'll see him in... through his series of illnesses that begin when he's a kid, and which, of course, he recovers from when he's a kid.  And so that was... that was that.

When I began Indignation, it's... it's really a book about a boy, a boy of 18 or so, I think.  And I... that had nothing to do with Everyman in my mind, except that I knew my... my young hero was going to come to a bad end and... in the war, Korean War.  And so I had to get him into the War, and the whole book consists of my working out his fate so that he ends... winds up in... in the War, as most college boys didn't in those years.
 

The Humbling, a book about an actor who loses his power to act, I had another goal, which was could I get this guy to commit suicide?  Persuasively?  It's not... it's not easy.  Could I... and maybe I didn't do it... can... can I get this guy to kill himself because he thinks, because too much has happened to him, you know.  And so he has... he takes two blows, one blow is losing his magic, the first line in the book is he'd lost his magic.  Losing his magic as a... as an actor.  And the second blow is romantic and sexual.  And that was that. 

The Humbling was followed by Nemesis, which is about another strong fellow who gets destroyed.  And I suppose that's what they all have in common.  A strong fellow, whether he's a young fellow or a middle-aged fellow, a strong fellow gets knocked over, gets destroyed.  And... by some cataclysm.  And what the stories have in common is the cataclysm.  And what they have in common – I realised when I wrote the last one – is they each... each character faces his nemesis that was just... that was on his tail after him, he can't.. that he can't elude.  He cannot shake off and he cannot elude it.  And so, here are four more men of different ages brought down.  If you... if you like that kind of stuff, I give it to you. 
This also happens in American Pastoral, it also happens in... in I Married a Communist, it also happens in Human Stain.  Strangely, it doesn't happen to Mickey Sabbath in Sabbath's Theater.  He's already down.  You know that folk song, it goes, 'I've been down so long it look like up to me'.  Well, that's Mickey Sabbath, you know.  So when you think of all these heroes as though they were real people you knew, if you want to, the one who isn't knocked over is the one who is most cynical, most isolated, most despised... most despised, and yet he's not destroyed.  So what that adds up to, I don't know.  I don't know. 

How do you get the sentences to have some power at the same time that you're being accurate in your description or presentation of whatever is on your mind?  I suppose you have an interior metronome which is clicking out the rhythms for you.  And you have your kind of sentence, now every sentence is different... and every sentence has a different... falls a different way.  But altogether you have kinds of sentences you make.  It's in your own inner... inner ear.  Do I read aloud to test the sentences out?  Very rarely.  Very rarely.  Sometimes if a paragraph is... is difficult and no good, then I'll stop and sit in a chair and read it and try to see what's wrong with it.  But I... rather than hearing it, I'm helped by seeing it.  So I have to just keep seeing it on the screen. 
Now years ago when I wrote The Counterlife, which I think is 1985, I had an editor at Farrar Straus, who were then my publishers, named David Rieff.  And David is a... was a genius editor.  And... I was in England and I came to New York to give him the manuscript of the book and he read it and I read it and I thought there's something... there's wrong with it.  And so one day and evening, we sat in my room in the hotel and I read this book aloud to him.  And whenever the sentence was weak, one or the other... other of us rang the gong, you know.  And it's... it's wrong, and where... where is it wrong?  Where is it wrong?  So I did it with the help of somebody else.  You hope you have an editor who can help you out when you're in trouble like that.  Those are the best editors... are the ones who can... who can help you out with the sentence, you know.  But by and large you rely on yourself and by and large, as I said, there's this inner ear, inner metronome that ticks out the rhythm and that gives you the sentences, the cadences. 

The dialogue.  The dialogue is different from... from the narrative proper and there you rely on your... on your other ear, your ear for speech and what... you're not really imitating human speech, you're approximating it and you're, in a strange way, each writer invents human speech differently so that it approximates human speech but then if you read it aloud, it doesn't.  For instance, if you read Hemingway... that speech aloud, that speech with structure is so right when you read it in the book; it's not the way people talk.  It's not the way people talk.  But that's something else.  So you're... you're judging the speech by another standard than the one you're using to judge the effectiveness of the narrative sentences. 

I believe there have been four books of mine that have been made into movies and, probably, the first one is the most successful... was the most successful. It wasn't entirely successful, but it... it had the spirit, to some degree. It had some interesting performances; charming performances by a young actress named Ali MacGraw, and then a very good performance by... a very good performance by Jack Klugman, who played... played her father. It... it was Goodbye, Columbus and it was... it was all right and it had scenes – especially when those two were in them – which were good, which were good, which were true. The movie was a little shrill from time to time but that's how they represent Jewish vulgarity. But a little bit of shrillness goes a long way.
The next book was Portnoy's Complaint. That I never saw. Friends of mine who saw it told me to stay home, you know. I once tuned into a television programme, years ago, in which one of the... in which one of the actors from the movie was... was appearing, and so they played a clip of the movie and so I was stuck as I was watching it, and as best I could tell, it was a movie about shouting. People were shouting at each other.
The third movie was The Human Stain which had a very impressive cast of... of actors and had a horrendously bad script. The screenwriter emphasized everything that wasn't important and didn't emphasize everything that was important. So despite the acting, which was good, it didn't mean anything, and I don't think anybody ever saw it.
The last one was The Dying Animal and that was made into a film – they changed the name, because, I suppose, it had the word 'dying' in it, and they changed the name to Elegy, which means absolutely nothing. And, I... I thought it was pretty bad... pretty bad. So... so incoherent and so off the mark and I believe that was written by the same screenwriter who wrote The Human Stain, so he's two for two.
Other books – people have been interested in them, but nothing has ever been made. It would be thrilling to go into the movie theater and sit down and watch your... your book come alive on the screen, I'm sure it would be thrilling, and I always hoped for this thrill, but it never happened.

Yeah, there are a certain number of angry people in... in my books, beginning really with Lucy Nelson in When She Was Good and going up to, I don't know what  I guess in The Human Stain, Coleman Silk is enraged by what's been done to him, but that isn't the whole of The Human Stain. But, I guess, I can write about anger. Anger, rage, outrage excites my verbal energy, just as lust excites Nabokov's verbal energy in Lolita.
You're not feeling the emotions the characters are feeling when you're writing about them. That's the last thing you're feeling. So I... when I'm writing about Lucy Nelson being angry or Ira Ringold in I Married a Communist, being... who's a very angry guy, being angry. While I'm writing, I'm not angry. It doesn't work that way. I'm excited by what I can do with his anger. When Portnoy was angry, I was happy. And I remember it. I thought, yippee, here we go. Let him go, let him do it. So, I'm able, I think, to have some success in writing about anger. When Portnoy's feeling lust in Portnoy's Complaint, I'm not feeling lust, I'm writing, I'm finding the sentences. I have too much to do to be lustful too, you know. So, I've also written about other... other emotions, and... I would hope

Love! Do you know... Why don't I just repeat...? Speaking of love, why don't I just repeat what Charlie Chaplin said about love? He said it's love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love. It's love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love. It's love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love. It's love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love, love. Love. Love, love. You didn't figure on getting that, did you?
