quentin.blake

Quentin Blake, well loved British writer and illustrator, is perhaps best known for bringing Roald Dahl's characters to life with his vibrant illustrations, and for becoming the first ever UK Children's Laureate.  He has also written and illustrated his own books including Mr Magnolia which won the Kate Greenaway Medal.

I was born in Sidcup, which is London suburbia, it was perfect suburbia, with semi-detached pebble dashed houses, and in 1932 when I went to school, to the Church of England school at the end of the road, and I think I must have drawn then, quite a lot, and I think there are only one or two of those drawings, but I know that by the time I went to the secondary school, when I was 11, I could draw then. I mean, I think I could draw quite well, as it were, and I also, the other thing I was thinking about was… the only, every now and then people say, ‘What books did you have as a child? Were you influenced by them?’ And I think they expect you to be influenced by other illustrators, but at that time they were a fairly random collection of books, and there weren't all the picture books that there are now, and I can remember some of the drawings, but I can remember… as a sort of marker, I can remember I was given Chicks Own Annual, for 1937, on December the 16th 1936, which was when I was four, and… from my parents, and that was a sort of children's comic that had animals dressed up as people, particularly the chicks, which were referred to in the title, and… I can't remember learning to read at all. I mean that's something that, I must have been able to read that. The words were divided in half with hyphens, you know, to make it easier. Whether that system works or not, I don't know. But I can remember the drawings, in fact, when I say I can remember them, I still have the book as a matter of fact, but what was interesting to me about it was that I think I'm right in saying that I thought then that some of those drawings were better than others. And actually the ones that told the story on the front about the chicks in this sort of school, with… Mrs Duck, who ran it, and things of that kind; they were quite robust, and other of the drawings in the comic, in this annual, were rather sort of… wimpish, I think. And I think I still think the same, so I'm not sure that my taste has changed much, but I can remember that. And I and I remember it when I look at it, so I hope that's correct, but… I didn't get very conscious of drawing, I don't think… until a bit later on, although when I went to secondary school, which was Chislehurst and Sidcup Grammar School for Boys [sic] I know that I did a drawing which was there there was a school magazine of a fairly conventional kind, but I did a drawing when I got there, called After the Game which was a drawing of some boys in the changing room after a football match, and it was a very strange choice of subject, because… I hated football, and cricket and all games, as a matter of fact, and why I chose to draw that I can't imagine. I suppose because it was a new experience, I'd never played football before, and I didn't know what football boots were, and so on. So, and that was quite a sort of formal drawing. But mostly that wasn't what I did… and I think one of the… secondary school, grammar school, for me, was… it was practically the only sort of cultural… I mean, source of cultural input, I think… I got more or less everything from there, and I think that's maybe one reason why I've been, I suppose, interested in teaching ever since, because that was… that was a source of where everything came from, and there I was taught English very well by a man called JH Walsh, who also wrote poetry and I… there was a school magazine, which I wrote for, and did what now seem to be rather terrible drawings for, and there was a school play that I, that we used to do Shakespeare, which was a very good thing. Shakespeare was organised by the Headmaster, who was called McGregor-Williams, who was a bizarre character, rather like the sort of retired colonel, or something like that. He was full of… himself, shall we say, but he thought you should do Shakespeare, which was a redeeming feature.

He was also in Shakespeare himself, and so although he was short and fattish, with a bristling moustache, and was bald, he used to take the part, for instance he… well, Sir Toby Belch he did To The Manor Born, we said, but he also took the part of Mark Antony in Julius Caesar, and that's something that I remember about drawing, because I did some drawings of him, because I had a very minor role in Julius Caesar, I in fact had two very minor roles. I never read the whole play, I don't think, I just came on and said, 'Oh Caesar', at one point, and went off again. But I did some drawings of him. He had a leopard skin. I'm not sure whether he ever meant to get that on, and a ginger wig, and boots that he couldn't quite do up at the front, you know, and I did some drawings of him, and he had a visiting French boy, it was a sort of exchange, at the time, and this French boy didn't quite realise what discretion was, and told the Headmaster that, Mac, as he was called, that I had these drawings, and I thought, oh no, I'm for it. You know, really, because they were… and I took them… I was summoned to go and show them to him, and I thought, this is dreadful. But I took the two least exaggerated, even so, and took them to him. He looked at them and he looked at them for a bit, and I thought, gosh, what's coming next? And he said, 'Yes, I think you've caught something of the vigour of the man'. I had a rather similar experience later on in the army, but I did, I had a lesson in discretion. It was a lesson in caricature as well of course. But the idea of… I see, I think now, looking back, I mean I think that the idea of a magazine, of drawing in a magazine, of writing in a magazine, of doing Shakespeare on the stage, and drawing as well, must have been, you know, part of what I turned out to do in the end.

In fact art wasn't very important, I mean it wasn't an important thing in a grammar school, anyway. I don't know what it's like now, but I mean it was one of those things that, you know, wasn't considered very important, and I did it for what was it called then? General School Certificate, or something like that: the first exam, and I think, and I had to go and I had to go and see the Headmaster, and see if I could, he said, 'You have to give up something'. And I said, 'Could I give up chemistry?' Because chemistry I couldn't learn at all. And there was an elderly, rather sort of vulture-like chemistry teacher, who was a perfectly nice man, but I mean sort of rather wizened, with thin hair, you know and so I had to go and ask him if I could give up chemistry so that I could do art in the General School Certificate exams, and he said, 'Oh, I suppose you'd better'. And then so I could do art in about two terms, or something like that, which was okay. I now muddle up the exam at 16 and the exam at 17 or 18. I can't remember which was which. I remember going into one of those exams and doing a still life drawing. A pencil still life drawing, and you could, one subject was 16 green apples, I think… I can't think how they thought of that, but fortunately there was also, I looked round, and  you could choose between one or two things, and there was a lobster, and then I was alright, you know, there was something to draw. But I didn't get a great deal from… on the whole, from the art masters at school. In fact I remember one of them, he was quite a nice man, but was obviously used to teaching art to people who didn't really want to draw. And his idea was that you did sort of wandering lines, you know, across the page, like this at random, and then you looked at them, and you saw what you could find in that to draw. And I could only ever find octopuses. There was nothing else you could make it into as far as I was concerned, and it was maddening, because I wanted to get on and draw something. And that was what I really wanted, to draw something.

Two people were very good and helpful to me. One was not in the school, at all, but came to me through the school, because this was... part of the time was during the war, and so a lot of the male teachers had gone off to join the services, and a lot of part time people and retired people and so on, and Latin was taught by Mrs Jackson, who was a… well, she was very good, but that's another story altogether. But her husband, well, she saw my drawings, I did some drawings of her as well, as a matter of fact, and her husband was a painter and a cartoonist, and he had drawings in various magazines, including Punch at the time. And he was a painter, rather of the school of Modigliani, I would say, roughly, and she said to me, this is would be when I was about 13 or 14, would I like to go round and see them, and take some drawings to show him? And I used to go round to see Alf Jackson, about every six months or something like that, I suppose. And he would play the violin. He was a small, very sort of bright-eyed man, smoking a pipe, and the ash would drop on your drawings but he was very, I mean I realise now, that, you know, it was a tutorial actually, you know, I hadn't the concept at the time. And he would go through them and he was very good at talking about I mean he didn't distinguish one thing from another, in a way, because he would talk about Michelangelo or he would talk about who was in Punch that week, or he would talk about Modigliani, or someone like that. And he took it all perfectly seriously on the same level, and talked about drawing, and it was he who, he said to me, 'Do you ever have any ideas?' I thought, ideas? What, you know, I don't. And what ideas meant joke ideas, you see, and so I thought I hadn't… I had better go and have some. Because I mean that was the strange thing that I… drawing was also mixed up with funny things really as well. I mean when I went to that school, I was 11, 12. I was friends with two boys, one of whom I still know now, he's a white-bearded patriarch, but and we what was that called? We were a sort of society, the sort of thing that… children at school… and I think it was the III, I seem to remember it was Idiotic Inventions Incorporated, I think. And we had a book that we drew things in, and I think, you know, how to make blancmange fingers, you know, stick your hand in a basin full of blancmange. And other drawings, and I can't remember them now. It was an exercise book that we used for that purpose. But I started… I thought I'd better have some of these joke ideas. And I tried to do that, and I started sending them to Punch, because I was told how to do it, and you did drawings, or you did rough drawings.

Every couple of months, I managed to produce half a dozen, and I sent them in to the Art Editor, and then a few days later I got them back, with a rejection slip, and I got a wonderful collection of rejection slips. I may still have them. And the Art Editor at that time was Kenneth Bird, and he was Fougasse. He was a very popular artist at the time, and very good, and the first time I got one of these, it says, 'Room could unfortunately not be found for this, and it was therefore returned with our compliments and thanks'… very polite. And there was a little pencil, said, 'Sorry, not quite', from Kenneth Bird. And I took this to see Alf Jackson, and he said, 'Oh no. That means he quite likes it', you know, kind of thing. Otherwise he would have said nothing. So after a while… a year or two, I got a splendid collection of these things, which said, 'Sorry, not quite', on them, and then I thought perhaps I can do something else. And… going to London was, I mean although it was only half an hour on the train, it was something you didn't do very often. But I was going to… I think I was going to London with… another teacher, who was very important to me because he… he was an English teacher and a neighbour who lived across the road, he was called Roland Rahtz and that seemed significant to me, because he was actually called Roland Quentin Rahtz, which… and there weren't many people called that, so he and his wife were sort of not pseudo parents, but kind of pseudo… kind of intellectual parents, as it were. I mean my parents didn't have anything, didn't have books or art books, or anything like that, but they did, and they lived just lived across the road, and would go over and turn up on their doorstep for no particular reason except just to talk to them and look at books. But he was taking a school party to see Donald Wolfit in King Lear, and so I must have written to the Art Director, and said, I've sent 70 drawings I think I referred… in the past couple of years, could I I come, bring and show you some more? I think Alf Jackson must have put me up to that, I think.

And I went to Bouverie Street, and… Punch office was a very impressive building, it was like going to a gentlemen's club. And the men all wear pin-striped suits and that kind of thing, and there was a very sort of efficient secretary, who put me in a waiting room, and I sat next to a woman who was waiting there and I know now it was an artist called Pearl Faulkner, who I rather admired, but I didn't know that then, and the secretary came and brought me some magazines to look at, and said, 'Would you like to have a look at these?' And it was The New Yorker, which I hadn't seen, and which I sat there reading. And after about three-quarters of an hour this woman disappeared, and the secretary came back, and said, 'Are you still here?' And I said, 'Yes, I'm waiting to see the Art Editor'. And she said, 'Oh, we thought you were with that woman who was here'. And so there was this schoolboy was supposed to be her… the visitor's nephew or something like that. And it was too late then. She said, 'Oh no, you can't see him now, he's desperately snowed under', and so on and so on. So I had to go away and come back later.
In fact, the Art Editor had changed. Kenneth Bird had become the Editor of Punch, and the Art Editor was Russell Brockbank, who was a Canadian, who drew motor cars. And jokes about motor cars. Which he drew very well. He knew all about them, and was actually very nice to me, and they actually bought two of those drawings. There was a letter followed later, when I… after I'd been to see him again with a letter, which said, 'Congratulations to the youngest contributor' on it, which I think you have to say, really. Not that, I mean, Punch had a great tradition of youngest contributors. They were terrible drawings, really. They were very small, but they were in print, and… I suppose I was… I think I was 16 at the time. And I remember taking them, I showed them to… Mac, you know, the Headmaster, and… he had an extraordinary way of relating things to himself, and he… he looked at… and he could not… he put one hand over one eye, and his other eye bulged alarmingly, in a slightly sort of bloodshot kind of way, and he looked at it. 'Oh yes', he said. He said, 'Well, I was never in Punch'. You know, kind of gesturing at the other magazines that he must have been in at one time or another, although he didn't draw at all. And he was very good at things like that. If there was some small crime in the classroom, he'd come and at one point would say, 'I wasn't in Scotland Yard for nothing'. So this was… anyway, that must have fed my interests in some way or other.

I can remember two things that were well, sort of markers again… trying to remember things. One was going to, this was 1951, and going to… what was that exhibition called? The Festival of Britain, and, again when I think about pictures that I liked, or thought about, or was influenced by at the time, I generally think it was much earlier than I would have imagined. Because I suppose then I was 19, and I can remember going in there, and there were quite a lot of pictures there. There was the Lion and Unicorn Pavilion, with Edward Bawden and there was Roland Emett, who I'd know because he was in Punch, and there was a painting The Origins of the Land, by Graham Sutherland, and there were paintings by John Minton and by Keith Vaughan, and I remember those because I'd liked Minton, but I thought he was a very good illustrator, actually. I thought he was much better as an illustrator than as a painter. And this was rather a big painting, and it was good, but what was interesting was that Vaughan who… they were those sort of neo-Romantics, which you know, I was tremendously influenced by them at the time, wanted to be like that. But what was interesting about Keith Vaughan was he'd actually changed his style. He'd stopped being a sort of Samuel Palmer-type Romantic, and had become the sort of broad figurative painting that he went on doing after that. That was one thing. Another thing at about that time was that I must have… I think it was then that I bought a copy of Tristram Shandy, illustrated by Brian Robb.

The other person who was important to me, who came quite late, I think when I was in the sixth form, was Stanley Simmonds, who was a painter. I mean a proper, a good painter. And he was able to kind of develop my… encourage me in the way of art in general, really, and doing paintings. And he lived in Redcliffe Square. He lives in… he’s 80 something now, but he lives in Cornwall now, but he used to live in Redcliffe Square, which is actually why I live in South Kensington, because many, many years ago I came, and I was impressed with the size of the rooms and I thought it was a good place to be.
And so he had a lot of influence on me, but in fact I didn't go to an art school, and I'm not quite sure why. I think partly because I was taught English very well, and so I was prepared to read English at university, and by Walsh, and I think I also thought I mean one remembers what one thinks I thought that if I went to an art school, I might stop reading. I don't know what the logic of this was. Whereas if I went to a university, I wouldn't stop drawing. So I wanted to get that bit of life on board, I suppose, but I couldn't go directly to Cambridge because I had to do national service. Sometimes you did it before university, and sometimes afterwards. And I got into Downing College, Cambridge, which I was particularly I mean that was the college I was directed at by Walsh. He was able to do knew the kind of English that was taught there by FR Leavis, and so I was prepared to go in for that exam, and got in, but then I had to go and do national service, which I didn't enjoy at all.

It was a was culture shock indeed. You know, I was 19, or something like that. And the army was completely, a completely alien world, and I can remember for instant going to… I think I started off in Oswestry, in… is that Herefordshire? Shropshire, I think, and I can sort of have some pictures of… I can see myself, as it were, from a distance, as though in some dreadful film in… because one was issued with kit, and I've a sort of vision of myself staggering along, you know, way behind everybody else, carrying this stuff.  Also, when they gave it out, they gave you a jacket, sort of battledress jacket, and I thought, but I've got two jackets already they've just given me, I couldn't understand that. And then after a bit I realised they were shirts, but they weren't the sort of thing, shirts that I was used to wearing, and I think I was sort of shell-shocked really, having to get up at five o'clock in the morning, and go off and learn to fire cannons, and things of that kind. But… I then went… that was three months basic training, and I then went into the Royal Army Education Corps and I did I think it was 12 weeks’ training, in Beaconsfield, in Buckinghamshire. There was a big white house there, which was the sort of headquarters, but we all lived in Nissen huts, and it's very strange because there were three companies, so that they trained you on a sort of rotation system. And the company I was in, I think it was K Company, and it was run by a man called Archie Wavell, who was a major, and he was the son of Field Marshal Wavell who'd been the Viceroy of India, and so on, so he was really a completely professional soldier, but very interesting. And in some ways, I did more things there, in that 12 weeks, it was… because the other people were there, the sort of people that one was going to meet later on at university, and in a sense I was less inhibited about doing things then than I was later.

Archie would give lectures about… he always wore a kilt, and he only had one… he'd lost one arm, and he wore this sort of Scottish beret, and a kilt, because he was in The Black Watch, and he'd give lectures about the Bible and the army, or Shakespeare and the army, and things like this, and he was very interested in everything that happened, and we spent a long time producing... one of the lieutenants who taught there produced Ben Jonson's The Alchemist in which I played the part of the Alchemist, with a grey bald wig, and I never quite learned all the words, I don't think, it's a very long part, and helped paint the scenery. Two of us painted the scenery, I think, and there were a lot of things like that went on, and I suppose we must have learned how to be education sergeants at the same time, and he… Wavell was… he was very interesting. I mean when we put this play on in one or two halls, he would get there in the front row was… because he knew a lot of people, the front row was Alec Guinness, because Alec Guinness had been in a production of The Alchemist, and there was session also where we all sat round in some kind of mess building, and Guinness was sat on his own in the middle to answer questions, which was something he couldn't bring himself to do. He was really frightened by this, and but poor Alec Guinness having to watch this, and he played the part of Abel Drugger, and the young man who played that said to him how did he interpret it? And Guinness said, 'Oh, very much the same as you did'. But there was lot of I mean you could do some drawing as well, and fact Wavell asked me to go and draw a portrait of him. 'I'm very vain, I'm afraid', he said… and… I couldn't, I didn't do it very well. I did a better drawing of him when he wasn't there than when he was there. I suppose I was more inhibited. But he was very he was someone who was very interested in everything that was happening, and he said he would actually speak to you in an uninhibited fashion, which was unusual for an officer, but he was so much more I suppose, secure, and I remember him saying, 'Well I know, I was educated at Sandhurst, so I'm probably rather insensitive'.
And… who else did he get? Cecil Day-Lewis, who was the… and his wife, Jill Balcon, who was the Poet Laureate of the time came to read, and so it was a very strange it was a kind of it was a kind of an education. And he was very interested in everything that and he was just rather he must have known about my drawings because the ones that had been printed because he was rather disappointed they were so small. I think he ought to have done better later, but he came to see a number of people included at Cambridge after we'd gone there and I had one or two very good letters from him, which have disappeared, and strangely I lost them, and one I know, was in a book, which I lent to a friend, and he saw a mention to himself, about himself… tore it up, in a fit, but there was a letter; he was killed, in Africa, Wavell, and wouldn't have been looking after himself, you know, but I did have one or two very nice letters from him, but I they're all gone now. But he did take an interest in people individually, and I remember at Christmas, once, going home on 48 hours leave, or something like that. He was driving out of the camp, and I was just going off to the station. He stopped, and said, 'Where are you going?' And I said, 'Well I'm going to Sidcup'. And he said, 'Oh I'm going to see my mother in Reigate. It's just down there', you know, and so he drove me home. And came in for a glass of sherry, and went off afterwards, but it was a shame that he was killed, but I think he wasn't someone who would take care of himself, you know, I mean he would just go all out.

I taught English of sorts to enlisted boys in Aldershot, which was rather like being at Dotheboys Hall or something like that. It was very strange, and every now and then they'd all run away at once. But generally not with sufficient planning, so that they went in their gym kit or something like that, and the soldiers had to go out and collect them all up. But towards the end, I did one or two drawings for a magazine called The Soldier… and they weren't very good,  but what was interesting that I was asked to illustrate, or re-illustrate a book for teaching illiterate soldiers to read, and it was called either English Parade, or English On Parade, I can't remember. And it had been revised, and it needed new illustrations. And I did that at Eltham Palace, which was the headquarters of the Education Corps, which meant I could live at home, for three weeks. But you had to… it was very interesting, because you had to go and draw… I mean you went every day, to report, and drew from nine to five, or whatever it was, you know, and I think the officer who revised this book got paid. I didn't get paid, but I was allowed to live at home, and not wearing boots… you didn't have to wear boots, but you went in uniform, to Eltham Palace, and drew. And then you'd show these drawings to a lieutenant colonel, I think it was, in the Education Corps, who looked at them to see if they were all right, and they were generally you know, Bob sits on his kit, you know, and things like that, you know, sort of simple things. But it was… I mean that was the wonderful part of the apprenticeship in a way, because you know, you'd go and sort of stand in front of the desk and show him these drawings. And he'd go, 'Oh yes, very good Sergeant Blake, I think the grass looks a little bit long in this one'. So, because he was looking at it from a military point of view, so you had to sort of… the grass had to be cut properly. Or, 'I think the creases in their trousers should be a bit better than that'. And because you can't, you know, you can't actually cut the grass in a drawing; you just have to do it again. But it was very good, really, and I could claim it was the first book I'd illustrated. It was the first sequence of drawings I'd done. Sadly there… they already had a drawing on the cover, from somebody who'd worked in very much the same vein as I did, and they kept that, so I didn't get the chance to do the cover, but I did about 20 or 30 drawings inside, so that was good training, really. And you know, it was good practice in dealing with editors and things of that kind. And then after that I actually did quite a bit of drawing being in Aldershot was very boring, actually, once you'd got used to it. But I mean you were introduced to a different way of life and a different set of people. And a different language, you know, that you weren't familiar with, but I think I did a certain amount of drawing there, and I also I drew I think it was Lieutenant Harland as well, I did one or two drawings of him, which it was a mistake to leave on the desk, I think, but he was a nice man, and it was perfectly alright. After after that I went… I think after I was demobilised, after two years I went to France for the first time, I think it was then, to see a friend, in Bordeaux.

I can remember those Romanesque capitals in churches, from that time, very well. And I think it was then that I bought a book of 18th  century French drawings, and I think it was in the Place Gambetta in Bordeaux, I still have it, anyway, but there were two. I had forgotten to mention, there was a previous… when I was at school, I bought a copy of a book of the lithographs of Daumier, which I still have, and the 18th century French drawings, I still have. So that was part of the French influence, and I also, from then, I had a little sort of economy book of French posters at the end of the 19th century, which had got posters… I mean just little pictures in really, not a lavish coffee table book, but it's quite interesting, because you can get it out of there, and it's got posters by Cappiello and Stein and those people, names who came to mean more to me later on, and then I if I look back, I saw that hat I'd got them in this little book.

I was at Downing for three years, reading English, under Leavis and… in fact I think I was much more… Downing was a very sort of serious… or English at Downing was very serious, and… I felt rather inhibited by it all. I felt… I valued it, and I thought a lot of Leavis, I don't think he was what I would think of as a good teacher, because he was so self-centred, really, I mean on his own ideas, I mean you know, he had that funny way of talking… you know, sort of the… he said, ‘Well, the critical… position… this is so, is it not?’ You know, but I mean you could be there in a tutorial, or I mean a supervision, which he was so good, ‘This is so, is it not? Well it is’. So he told a rather a kind of… I mean, he was interested in you if you were really a very brilliant student, who was going to follow on. And… another headmaster from Chislehurst and Sidcup Grammar School was actually spending some time in Cambridge, and spoke to Leavis, and said, had he noticed me? ‘Yes, he is here somewhere’. But that was… I was… I think I was rather inhibited about… so that drawing in Punch, which was what I was doing, seemed a sort of slightly unsavoury activity, that you… sort of like something you did in private, that you weren't supposed to tell anybody about, and... but I'd been approached… I'd been contacted before I went up, by Nick Tomalin, who was Editor of Granta, which was… a student magazine in those days. It was before the title had been taken off and applied to books. And I didn't quite know what to do about that. In a way I was drawing for Punch anyway, and it was stupid of me in a way, because it… a magazine like that, would give you all kinds of opportunities of things that you could do, and I think I sort of got the wrong idea, because I was drawing for Punch, I... it wasn't the thing to do, and also I was…  I didn't quite know what to do with these smart boys from the other end of town, you know, who'd been to public schools and things. And I didn’t… and I felt rather inhibited about that. In the end I think I… art directed one issue, I think, or maybe two, but I wished I'd done more, but I didn't do a great deal about drawing, when I was at Cambridge, I was rather serious. I suppose I was serious about my studies, although I’d... I'm sure I wasted a lot of time. And I liked being at Cambridge, and eventually I started going… I think I went to some life classes at… Cambridge Art School [sic]. Sort of one afternoon a week, or something like that, because I really didn’t… you know I hadn't had any kind of training in in how to draw, and I didn't know anything about drawing the human figure. And so I… that was something I had to do later, and I couldn't do much about it then, or I didn't do much about it then.

When I'd taken my degree, I came to London University Institute of Education to do a teacher training year, because I thought you couldn't… I mean I… knew about being an artist, you know, and I… but I didn't think you could earn a living doing that. I didn't know many people who… who did, or hardly anybody. So, I came to the Institute of Education, and I did English teaching there, and it was… in some ways a bit of a disappointment, and it really was because they were… the English department there was very good. It was Jimmy Britton, and Frank Whitehead, and Nancy Martin, people who were well known in education and… associated with them was… Harold Rosen, whose son, Michael Rosen I did a lot of work with, you know, I still do… later on… but… they were… proposing ideas, which I'd already been introduced to in Cambridge, so all I could do was agree with them in a sense… so I didn’t… there wasn't sort of… it was… frustrating for me, and I… also I was living at home, and commuting to the university and so on. So that was… that was kind of disappointing in a way, and I don't think I was very good at… at teaching practice. But… one thing, which I… now remember, was actually during that course… I was written to or rung up by… I suppose the Art Editor of Punch, offering me the job of Assistant Art Editor, and… I don't know how you come to those decisions, really, and I thought I… this was during the course, and… for some reason or another, I mean, whatever the… my thoughts were, I turned it down. I thought it… it wasn't what I wanted to do. I think I… partly thought that Punch was a bit old-fashioned, or not very artistic, or something, I don't know, or… even though they’d been very nice to me, and I… because I can remember that… that I did that, the next day I had an attack of nerves and went to a phone box in London, and rang up, and said, ‘What would happen if I made myself available?’ And… they said, ‘Oh no, we've already appointed somebody else, the next in line’. And… but it was right, really, and I… it was funny that I… it wasn't that the, sort of, teacher training course was so attractive, but I somehow knew that I couldn't give it up then and go and do this other thing, so I must have had some idea of something else I was going to do. And when I finished the teacher training, you… you were, I think because you were financially… assisted in some way, I think you… you were supposed to go and teach, but I went and taught part-time, and… just a… a little bit. I did a bit of teaching at Croydon Art School [sic] and I did a bit of teaching at the French lycée [sic], where my friend, John Newman was a full-time teacher of English, and… but I mean a few hours a week… but the problem I had then was that, you know, up to then I could send drawings in to a magazine, you know, and say, ‘Would you buy this or not?’ And they bought it or not, sent it back. Mostly Punch, but one or two other things as well. But I couldn’t really ask for commissions, because I… because… you know, they might… it might have been… the next day might have been the exams, or something, you know, at least I didn't feel I could. And I just didn't know enough about drawing, so I went round looking for somewhere where I could go and draw.

I saw an article in a [sic] art newspaper, about Brian Robb, and I already had this… probably more than one of his books, but I certainly had Tristram Shandy. And he was somebody whose work I admired, and I thought, oh he's a… he’s an illustrator, he was a cartoonist, and he was a painter, and I thought those were all the things that I was interested in. So I… so I went to Chelsea, looking for him, and he… got me to… in those days you could join a life class, just from outside, and I think it was £7 a term, or something like that. And… I joined a life class… which was… non-vocational students. It was called the Odds and Sods, you know, there would be sort of blue-rinsed ladies, and ex-pats coming back from… from foreign parts, and… and that kind of thing, all drawing at different levels, and… it was run by a man called Edward Wakeford, who smoked a kind of… a very… very good water colourist, who smoked a kind of… Sherlock Holmes pipe. We used to go outside in the intervals, and talk about the novels of Joseph Conrad, and things like that, and Henry James, were the things he was interested in, and… I remember that there’s a… there was one of these middle-aged ladies saying, ‘Oh, Mr Wakeford… how can you get that lovely brown, like Van Dyke?’ And he said, ‘You can buy a tube of Van Dyke brown’. But… but he was very… he was good about drawing, but what was good about Chelsea was that… I found that they were… they were… it was at the top of the… above Chelsea Library in Manresa Road in those days, and you were sort of accepted there as being part of it, even though I used to go for two days a week, or something like that, just to this strange life class. You… you could meet the students, and go to their parties, and… and be part of it. And… Brian Robb… he said, ‘Don't join my illustration class’, he said, ‘it's too late for that now’. But again, he’d looked at the things I was doing, and… so I was sort of getting a tutorial from him really, and the… I went on for a couple of years doing this, a couple of days a week, and I've done lots and lots of life drawing. And it was interesting in a way because at that time, which was… the sort of late ‘50s, I mean, art had become very abstract, and you did basic design, and things of that kind, and where there was life drawing, it was a kind of a piety, and it was curious that… I mean I was going there because it was a… I had this appetite which needed to be fed, and you could draw from the model, and then you… you know, then you'd go away, and still I'd go on drawing, from the model, but in my head, you know. It made an enormous difference. And then I would go and… I mean I was still… because I thought I couldn't make any money, I was still living at home in suburbia, in Sidcup, but I would go home… and do paintings there. And… but after a couple of years I… I suppose I felt I'd done enough drawing there, and… but the meeting… talking to Brian Robb was… was again… I went there to look for somebody I thought would understand what I wanted to do, and you don't realise at the time you've done something quite significant. Because… I went off, and for… for two or three years, I was totally freelance, and just working for magazines, and… and started doing books, which is another subject, but… I suppose… a few years afterwards… he'd… he’d ring up once a year or something like that, or I might… I might see him, but he… he transferred from Chelsea to The Royal College of Art, where I think he took over from Edward Ardizzone who… who retired, I think.

He rang me up one day and said, 'Would you like to come and set a project to the illustration students?' Which… I mean, was a novelty to me; I'd never done anything like that, but I went and… I invented a book cover project which was really… something I really didn't know a great deal about. But… and then you… they did it and you went back a fortnight later, and I went back and did a crit of everything they'd done. And… then Brian said, 'Just come down to my office, we'll have a few words'. And… he said, 'Would you like a part-time job here?' And it took me about, you know, five seconds to decide the answer was yes…which was different from being, you know, Assistant Art Editor of Punch. And I… and I imagine… so I started the next… I was looking forward to starting in that… that autumn, in October, or whenever it was, and… it was strange though, because I thought, a part-time job, it was actually… two days a week, I think… and I didn't know too much about art… I knew something about Chelsea, but I didn't know too much about art schools, and I imagined this was a very, sort of, humble role, in which you came in and did a little bit on a part-time basis, and crept away again. But of course, when I got there, I discovered there were only three people teaching in the department: Brian was one, Sheila Robinson was another, Paul Hogarth used to come in occasionally, and… and me, you know, so… so that in fact you… you were actually part of the… of the team, and… and I really… I mean, I sort of quite soon became Brian's lieutenant, effectively. And… and we kind of ran it between us, and we spent a lot of time talking to each other, I mean he… he was a very well stocked mind, a very interesting person. And so there were just occasions from time to time, when we were in his office, and I'd say, 'Perhaps we ought to go and see how the students are getting on… on now'. But… and the other thing that was very… I mean, I had to sort of learn how to do it after I got there, really. I mean I had some thoughts about education, which I think were… relevant in fact. I mean, the great trap in education is to do, you know, unto others as was done to you, which is… which is a dreadful mistake. I mean you have… every bit of education is a new situation, and you can… come to it with some experience, but… you have to address that situation, and so it's… it's different. I mean as it was there, teaching in a postgraduate situation, from… from actually teaching people how to do things. But I sort of had to learn it… after I got there. And I think it was only after a couple of years that I really, sort of, got into the swing… or perhaps after about seven years, I'm not sure, but I mean you… you feel that you do kind of learn how to do it after a while.

Starting to teach at the Royal College of Art was a rather strange experience because I trained as a teacher, but as a teacher of English not as a teacher of art and, in fact, although I'd been to an art school as a part-time student, which was Chelsea I had no art qualifications, as such. And properly… I still haven't actually, but I kept up contact with Brian Robb who had been teaching at Chelsea and I knew their… or rather he kept contact with me when, once or twice a year, he'd ring up. And then, after a while, he moved to the Royal College of Art and one day he rang me up and said would I like to go and set a project for the students, for the illustration and graphics students. And so I went and did that and I set a project about book jackets, I think, a thing which I'd almost never done, but it seemed that it was a sort of portable subject. And a fortnight later I went back and did a crit, you know, and talked about what they'd done, which was interesting to me, and then afterwards Brian said well come down to my little office and we went down there. And he said, ‘Would you like to have a part-time job here?’ So I thought about it for about five seconds and said, ‘Yes, that would be nice’, not knowing what I was saying yes to, at all. And then… until the beginning of the next academic year, of course I was just… waiting to find out what this really meant. I'd no idea. And when I got there, in a sense it was rather frustrating to begin with, because you can't do that kind of job unless you know the people who teach there and you know the students and so on. So, it's very slow to start and also I didn't really know how to do it. I had to learn how to do it after I got there.
What was the other thing that was unexpected about it which was on the positive side was that… I was there as a part-time tutor, I think that was two days a week. And I'd assumed that I was a sort of humble person who would come in for those two days and do a little bit of something and go home again and the great machine would move on. In fact, when I got there I discovered that… there were only three people teaching in that little department – there was only 30 students – but Brian ran it on a part-time basis, Sheila Robinson was a tutor there and I was a tutor there. We were the regular people so, in fact, I almost immediately moved into the position of being, as it were, Brian's lieutenant because Sheila came from Suffolk when she came, whereas I was just down the road so I was usually on the premises. That was a problem about… it was a great advantage to live near work because, sometimes on a day when I wasn't teaching, and I could go in, as it were, for half an hour to fix some little problem, and you'd find that you were there for the morning because there were lots of people who seemed to be waiting for you with their questions and you would leave after three hours, not having done the original problem at all. But anyway, it was wonderful being so near, I was within 20 minutes walk and the department was in the part of Graphic Design and was in the back regions of the Victoria and Albert Museum. So I could walk along there and… change my mode of thought to RCA as I was going there… and that's all I ever did, was to walk there. So that was very convenient.

I really did have to learn how to do it and I may have taken… it's impossible for me to tell now… it may have taken me rather a long time to work out how to do it. When I arrived there was a group of students there who were very… they were in their third year and of course they knew a lot about art schools than I did and they were very confident. And this was 1965. They were very influenced by American illustration and knew a lot more about that than I did, I mean contemporary American illustration of a sort of Yellow Submarine type. They were perfectly nice, but I mean it was… I felt in a very strange sort of situation and it was gradually I… well, I suppose I really began to feel that I knew what I was about after the new lot of students came in and it was then three years and, when they'd gone through the works and I'd got to know them properly. I found the whole experience very interesting, very fatiguing as well. It took a lot of time. But the thing about it, really, from… I mean, selfishly, from my point of view, was that you were talking to these people at, what, most of the time was a was a very high level. I mean it was like talking to… they already had one degree and they'd come from their art school so they… many of them had got styles which were already formed and were highly skilled, not all, but I mean… because sometimes we did accept people, we took people, because we thought they might be interesting rather than because they were particularly slick and professional already. There were different reasons for accepting people onto a course like that.
The other thing that was good about it was that it was… well it was simply that they did work in so many different ways and so that you were talking to each person in the year group of ten people, worked in a different way, and you were addressing their problems on a sort of one-to-one basis mostly. I mean I was setting projects and doing general crits but really, what it came down to was this kind of tutorial principle. And I found that very interesting because I mean, although I started doing humorous drawings and humorous drawings in books and in magazines and so on, I was gradually doing more children's book illustration. And it's very important, I think, not to become herded into a little corral where you only think about that kind of thing. So I spent two days a week, and later three, talking to people about every kind of illustration and… whether it's for magazines, whether it was doing illustration almost like works of art, whether it was doing illustration of the classics and so on, all kind of things like that and in all different ways. So I think that, looked at selfishly, that was very good training for me. It really kept me amongst a lot of these people who worked in different ways and sometimes I think people assume that you like the work that looks a bit like your work and indeed, I think there are art teachers who only want to teach people who work like them. But… I didn't find that, I found that there were some people you found it difficult to talk to, but many, and… some of the people I got on with very well worked in a mode that was totally other from what I did. But it was interesting to find, I mean in that way, in talking about their work, it was good to make this kind of mental effort to put yourself in a position where you saw things, as it were, as they did. And… it kept one very much sort of more open to things and I think also it was interesting to discover how much what you can say about pictures applies to different kinds. I mean there were… things about the sequence of pictures or about the way colour is used or the way the picture is organised or whether it knows what its idea is… all of that kind of thing, a lot of it does apply… across the board to different kinds of people, but although it has to be adapted and nuanced, in certain ways.

I've talked about Stan Simmons who taught me when I was at school in the sixth form. One of the things that he could do, and which I think is one of the things that a teacher can do, is to actually tell the student what they've done because they're very often… they sometimes know instinctively what things they want to do, but they can get sidetracked, they can get shunted into a siding, they can get into some track where they're trying to do something which is not really what they're good at. And to be able… sometimes they've got two or three things going in a picture which are incompatible really, you know, kind of thing.
So that telling people what they've done is quite interesting and, of course, being enthusiastic about it is another. That again, I think, is a thing that I found rather difficult to get hold of because I mean I believe very much in being enthusiastic about things but, at that level, you tend to take it for granted that it's going to be good and you talk about the things that perhaps aren't quite as good as they were. So, I think that's the thing that I also had to learn. Brian Robb was very good at that in a in a slightly old-fashioned gentlemanly way. He was able to say, 'You are to be congratulated', and, you know, it took me a long to… to cook up some version of that. The other thing… well I think the… benefits I had from it: one enormous benefit was that because I went to university and didn't go to an art school except only as a part-time student, I didn't really have any contemporaries to talk to about what I was doing, only just one or two people. But most of these people, they were in their 20s and I was in my 30s to begin with, so… a lot them became my friends, they're still my friends now. So I sort of accumulated an art friendship, really by teaching there but also, in a sense, slightly having a sort of student career there as well by meeting these people. So a lot of my friends are people that I met at the RCA and taught at the RCA and subsequently perhaps taught with. But it's quite nice because they're all younger than I am which is and so that was very interesting. I think also I was very timid when I when I first went there and some people who knew me then will be pleased to tell you that. But I did get a bit more confidence both in talking about things and… eventually I took over the department when Brian Robb retired and that was the thing that… it was interesting from a teaching point of view because it… I took to that quite happily. It was, in fact… Brian was quite ill or in fact he was being ill by proxy, as it were, because his wife was extremely ill and I more or less ran the department for about three years before he retired. And when he retired it was… I'd been there for, I mean in a way, too long already – it was about 13 years, I think. But it was a question of whether I didn't want to work for somebody else because he was an ideal person to work for, so I either wanted to run it or leave. And… Dick Guyatt who was running the whole graphic design department, said would I like to run it. So I thought, well, I must try this and so I took that on and I did it for seven years until it was… everything was getting, sort of, too much for me. But that was a very enjoyable experience and it… but it did mean that I was in touch, not only with a range of illustration students, but a range of graphic design students and, beyond that, the whole range of students at the RCA. So it gave one a very, sort of, broad view of things.

Because I was there for quite a time I lived through a number of rectors. When I first went there it was Robin Darwin, who I didn't know at all, I mean, he was too much of a distant figure. But he was very gruff and authoritative and interesting in that way. And I think he did good things for the college. And I think perhaps the college was not... they didn't always appoint the best people as rector, I don't think. Always interesting people, and people of quality, but it's very difficult to know what that job is, I think, and of course their great piece of enterprise was appointing Jocelyn Stevens which I think was a result of John Hedgecoe, who was Professor of Photography, I think knew him from when they both… when Jocelyn owned and edited Queen. And… I think it was he who promoted the idea of Jocelyn, because it was… I mean he did arrive with a crash, it's true, and got rid of a lot of people and there was a lot of angst and things of that nature. I think, curiously, he I was hoping he'd bring a lot more money to our department, which he never did, but seem to take some interest in it and in fact, I think, perhaps just because we weren't important enough, but Alistair Grant, who was Head of Print Making, and I think were the only two people who were not replaced at some time during Jocelyn's... so, I kind of survived Jocelyn alright.
In fact, when Herbert Spencer, who was then Head of Graphic Design he seemed was moved off, I think, and for about a year I actually ran the graphic design department, and I think they would have offered me that job if I'd wanted it. Again, that was very interesting too. I went and I had to go and talk to absolutely everybody I mean all the tutors and the sort of, local heads of department and so on, about what we were going to do and keep hold that together, you know, because there was a possibility of well, there was tension, you know. I mean, different people had interests, wanted their bit of it to survive in such and such a way or they had ambitions for it. And that was a very interesting exercise and, you know, you found yourself doing those things that you read about the… if you read anything about management, you know, I mean the first thing you do is to move the furniture in the professor's office. And I mean, in my case, I moved it back against the wall and came out in front of it because otherwise I know, if you went in previously to see the professor, he was there beyond the desk to talk to. And all that was very interesting but I didn't want to go on doing it. In fact, at one point, I accepted to be a chairman of a faculty which was a mistake and as soon as I got there, I realised I couldn't do it and I had to go and say to Jocelyn that it was, I'd got that wrong, I couldn't cope with it. And I… it was an interview… John Hedgecoe was there as well and that was when I, sort of, started to withdraw a bit from the college because I remember I was saying I just, you know, I couldn't… I didn't think I could do it. And I remember Jocelyn saying, 'Well, you realise this alters your whole relationship with the college'. And I think he was saying, you know, we will give you the sack or something like that. So I agreed with him and I said, 'No, I think you're right, it does'. And… then he realised he hadn't got any more cards left and I mean, at the end of the meeting, we decided that probably Dan Fern was the person to do it and he took it over and did it brilliantly and has done it ever since. But we parted friends. It was very nice because Jocelyn… when I left I sort of tapered off; I did two days a week the next year and one after that. But when I left… Jocelyn, shortly before he left, appointed two visiting professors… there are a lot now, I think, but… and one was Eduardo Paolozzi and one was me. And I'm technically a visiting professor, but I... He wrote a very nice letter which said, you know, that you're now visiting professor please come as often as you can, which has been a very nice relationship because it means I wasn't left but I wasn't expelled from the building and I still know people there and I still go in from time to time. And it isn't very often that I go, but I suppose I go every term and so I stay in touch and I know the people there. What is also very nice for me is that I work for Brian Robb and we got Dan Fern to come in as another part-time tutor and then eventually he took over from me. And the shape and the organisation of it has changed but… one can't officially hand something on like that. But by coincidence, it does feel rather like a family business which we were running. What will happen next, of course, who knows?

When I went to the college I still was because I didnt know much about art schools, I just had a little bit of experience of Chelsea, but I suppose from that and from… I mean from that inexperience and from received experience, I always assumed that students were not successful, you know, artists were hungry and so on and so on. I mean, you know, you were sort of given that idea and this is partly why I did a university education rather than starting off immediately to be some kind of an artist or illustrator. So, it took a little while to notice it but what was nice about teaching at the RCA was to see these people go off and get work and become names in the business and be successful, so to speak. Im now totally confused about, you know, over 20 years, when anybody was there so I tend to refer to one student, ex-student, in the presence of another and they have never met and dont know who Im talking about. But they went off in all different directions.
Dan Fern, who does a sort of illustration which is between that and fine art and graphics. Its a very interesting, sort of, almost abstract way of working. I mean, we worked together for a long time and hes both successful as a teacher and a professor at the RCA but also as a designer and illustrator, and now as a gallery artist as well. And… he was in that first year where I knew everybody because I saw them in their entrance exams and so on. And there were other people in that year that I still know.
Linda Kitson was in that year but she was the only woman amongst ten blokes, I think and she went on to become… I mean shes Ive known her ever since, shes my best friend, as it were, and somebody I talk to about things all the time. It was rather strange in a way that I mean they all went off to Wales one in one summer I think all that year. And they said, Oh, we dont want any women, but you can come, Linda. And so she was one woman with these ten men which was an experience that sort of strangely repeated itself when she became commissioned by the Imperial War Museum to go and draw in the Falklands. But I think she was one amongst about 3,000 soldiers there.
And I also think I got on well with a lot of people, but it was very informal and I think we moved towards making it more informal. I dont think anybody nowadays calls their tutors mister and I think there was a little bit of it when I arrived. But I mean its very nice to go to a private view or an exhibition sometimes and see how all these people are getting on. One person who was very interesting to me, Russell Mills, worked in a very precise and sometimes in quite abstract way, very interested in music and installations, and works a lot with Brian Eno and that kind of thing. And Im always, I mean, were always very pleased to see each other, but what is quite interesting is that we seem to have a great deal of affinity. Its hard to say why. I mean there was some kind of vein of humour in him… and also hes a terribly nice man. But hes one of these people who tends, pretends to be aggressive and difficult and rebellious and is a perfect gentleman actually, you know, kind of thing. But that was a sort of extreme point in which you can feel very much together with somebody and able to talk about things in a similar way, although their work is completely different.
There are some people whose work not like mine, but worked in a similar area and Emma Chichester Clark was one. And some of them have gone on to be childrens book illustrators. She didnt start off as that; she was a great book jacket artist for some years. But its hard to remember what you did or what you talked about but I mean, I can remember... surprises me Emma saying to me much later on, You told me I had to do roughs. And that was really part of it. I mean is there something that you have to explain to students because theyre so taken up with the nature of the piece of work theyve got in front of them, they tend to work terribly hard at one image. Whereas, in fact, if youre working in a book or any kind of sequence of pictures, its the sequence that matters and so you have to organise that sequence and you cant really do a book without doing working out its going to flow through and how its going to work and what the pictures are going to look like in relation to each other. Its often very hard for someone whos not used to doing that to get hold of the idea that sometimes, you know, not the maximum effort is better than the maximum effort, you know, I mean you can, occasionally you can just sort of throw things away or you can make the rhythm of the thing work. And also, I think, I mean I feel very sympathetic towards the student doing that because, even now, you know, sometimes when you when you start off a book perhaps they dont know how to do it because theyre not very familiar with their own talent and way of working. But I mean I still feel like that sometimes, I mean, because every book has a kind of no two books are the same, theres always a kind of slight change or a major change and you just feel you cant cope with that until you find your way through. You do a drawing or a bit of a drawing and oh yes, perhaps I could do it like that, maybe that would work. And so… I very much sympathise with them in that situation; how do you deal with a book? Because I still sometimes now wonder, you know, should I have taken this on and Im not quite sure. Ill see how Im going to do it. Until you actually work out how it can be done.

The person who was a great influence on me was Daumier. And who I bought this book of his lithographs, and I mean, he was a sort of hero then, and he still is now. And I've now got 50 lithographs or more from that I bought at one time or another from cut out of the newspapers of mid-19th century Paris. But I was also… there were people on Punch that influenced me. One, Ronald Searle was a sort of role model, if you like, and I was taken to see him when I was 20, just when I joined the army. They had a sort of programme, which was when a young hopeful went to meet a seasoned professional. Actually he was probably about ten years older than I was, really, in a rather impressive Denys Lasdun House in Bayswater. And he did wonderful caricatures, he did very funny drawings, he did satirical drawings, and I remember actually on that occasion I went to see him there was a lot of discussion, kind of initiated by the people who had taken me there from the BBC about the philosophy of drawing and things of that kind. Actually, what I wanted to ask him was what kind of pen nibs he used. And I think that is the sort of thing you want to do. Actually I had a visit from a wonderful French illustrator called Johan Sfar here, recently, and he wrote something about it in his journal, which was published afterwards. And he said, 'When you see Quentin Blake, you very quickly talk about cookery'. On parle très vite de la cuisine. We talked about how you did it. But I was frustrated that I didn't get to talk about it. But the other person who was inspiring to me was André François. André François has just recently died at the age of 89, but he was everywhere then, and in a lot in Punch, doing these covers, and occasionally doing drawings inside in other magazines, and also wonderful advertising. Very painterly pictures of crazy, you know, a rhinoceros wearing socks, or something like that, to advertise socks, you know, or something. And I remember the sort freedom with which he drew. I mean the fact that fundamentally it was very strong drawing, but it was not respectful at all, and it was kind of improvised on the page. I was trying to… I did a bit of advertising at that time. I was never very successful at it because they always wanted me to illustrate somebody else, imitate somebody else, and I almost took over a job that André François had been doing, except he suddenly got a prize for it and so they kept on with him doing it.

Working for Punch got more interesting as I went on, because they'd had... I got more varied things to do. Mark Boxer used to do a thing called In the City and In the Country, and this was financial notes, and notes about life in the country. And they both appeared on the same page, and were called In the City and In the Country, and for two or three years he'd been at Cambridge and edited Granta. He was a bit older than I was, and he'd established this. And you had two pictures which, sort of, matched each other, so they were a sort of visual reference to each other, so that the In the City was nothing about financial, it was about city life, and the other one was about country life. And he did that for two or three years, and then he went off to become Art Editor of the Sunday Times Colour Supplement, or something rather grand like that. And I took this on. And, that was very good for me, because I think it was ten pounds a week, or ten guineas a week, which was the sort of, you know, financial basis of keeping me going. So I knew I was going to earn that, and it was quite nice because you could do… they used to send the bit about country life, a bit of it was edited by Peter Dickinson, who became a very celebrated detective novelist and a very celebrated children's book novelist. But you'd get this bit about country life, and you'd have to draw something for that, and then get a city thing, so it would be, you know someone taking their fur coat off in the top picture, and someone shearing a sheep in the bottom picture, of something. You got a visual thing. So that went on certainly, but there were also other things, and they started having coloured covers. I think in 19… maybe 59, the first one, but they'd had the same cover, by Dickie Doyle for 150 years, every week. It's wonderful… I mean I'm a great admirer of Dickie Doyle, I mean he was really a genuine influence. He was somebody else who started drawing for Punch when he was 16, but he drew much better than I did, I mean he was a brilliant draftsman, but they'd had this very, very nice cover, but they started having one or two coloured covers for special issues. The Christmas issue, or the Easter issue, or something like that, and it ruined the whole thing, and I mean in a sense you couldn't go on having the same cover every week, if you were going to have a coloured one sometimes. And so they gradually got into having coloured covers every week, which was a lovely new job for you, and you just submitted, it was… you know, it had to have Punch, and the dog Toby in it, and you had some kind of the first one I did was of Punch as Punchinello, and the dog as Harlequin. And I mean that was you know, a very interesting… you just submitted a rough. The first one that I did, was drawn with a quill… I mean a plastic quill that you buy from Boots to clean your teeth, you know, pick your teeth with kind of thing, but quite good to draw with, and on Ingres paper, which I happened to have for some reason or another, and blackboard chalks, which were the only… normally I would be using pastels or something like that now. But I happened to have blackboard chalk, so that was was how that was done, and then I went on submitting and I did quite a lot in colour at one time or another. And what was very nice about that was you only had to get it right once, if you see what I mean, so you could use some other different way of doing things. You know, you could use pastels, or you could use water colour, or you could… I did one where I… got a lot of those little glass eyes that they put on teddy bears, and stuck them on so that they were photographed in three dimensions.

I went to see the agency, I think up in Southampton Row, or somewhere like that, and the person who'd commissioned François said we… he said, ah now I remember we had a drawing of him… a drawing from him, which was of a cockerel, you know, a sort of French rooster, you know, which he'd done for something, and there were one or two slight changes that we sent it back, asking for these changes, and we were terribly worried about the deadline, and it was coming, you know for this, and he said, 'Finally, just at the last minute it arrived'. He said, 'And I ripped off the brown paper, and it was an elephant'. Which was one… I mean, that… François wouldn't have… didn't want to change anything, he just wanted to go on creating something. And in fact I got his address, I suppose when I was in my 20s, from Russell Brockbank at Punch, and he lived outside Paris in Grisy-les-Plâtres, where he lived till the end of his life. And I went down there to see him and as a sort of pilgrimage, really. He was terribly nice, and he  collected me from the station, and was very kind of modest and self-effacing. I said, 'Have you ever had an exhibition of your work?' 'No, I haven't got enough of it, I'm afraid', he said. In fact, he became much more of a painter, and he did have exhibitions, and you know, he's had retrospectives at the Museum of Decorative Arts, and the Louvre, and all that kind of thing, and you know, he was a great man. But while I was there, apparently he'd done drawing for Pirelli, who was the people he used to work for, and there was something about it they didn't like, or they wanted changed, and he had said… I mean, he was talking to his wife about it, you know, and he'd said, 'No, no, that's alright, I don't want to do it again, just send me the rejection fee', which is what you get if they don't want it, you know. And while I was there, they rang up, and said, 'Alright, we'll take it as it is'. But I mean that's a very good lesson, you know, for a for a freelance artist to hear. I mean you've got to be François to get away with it, but I mean, its strengthening, and its good to see it actually happen in front of you as it were. And… in his sitting room there was a wonderful trompe loeil drawings of shelves, with things on the shelves, which he'd done, which sort of, were very effectively trompe loeil, but didn't actually, didn't deceive you. I mean, they were three-dimensional, but you still knew they were drawing, which was very interesting. And the other thing I found rather touching, he hadn't finished it. Which you know, it was something that he was doing when he had time to do it that was fascinating. And since then, I mean I've not seen him very often, but I've seen him once or twice in London, and I was very touched, because I had an exhibition of my work in an illustration gallery in Paris, what was it, three or four years ago and he turned up. He came to the private view.

He had a beautiful little book called Crocodile Tears, Les larmes de crocodiles, and it was… it was in the shape… the… the crocodile was… was caught in Egypt and sent back to France in a box, a crocodile shaped box, and the book was a long shape like that. In a… in the shape of a box, with… with the stamps and labels on the outside; a very… beautiful thing. And… he also worked… he did… he did a very interesting book with Jacques Prévert, and… what is that book called? It's called des îles Baladar [sic] or something like that. Which… well, you will know… which… I bought some second hand copy, no, not second hand copies, copies outside his publishers, for… for sale, 50 years after it was originally published. But… François worked with Prévert, and all kinds of other writers… very, very… and he did some children's books, but it… it was not in a way the children's books so much as… as the advertising and the… and the magazine illustration and things like that, because he always did it… fearlessly in a way, you know, kind of… and invented something extraordinary, on the… on the… as it were, on the spur of the moment. And he was a very good painter, but strangely, I mean I think as… as an illustrator, or as a graphic artist, he was a genius really, because you couldn't… you couldn’t imagine what it was he was going to do, and it was so, kind of, instinct with life in it; that was very… inspiring.

At the same time I was doing those… working for Punch, which kind of faded out eventually. But I also I didn't know many people in a way at Cambridge, having done one or two things for Granta, I'd met Rory McKewen, who I think was Art Editor of Granta, or something like that. Who after he left Cambridge, came to London, and worked for The Spectator, and he used to do cover drawings for The Spectator, and he recruited two or three people to draw for The Spectator. One was an Australian called Bruce Petty, who was quite an interesting man, and one or two others. And I started doing little drawings, for the cover, and then they decided though they would have a full illustration on the cover, and I started doing those, and I did cover coloured ones for Christmas. And not every week, but I mean probably three-quarters of them I did, which, again was a wonderful sort of experience, because it's like… I thought it was like an actor being in a repertory company, because you didn't know what part you were going to have next week. And I mean you might have been doing the sort of, you know… some view of London, or you might be doing a caricature of a politician, or you might be drawing Bertrand Russell, or you might be illustrating an article by Kingsley Amis or… a series by Evelyn Waugh, and of course it meant you had a different challenge each time and also you could find a different solution, as long as you were working in two colours.
And I used to go into, where were they then? Doughty Street to get a brief from the editor, or someone there. And it was a active time. Brian Engliss was the editor, and there was Alan Brien, and Bernard Levin and Katherine Whitehorn and Cyril Ray, and a lot of interesting people were writing for it. And again, I never felt I really belonged in a way I used to go in, rather like a sort of window cleaner or plumber, or something like that, you know, get into work, find out what I had to do. And… but you had to take it back, well, the next day, very often, or maybe the day after that, but you didn't often get more than a couple of days. Sometimes if it was a literary number, or a books number, you'd get a bit longer, and you could spend a bit more time on it, and then you'd… they'd fit the names in, or you'd have to write the names on it. But that was a very interesting time for me, and it was like all those things, I probably went on too long doing it, but I did... it was in the 60s and there were a lot of interesting things to do and ways in which you could draw it differently.
And last Christmas and the Christmas before, or the Christmas before last, or maybe three years ago Boris Johnson said, would I do a Christmas cover for them. And I… at the time I… the first time I said no because I thought, you know, I've been… such a long time ago, and I'd been through all that experience and I didn't think I'd want to go back to it. But… Christmas before last I'd thought, I can think of something I can do for that. In fact, it might be quite nice to go back and do another one. So, the year before last I did the Christmas cover, and last year I did. I think the two years before that were done by Ronald Searle, which made me think it was quite a good thing to do. So it was quite nice to revisit it.

So a lot of that magazine work was interesting, but I also wanted to do books, really, and I didn't… you know, I just wanted to be between two covers, and to arrange the way the drawings were, myself, without sort of elbowing my way through a lot of other peoples drawings and text and that sort of thing. And I didn't know how to do that, and I was quite… there seemed to be opportunities in children's books. There were other people like John Burningham and Gerald Rose, who were of my generation, and I think also were in... would have been influenced by François, in the way they did things. But I didn't… I thought I'd like to do something like that, but I didn't know how to do it, so I didn't know how you started. I had taken my portfolio to publishers once or twice, without much success, but… so I asked my friend John Yeoman, we'd been at Cambridge together, whether he could write something, that I could illustrate, and I mean he knew no more about it than I did. But he could speak Russian and French, and he delved about in European folk tales. And he actually produced one story, which I wanted to do as a picture book really, was what I was thinking of, but sent it to Faber and Faber, and they said, 'We've got a little series of books, and if you would like to do four or five more of these stories, we will put them together in a book'. So that was, you know the first publisher you'd been to offers to publish you can't say no. So we did that, and that was a book called A Drink of Water, in 1960, I think, and we did one or two more. And we've done a lot more books together… picture books and other books. But that was the first book that I did, and I think I was also… and, yes, I was also commissioned about the same time, by the Art Editor of Abelard-Schuman who I think was called Brian Payne, spontaneously through an illustrated book called Albert the Dragon. And so there were sort of two things, rather similar kind of weight of drawing, either black and white drawings, or drawings in one or two colours. And it took me a long time to get round to relatively, to the idea of doing a picture book. I think a picture book was what you had to do to get noticed, really. And so that the, I forgot the order they came in, but certainly John did one or two… one or two, I think Bears Winter House was the first one he did, and he did one called Sixes and Sevens, which was a very nice one of going along a river on a raft, taking people and things on at every stop, kind of thing. It was a sort of a cumulative sort of book. And then I did one of my own, because there were things that I wanted to draw, called Patrick. And I think that was 1968 or nine. So those were the first picture books, and I thought, when I started doing them, I thought well, I'll suppose I was, I thought I'll go on with them for two or three years, and see whether ther's, you know… I didn't know whether children would like them or not. I mean… I just thought I'll do them and see what happens. And I think I thought, I'll keep on till I'm 30, or something like that. And I mean I passed that point without noticing it, eventually, and they gradually got more… I was also, I could have been commissioned to do a book about writing for young people, and it was rather awful, really, because I thought I knew something about English teaching, and I thought this… I so disapproved of the methods put forward, that I… that was, I think, the only time, then, that I turned down a job. And I did some books as well with collections of pieces by Patrick Campbell, who wrote a lot in magazines and newspapers at that time… humorous pieces of, you know… short humorous pieces. He was a very funny man, I think, and they were gathered together in books. They started… I think they were in The Spectator originally. And then I got on to actually doing new illustrations, doing covers and new illustrations for his books. And I don't think I ever met him. I think I'd… he was on television. I think I saw him on television, but I… he was very tall and angular. And he'd been drawn by Ronald Searle, previously, as well, in the magazine Lilliput, and it was curious, it was as though I did… to me, it was as though I'd invented him. You know, I had a sort of formula for drawing Patrick Campbell, without ever having met him. It was a sort of elongated version of the people that I drew anyway.

It was probably in the 70s, sort of mid 70s, when… there were three or four, what proved to be quite significant, collaborations, they happened then. I mean, John Yeoman and I had been working together, I had got into doing some books of my own. Even then, when I did that… that first book, picture book, I did on my own, Patrick, I… I didn't, you know… I should have been doing the next one as soon as that one was in the pipeline. I didn't know you had to do that, I was waiting for somebody to tell me I've got to do another one, you know, kind of thing. And in fact that was published by Tom Maschler at Jonathan Cape, and he's someone who’s, over the years, been very good at saying, ‘What about the next one?’ And once we got into the habit, and when… as I gave the finished version, and the finished pictures of one to him, he would say, ‘And what ideas have you got about the next one?’ But… that's one of those things, you know, when there are certain questions you… you get asked, like, where do you get your ideas from? And my own ideas, that's quite a difficult question, they come from different places, and really I don't know. But the other answer is, I get them from authors, and that's one… I couldn't… I mean I could do a book of my own every year or two, but I like to work more than that, and I do three or four or five books a year, and… or I have done, and… and I couldn't do that without authors. And what is nice is the diversity of authors, and I think it was… it was sort of '73, '74, '75, '76, or around about then, that looking back I realised that some new… relationships and collaborations started. One was with Russell Hoban, and… Tom Maschler at Jonathan Cape sent me… I think he actually sent me three manuscripts… and said, ‘Look at these, and see what you think about that’. And I was… you know, I admired Russell Hoban's writing already… and these were all very nice, but there was one, which was… was the one that we did called How Tom Beat Captain Najork and his Hired Sportsmen, which is a wonderful title, and I… said, ‘Can I do something about this?’ And I was invited to do a sample. Always a difficult thing to do, because, you know, there is a kind of… process, of… of development, where you find out what the drawings ought to look like, so… but anyway I did… I did quite a lot of samples. I really did quite a lot of drawings for it, and it was about three or four pages of typing, and it was… it seemed wonderful to me because it was… it was like, as though it was… it was the book that you wanted to illustrate, you didn't know it existed, and you could not have written it yourself. But it was like ideas that I wanted to… to draw. And… so I did these… these roughs, and sample drawings, and then there was a… you know, there was a little wait, while I found out whether… while I waited to find out whether I was going to be commissioned to do it. And… I thought, you know, I'm not sure how I can cope with this, if I'm not going to be allowed to do it. But… but I was, anyway, and… it… that was… that was fascinating, I think.

It takes place next to a… a river, and it's got… well, I… it… it defies description, but it has got Aunt Fidget Wonkham-Strong in it. And it's got a wonderful beginning. It… it says Tom lived with his Aunt Fidget Wonkham-Strong… she took no nonsense from anybody where she… what was is? Where she… the flowers wilt, anyway as she passes… as she passes. And that's so nice, because there's no… she… she wore an iron hat, sorry, of course, she wore an iron hat, and took no nonsense from anybody. Just to be told that about someone, that she's the sort of… figure of discipline, of an old-fashioned kind. You know, it's a wonderful start, so you can make a, kind of, Victorian figure of her, and draw this and imagine what an iron hat is like, and draw her sort of pterodactyl like face. And… and then invent Captain Najork and his hired sportsmen, who were rowing up the river, and so on and so on, and these games which are… are described, but not described by... I mean, he… Russell writes about them as though you knew what they were, you know, about wombling, and… and sneedball, and doing these things in the mud. And… so that was a… that was a marvellous thing to do, because there was a lot… there were a lot of promptings for the illustrator to invent these people, and you could decide… it didn't tell you that it was Edwardian, but I thought that was what it… what it ought to be. And so… and that was the first of a number of books that I did with Russell. And… in fact he… he was invited to write a sequel to it, and that was called A Near Thing For Captain Najork, and I thought it was… I didn't see how he could write a sequel to it, initially, because, well, the… the original story is perfectly formed. It's a… it’s a sort of educational fable, and it's got a… it’s got a bit… of other books in it. It's got a little bit of, sort of, Hard Times in it, and a bit of… of Huckleberry Finn, or something like that… it's got… but it's about how people who do things spontaneously, and skillfully for that reason, are more effective than people that… people who learn things by rote. Because these… these… I mean, that's the wonderful… actually there is… I have got the postcard that… that Russell gave me, which is… there is a Victorian engraving of Captain Najork, and… it doesn't say his… you don’t know… there… there are these chaps rowing, in a rowing boat, and of course it was Russell's brilliance, that he looked at that picture, and knew they were hired sportsmen, with everything that was kind of implied in that. And it’s… it's a wonderful educating… it's a perfectly formed educational fable, and… and so I couldn't see, you know, how you could write another educational fable, and it was extraordinary when… when I got it, because it was… he said, ‘Got it down to two pages of typing’, he managed to… write an even shorter text. And, in fact what it is, is he… he wrote a sequel as farce, which is a completely different form, in… in that things happen… come together, as it were, by accident, which produce other things. And it's in that Tom, you know, invents a jam-powered frog, and they're going down the river and there was… Captain Najork's got the hired sportsman with this mobile snake, and so on, but I mean the way that things come together, is a sort of, is… is a kind… is… the structure is farce. But you could use the same people, and in fact, it was very nice, because when I… I remember saying to Russell… I didn't, you know… I thought it was… I didn't know how you could write a… a sequel, I thought it was extraordinary, and he said… he said, ‘Well by then, I knew what the people looked like, which helped’. Which was very… which made one feel… it was good to be in that collaboration. And we did… we've done other books since.

Joan Aiken, as well, wrote some stories about Mortimer and Arabel. Arabel is the little girl, Mortimer is her pet raven. And I think she wrote them specifically for television, for the… for the programme Jackanory, which… and on that you had a… a presenter, someone, generally a rather a good actor, who read the story, as from a book… and to camera, and occasionally you would see illustrations for it. And… and there would be say… there would be five programmes for a quarter of an hour for a week, and you'd do… 12 drawings for each day, so you were doing 60 drawings, and… I did them on… they had their… the BBC had their own artists at work on some of these stories, and they painted a whole scene, but it was interesting to me, because I knew that the camera only looked at certain parts of the picture at a time, And so you could draw it… I drew them on cream boards, because in those days, it was… you saw the pictures by the camera, looking at them. Now they're put on a rostrum, or they're done digitally but then the camera actually looked at this picture, and it could move about on the picture, so that you knew that it would look at this, and then it would look at that, so you organised the picture in a different way, so that it would gradually follow round and arrive at somebody doing something, which came as a little surprise. Or it might just have been a quick picture, where you saw one thing happening. But quite often you moved around, so you had to do quite a big picture, and moved… the camera could move around on it. And… these… stories were… were about Arabel and Mortimer the raven, and we did… we did a number of those, and lots of drawings, and it was very fascinating to me also, because you were invited, or required, to… to go to the television studio, to… to see the… the recording. And there would be Bernard Cribbins, who read most of the… Arabel's raven ones, and I… I mean, but I did other stories, and by other people, and you know, there might be… Roy Kinnear, or Kenneth Williams or one of those actors at the time. It was wonderful to see them at work, but you were there to… to… in case something didn't work in the drawing, or you had to strengthen a bit up, or you had to draw an extra bit on. Very little of that was needed, but it was very wonderful to see it, because there'd be the actor there, there'd be two or three cameras, there'd be a great studio with… hung with, you know, masses of technology, for the way of lighting for other programmes, and then a pile of these cardboard sheets with the drawings on, on a kind of music stand, and the camera would look at them for a bit, and then go back to the actor. And during that period, a man with rolled up sleeves and Fair Isle pullover would take this picture off, and… and reveal the next one underneath. It was a wonderful sort of contrast of ways of doing it, which is all… I mean that's all gone now. But it was very… it was very… I mean I enjoyed seeing the actors doing it, and Bernard Cribbins was… was particularly good. But it was… it was a… there was a kind of rhythm and sequence in it, but it was a slightly different one from a book, and Joan Aiken is… is another extraordinary writer, and then we eventually did these books. I had to re-illustrate them when they became… when they became books, because then they had to have quite small black and white drawings, but I… I felt I knew a lot about… Mortimer by the time I’d finished. And then I did one or two other books of… of Joan Aiken's as well, and later on… she'd worked a lot with Jan Pienkowski who'd done very beautiful things, where… where she’d… she invents fairy tales, and she used to invent… fairly tales with contemporary elements in them. And there was one, which for some reason or another, he couldn't do, and… and so I did it, Tom Maschler asked me to do it, which was The Winter Sleepwalker. Which was an extraordinary collection of stories, and one of the books that I most enjoyed doing, because there was a great sort of variety of mood through them… some… one or two quite serious and sinister things, and others rather lyrical stories, and… that was… and… and some very funny, so that was a… a very nice collaboration with… with Joan. And I used to go down to see her at… she lived in Petworth with her… husband was an American painter, and we used to go walk in… in Petworth Park, and… Joan was very, very sort of… small, and contained, and… very interesting to talk to, and I mean, people sometimes sort of imagine that children's writers… people who write for children are innocent and remember in their childhood, and… I…  I don't know the Freudian terms, but I remember her saying once, we were walking, yes, well of course Arabel is the… no I think Mortimer… one of them… Mortimer is the ego and Arabel is the id. I may have got that the wrong way round. But… but… and I thought, ah… there's more to this than meets the eye. So that was very… good. It meant… and I did a lot of drawing for television then, and I… I even did some live drawings on television as well… stories which I wrote so that you could actually draw them while you were telling them.

There was also the collaboration with Michael Rosen, and… that was interesting in a… in a different way. I illustrated his first book of poems, which was called Mind Your Own Business. And… it was edited… it was published by Andre Deutsch, and it was edited by Pamela Royds. And it seemed to me, particularly in retrospect, the right way to set about something like that, because we had a meeting, or one or two meetings, with Pam Royds, Michael Rosen, and me, and we started from a pile of manuscript, which were his poems. And they said, you can… you can look at these, and there are certain poems, which we've got to have, and there are others, there's a… there’s an option. So if there are some you would like to illustrate, and so on. And we started talking about it like that. And… this was in '75 or something like that and… also we were… at that time, most books of poetry for children were intended to improve you in some way. And they tended to be a sort of poem down the middle of the page, with a title, and maybe a little vignette of something rural going on at the bottom, something like that, you know, they were… there was… they were… they were beautifully produced, but rather formal in a way. And, we didn't want it to be like that, we wanted it to be informal, so, I mean I actually sort of changed the format of the book a bit, so it was slightly broader, and Mike Rosen wrote these rather sort of… the poems were a funny shape, because they were very conversational. They were… they were… a lot of them were kind of reminiscence of boyhood, and we decided… well actually we did them without titles, and instead of their floating down from the… being hung from the top of the page and running down, they started at a point which would bring them to the bottom of the page, so they always arrived at the bottom of the page. And we tried to make it like a sketch book, in a way, really, and so there were some pages, there were some poems, which you didn't want to illustrate, because they were very, sort of, intimate and personal, or happening at night, and so… that you… you know, there was one about… he's lying in bed, hearing his heart beating… you don't want to illustrate that one really, you know, kind of thing. So there were some pages just with poems on, and there were some pages that just had drawings on. And he… he told me one or two things that he might have written poems about, but hadn't, like… having a… he and his brother used to do the washing up in the kitchen, and they used to have, sort of, fights with squirting the washing up liquid and fighting with the brushes from the… the washing up brushes and so on. And, so there… there are pages where there are… where there is that going on, without a poem. So that it, sort of, moves from one thing to the other, and here the drawing takes the emphasis, and there the poetry takes the emphasis and so on. And that was… that was very interesting to do, and we did one or two… two others like that. The other thing that I liked about it is that he… he has extraordinary sort of recall of… of boyhood, and… it meant that there is an element of fantasy there, but it's much more like drawing from life, and so you draw it with a different thing, with a… with a, sort of, I think a soft… sort of, fibre tip pen, that looks a little bit as though you might have been drawing it from life. It's not… it hasn't got the sort of definition… I mean in a sense you can be more definite about fantasy, because you're inventing it. Whereas these had to look a bit as though they came immediately from life, and so that began that sequence. And then… we did two or three or four books, and then we both got into doing too much of our own things, and… and didn't do much… we… we've done books on and off.

The extraordinary thing was, a couple of years ago, I was sent a manuscript of about a page, by Caroline Royds, of Walker Books, who is… Pam Royds's daughter. And… she knew of course that we'd worked together, and she said, 'Mike has sent me this manuscript', and she just sent me the email, and it said at the top, 'Is this a book?' And she said, we're not… you know, we would like it to be, but we're not quite sure, whether it is. Could you illustrate it? And this is Michael Rosen's Sad Book. And in fact my assistant gave it to me, and said 'I don't know whether you'll want to do this, it's very gloomy'. And of course once I'd read it I knew that I did want to do it very much. I mean it's about his son who died when he was 18, quite suddenly, two or three years before that. And… I mean it was good that I knew Michael, already. I didn't know his son, although I'd drawn him when he was younger, I mean I'd drawn him as a fictional character. But to find the ways of treating that it sort of revived the spirit of those early books, but in a rather different way, because one had to be gloomy, and yet not despairing, which is, I mean… that is in the words, and the… you can unfold the words, it is all there, but the way you design that and deal with it was a very interesting task indeed, and in fact I think, instinctively, I think I'm right in saying this… the first proposals when I'd started doing some rough drawings, were to make it a smaller format book, with some rather tasteful, distinguished typography in it, because it was a sensitive subject. And I think that's what's interesting about, you know, one of the things that's interesting about illustration, it's not just a question of drawing the things that it says in the book, and I think it was important… to me that it was not treated sensitively, if you see what I mean, you know… no, we've got to have a full size book, and the cover will show that it's not for small children. But it's the size of a picture book, but you can see that it's gloomy, in the same way that the typography has to be perfectly straightforward, you know, it's addressed to you, seriously, and you have to take it in that way.
So… that was a wonderful… I mean it was on the basis of a very sad happening, but it was a return to that collaboration, 20 years or more later, which was very, very interesting to me. And now we're about to revive… we did two books earlier on, one was called Don't Put Mustard in the Custard, and one was called You Can't Catch Me. And those treated some of Michael Rosen's poems, but as a coloured picture book. And they've been out of print for a while. And we did them… actually it must be 25 years ago, or thereabouts, so they're… we're just about to revive them now, to re publish them together as one book.

The other important collaboration, which started in the mid-70s, was Roald Dahl, and that's the best known of them and I think that was about '76 or something like that. And… which is one of the questions you get asked, you know,  how did that come about? Did you know him in anyway? Or something like that. And it was… in fact to begin with it was completely professional, as it were, the… I was published by Jonathan Cape. Dahl moved from his previous publishers to Jonathan Cape, and sort of brought one book with him, I think, which was Danny the Champion of the World. I think maybe that had already been commissioned, I'm not quite clear about that. But Tom Maschler, who was in charge of children's books… everything actually, at that time, at Jonathan Cape, but including children's books, I think must have suggested to him that he might write a picture book, because Roald hadn't done that before, he'd just done sort of novels for children, of different lengths. And that was The Enormous Crocodile. And then they looked for a picture book illustrator for that, and I was invited to do a sample. I think Tom thought it would be a good idea if I if I did it. Roald, I think, didn't have a view about it, and he was good about visual things, but I don't think he had a view about who would do it, except I think he thought… or at least according to Tom, which he writes in his reminiscences, his book of memoirs… I think Dahl was a bit apprehensive, because he thought it should be someone with a with a less distinctive style, which you could imagine, I mean as a point of view, but anyway, and I think probably they invited other people to try it, because… I heard from New York that somebody had been asked to do so but really I don't know about that, I just know that I did some samples, and was given the manuscript and asked to do it, and as far as we knew then, I mean it was just that book. Dahl's books previously had been illustrated by various people, some in America and some in England and so on. But it was… there were various things that were interesting about it, I mean my meetings about it were in the publisher's office, between Tom Maschler and Roald and me, but it I mean, I hadn't done a picture book quite like that. It was sharper, or whatever the word is in certain respects. I mean it was more about mean tricks, and that sort of thing. Also it was actually much longer than most of the picture books, which is a special sort of professional problem, because there's quite a lot of text on every page, if you're going to get into 32 pages, which is the normal length. I mean, some picture books are 40 or 48 pages, but the publisher is really aiming for 32 if possible, and that was quite a lot of text, and it was really... it worked as a picture book, because there are certain very kind of potent visual ideas in it, but it was still partly written as a... like a just-so story or something like that, so that there's quite a lot of text on each page, which means that not to make it look like a book with little drawings in the margin, but to look like a picture book, you have to paint in the sky very often, so that you can have an orange sky, or a pink sky, or something, with text on it… and then so that it looks like a full page drawing, but in fact two thirds of it is actually the story.

That was one aspect about it. The other thing is, which is one of the interesting things about illustration, and why it's interesting going from one author to another, and one book to another, is that… is the sort of tuning in on what this is like, and I mean the… the crocodile is a kind of… is a kind of embodiment of evil energy, as it were. It's like Richard III, or someone like that, you know kind of thing. I mean you, it's terrible, but you like to watch it. And it seemed to me that it was because there were frightening things in it, it wanted to be in a sense artificial, or heraldic, so that… and he describes how he’s… you know, he's got hundreds of teeth, which rattle together and so on and so on. And it seemed to me it was like the crocodile in Punch and Judy, in a way. You know, that had… it comes out and goes like this, sort of thing. And, so it’s actually a sort of caricature of a crocodile, and crocodiles actually… I mean I know that crocodile's don't actually look like that. But, so it's got teeth, which are sort of like a saw kind of set of teeth, which are there really for catching children. And they're a trap, as it were, you know, so that the… as I drew it, the crocodile sort of developed into what it is, and also the the children are are real, but it's a kind of artificial pantomime situation of a rather frightening kind. Well, I mean pantomime can be rather more frightening, and so they tend to be slightly strong, heraldic colours, as it were. Very green, or you know, some bright flowers and so on which gives the kind of mood of the book, and to do that you… well you’ve got to design the whole book before you start to do it. You've got to do the rough drawings of the whole book, so that you know how the text fits in, and then it's done with a pen and ink, and that pen is a rather harder pen than the… than one that I might use, say, for doing those Michael Rosen books, or another book by Dahl, perhaps, you know… so it's quite a sort of hard movement, you know… it relates to all those teeth as you drawn them. And they're quite bright, flat colours in places, and… and as I say, you have to draw the whole thing so you can fit the text in.
That again, is a nice thing about a picture book, is that you, and nice for me, is that you arrange… you in a sense design it, because you arrange where everything goes in the book, and you tell the story in that sequence. And in fact there was a thing that I was doing wrong at the beginning, which is absolutely basic, which Tom Maschler was able to point out. Because he’s very good at looking at books, and seeing what works… is that I was getting the… you've got to get the suspense on one opening, and the resolution when you turn the page, so that you reach a point at which, what is going to happen? Whereas actually I was sort of giving the problem on the left-hand page, and the answer on the right. And you mustn't do that. You… you've got to have the problem on the left hand page, so that you turn the page, which is what keeps you turning the pages, because you want to see. And that goes through all picture books, or nearly all picture books. Not quite all, but it’s a sort of fundamental thing. So that was that. I was a bit frightened of it to begin with, but… with… there was rather a lot of biting people went into it, but I think… I sort of tuned into it, and then… that was it as far as I knew.

And then I was invited to do some drawings for The Twits, which was the next one that he wrote, which was sort of somewhere between a novel and a picture book. It was done in black and white, and I think I did a whole set of rough drawings, to a different format, because I thought it would be rather nice if it was a big book. Like a big black and white book. In fact I'd still rather like to do a big black and white book. I haven't done that yet it reminds me that I have to do it. Like that, but it was felt that it should be a normal sized book, which probably made sense, because then it goes into paperback and everybody can buy it. But it's quite interesting that, because it's a very black sort of book, you know, I mean it's black humour, and because the world is established, as it were, the rules are established, by these two horrible people, and it's very interesting to draw horrible people,  and you know, they’re sort of bristly, and one eye's you know, and so on. So that… that's all good stuff to do, and the good people are the monkeys and the birds, and so on, and it's only right at the end you discover there’re actual other human beings in the world. It's quite strange that. It’s… they set the tone… a lot of it is about their horribleness, and you have to find ways of showing that those things… like... that he's got a disgusting beard, Roald hated beards, and it has pieces of decaying food, you know, and sardines and cornflakes and things like that, Gorgonzola cheese. And so you think, how do you show that? So, I invented so to speak, a magnifying glass, through which you see part of the beard. So it's how do take the… how do you enlarge the text slightly, without contradicting it? And there was another bit where there’s… they catch the birds, and put them into bird pie. And of course a bird pie looks like any other pie, so, you know, there was this little problem of how do you show that it's a bird pie, and you do it by having their little feet sticking out of the crust, you know, which is… I think that’s a Cornish thing that you do with Stargazey Pie, you have the fish’s head sticking out, but… that seemed… there were various things like that, how… there is… and you have to draw their house. I mean I drew their house, probably… eight or ten times, until it got to look enough like a concentration camp. So that it… it was working on all that kind of thing. So that was it, you know, there was… there was an element of similarity to the previous book, but it was much… darker in mood, until we survive at the end, kind of thing.

By then I was asked to do a third book, which was The BFG, and this is quite, by comparison this is… this is a novel for children. And… I was asked to do, you know, a certain number of pictures for a set fee. And I think… I don't know, I… I… whether, I still wasn't… I mean I was still meeting Roald in the publisher's office kind of thing, and I think Tom Maschler probably thought this was a, you know, not… writers don't always want pictures, you know, I mean they tolerate them, in… if they're writing a book, in which everything is done in the book. And I did… I did some sample drawings, which were approved by the author, and then I went on and did about a dozen or 15, and… they were full page drawings, and then the book was at the printers, waiting to be printed. And… and I was telephoned, and he was not happy, because Roald hadn’t realised they were so few of these. And… so they said, it's at the printers already, what… what can we do? What can we do? And there are, sort of, 23 or 24 chapters in the book, and there's a space at the top, so the idea was that I could do little heading pieces, little vignettes, for the top of the chapters, and I did these 22 or 23 or 24 drawings in about three days, I think… and delivered them on Monday, I think, or something like that, and went… and I rather liked them, you know, I mean I thought they'd… they’d actually come out quite well, considering… and it was a little challenge to deal with, and I… done that. And then the next day… the next phone call, the next day, was… he's still not happy. And I think it was a misunderstanding about what was expected, and what… what he expected. So in fact what happened was that… the whole thing was pulled back from the printers, and dated back a bit, and… there were some benefits from that, I mean I'd… I’d done them with sort of thin line drawings, with a lot of shading, which I… which I quite liked, but of course they were full pages and heading pieces. If the drawings were going to be incorporated with the text, and follow it through, I couldn't use any of those. I didn't want full… I didn't need full pages, I didn't need vignettes, you couldn't, sort of, add anything else to it, so we just had to put those on one side, and I actually started again.

This was sort of, I mean… it was maddening from one point of view, because I mean I was teaching and doing other things at the same time, but there were some advantages in it. One was that Roald wrote a whole list of things that he thought could be illustrated, which made one realise that he was involved in a way that perhaps I hadn't previously realised, and got his suggestions about it. And the other thing was that I actually started talking to him about it, in a very sort of immediate, collaborative kind of way, and taking drawings down to Great Missenden, and talking to him about it. And got to know the book better, in a way, and I think the fact that I illustrated it again, made me… I mean, I think sometimes things that are reheated or cooked twice get better, don't they?
I can't remember what they… but there are such things. And so we had talked more about it. The other thing was that I had drawn the BFG in his costume, exactly as described in the book, with an apron and wellington boots and things of that kind, and of course, if you… when an author describes something, he can say it once, you know, and he can say on page 23, and he had a ginger moustache, and he need not mention it again, during the course of the book. If you miss that, then you're... you’re… I did once leave a moustache off the cover of a book by Kingsley Amis, but he didn't seem too worried about it, but these things he could mention what the giant was wearing at the beginning of the book, and he simply refers to it again later, but of course every time the giant appears, which is frequently, I have to draw them, and Roald would say, ‘I don't like this apron very much, it gets in the way, doesn't it’, you know, when he's jumping about and so on. And so we went into a kind of discussion there about what he should wear, and we reorganised what he what he was wearing, and we couldn't decide what he was going to wear on his feet, instead of these boots. And that was… Roald sent me this very strange brown paper parcel, very badly tied up, kind of thing, which had got one of his own sandals in it, and… which solved the problem, because that's what, if you look at the pictures, that's what the BFG wears.
But it was another one of the elements that made one appreciate how the closeness to the book, in a way, and… and one or two people have said, I made it look like Roald. It actually doesn't look like Roald. And it was partly based on… his ears were based on his gardener or something like that I think, it was a man I'd never met, but it made one have a sense the closeness and so on, so I think, on the second cooking, where the pictures followed the text more closely, I think he was more human, or you were closer to him, than one was the first time round.
And also that other thing that contributed to that was to realise that in fact Sophie, who was the little girl, was the only person in a Dahl book which is named after a member of his family, and that was his granddaughter, and I drew her from a description… well hardly a description in the book, except for her big spectacles that she wore. And… she was Sophie Dahl, and I met her later on, and it was rather strange to draw someone before you met them. And it was a reasonable likeness, actually, considering as… considering that I'd never seen her. And she changed, as she got older. But the disposition of the pictures again, having you know, what I said about picture books, how you need to decide exactly where the pictures go all the way through, it's very nice to do that in a book of text as well, so that you can actually get the pictures in the right relationship to the text. It's better than handing them over to a designer, who will put them in as near as possible, but sometimes not in quite the right place, because they can't change the drawings. Whereas if you've got the drawings, and know where they are going to go, it's quite easy. You can solve problems more easily than a designer can. Because I once did a book called Uncle, which was designed by a designer, and quite a good designer, but he had to reduce some picture and enlarge others to fit into the way the book fell, and that isn't very nice, actually, and you're conscious of something's being shrunken, and so on. Whereas if you're doing it yourself, it's quite easy to make a drawing a little bit larger or a slightly different shape, and so it's easy for you to solve problems, which are difficult for the designer to solve when it's all handed over as if finished.

By then we were sort of taken with the habit, and… I think a couple of books later… Roald actually required that I should illustrate it, as it were, and he did… I mean I discovered that he did actually like drawings, and he expected drawings to do part of the work, and when we came to do George's Marvellous Medicine, there were actual bits in the manuscript, which says, here you draw da-da-da, kind of thing. So that there are moments when, you know, the chicken gets larger, or the pig gets… I mean things change size. And… the… you're required to do that, and that was interesting, because it meant, it was clear when you'd had a few of those conversations that he was concerned about the effect of the book. And he would… although he was conscious of the important of his own manuscript, and wouldn't want somebody else to be fiddling about with it exactly, at the same time he would change it if he thought the mixture of the pictures and the words would make it better, you know, so could do that.
And then the other books followed from that, over, I think it was 15 years. And… what was… another thing that was very good about working on them was that you were not into a series. There are some that have… I mean The BFG is a bit like The Witches, because he did ogres, and then he did… he thought he'd do witches, kind of thing, and… but George's Marvellous Medicine was a bit different, and then Danny, the Champion of the World is a much more realistic book. It's a book which, with a bit of stretching, could have happened, about you know, poaching in the woods, poaching pheasants in the Cotswolds. And in fact that book, I re-illustrated, because I did all the books up to the time when Roald died, in 1990, and then Jonathan Cape had published all the new ones, Penguin's Puffin Books published them all in paperback, and they contrived to buy the first six titles, which were done before Jonathan Cape, to bring them into paperback with the others, and asked them to… asked me to… to illustrate them as well. So there was this rather strange situation in which, after Roald had died, occasionally people… you know, you'd meet, and they would say, oh, no Roald Dahl to illustrate now. What are you doing? Sitting there with your hands in your lap I suppose? Or something like that, which I wouldn't have been doing anyway, but in fact… I did what was it? Five or six books in two or three years, actually, so that I did Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator, The Magic Finger, Fantastic Mr Fox, and James and the Giant Peach, all to bring them into sequence.

So doing those books for Penguin Books, I… I sort of ended up having done the complete works, in fact I think I've done them all except one, which was The Minpins. And… rather later on in life Roald produced two manuscripts I think at about the same time. One was Esio Trot, which is about the man who was in love with the lady who lives in the flat underneath, who has a tortoise, and the other, The Min Pins is about a boy and about little people, who live in trees, and… and there is a sort of monster to be dealt with. And… there I wasn't asked to do The Minpins, which seemed to make sense, because I could be getting on with the other one, and it called for a lot of quite sort of detailed drawing of these small people, so that seemed to make sense and it was going to be done by Patrick Benson, who is an artist I admire very much anyway, and I know, so I thought that was very good. And actually Roald rang up at one point, he said, 'We sort of assumed you wouldn't do this, but perhaps you would?' I don't know. But anyway it was… and I said, 'No, no, I think it makes perfect good sense'. Patrick is doing The Minpins, and I'm doing Esio Trot.
And Esio Trot is… is a book that I like very much because it also has some special problems in that it almost all takes place in two rooms and on two balconies. There's a little, tiny bit extra of that. So it's like making a film in two rooms, so that you have to invent a lot of camera angles and the ways that you cut off the picture, and so on. And varying on this… it's very limited, you know, it took two people acting. There is something nice for the illustrator in it though, because there are dozens or possibly hundreds of tortoises, different sizes, which are is involved in the plot, and of course two… the first tortoise is called Alfie, or something like that. But what the illustrator can do is to draw the reactions of the tortoises, which is not written into the text at all, so that when they're being given certain things to eat, or lifted in the air, or poked through a window or something like that, or failing to get into their little hutch, you can give them expressions on their faces, so there's another little story going on, almost in the margins as it were, which is added to the story. It doesn't contradict it, it just sort of expands it a little bit in that area. It's also a book... well there are two things about it that amused me or or attract me in a way. One is that… if you went to, I suppose, somebody who is an expert in children's books, maybe an editor or a teacher, or someone of that kind, and said, do you think it's a good idea to write a book for eight-year-olds about a middle-aged man who's in love with a middle-aged lady downstairs, in a block of flats? The answer is probably no, I think. But I mean he does do it and he does get away with it. The other thing that it's since Roald Dahl had this reputation for being rather acerbic, you know, and taking a gloomy view of or a cantankerous view of things, it's a book without any baddies in it. Everybody is nice, and it was nice to see he could do that, and he could do it, and it's very nice to think that he… that he wrote it, I think.

I still haven't given up doing Dahl books quite, because a few years ago we did A Treasury of Dahl, which brought together a lot of the bits of the writing, and extracts from the books. Some of those, I… some were illustrated by other people, some I re-illustrated, and for some I coloured in the drawings which existed, and some I did completely new drawings. And it was a very interesting task of making a whole book, which sort of hung together, so that it didn't look scrappy, but looked like some… a book that was designed as a complete treasury. And then since then we've done Songs and Verse, which is getting all the poems and verses and things out of the different books and putting them together. And that we wanted to do a different way, so that there everything is re-illustrated by other people, not me, and I kept off everything except the cover, and I did the introductions to each of the… a drawing to introduce each of the seven sections. And they are not Dahl illustrations at all, they're illustrations of children doing things. So it was interesting to be involved in another way of doing it.

I've done picture books of my own, and… I did two or three early on, which were just sort of illustrating straightforward stories in a way, little fantasy stories. And I think the fourth one, which was called Snuff, I kind of didn't know how to do it any longer. In fact, John Yeoman wrote it actually, I mean he took the premise of the characters, which I got, and wrote the plot for me, and then I sort of felt I’d sort of… I didn't know how to do it any more really. And how I got going again, was I illustrated a book for Dr Seuss, a book by Dr Seuss, called Great Day For Up. And he it was very strange, I mean it was based on his roughs, but you'd think it might be, sort of, a dreadful task to do a book from somebody else's roughs, but in fact he… it was very interesting to look closely at the way he writes a book, and the way that it works. And he was very… I mean my drawings didn't look like his, you know, I think he was… I'm not quite sure why I was asked to do it, except there were some two or three very complicated pictures at the end that he perhaps didn't want to be bothered with, or maybe he was getting on with something else. But… looking closely at that, it made me think, oh, it doesn't have to be a story. You can, you know, you can form it out of something else. And so the… I think it was the next one I did was called Mr Magnolia, and that was based on the rhymes, and parents have to read it over and over again to their children. It must drive them mad, I think. You know, these same rhymes, you know, he has only one boot on, all that sort of thing, for God's sake. But in fact you find you do tell a little story as you do it, but you don't set out from a little narrative, you set out from a set of situations or... I mean I got into it because I started off doing some drawings it was going to be for some television situation, again, where you saw the person, and then you moved out on the picture, and discovered he'd only got one boot, or he was holding something else in the other hand. And I put that together as a story, and that sort of started me off again. But it… although in fact, once having started off again, I didn't quite go on in that way, and I've done quite a few picture books since then.

In… when was it? 1986, I started to retire from the RCA over two years, I just diminished my time, faded out, and from there… and I think that gave me a bit more energy to do… to put in to these books of my own. And some of them are entertainments, as it were, I mean strictly Mrs Armitage on Wheels, I mean they're, sort of, accumulative things, which then collapse at the end. Some of them have got a bit more substance in them, in a way, and I think they're books that are available to a slightly wider… they're not necessarily for the smallest readers, and I think the first one that I did like that was called The Story of the Dancing Frog, which is about a mother telling a story to her child, and it's about one of their relations of former times who discovers a frog that can dance, and how they take it on the stage, and what happens. In a sense it doesn't have an end, because they, you see them eventually retire to the south of France, the now elderly lady and the elderly frog, I suppose. And it's… it's the things that happen on the stage are funny. It's funny to see, we hope, to see a frog dancing, but there is a sort of framing device of the parent telling the child the story, which is in sepia, so you know that it’s a different time and a different situation, that's the real bit, rather than the fantasy bit. And it's partly about stories, and it's partly about what… well, I suppose it's about what you do in a difficult situation, if you're bereaved, or something like that, how do you cope with that? And in a sense, the implication is, well, one way you do something about it is by telling stories, and it's about what stories are about. Not everybody got that idea, and I remember there was one review that said it would have been better without this person telling the story. But in fact it… that was the purpose of it, in a way, and why it's called The Story of the Dancing Frog, and not The Dancing Frog. And that seemed to have… a bit more, sort of, substance in it, in a way.

I don't think you can… it's difficult to say, and now I will have an idea. I think you have to make a few notes, and, sort of, have an open mind, and hope that some kind of idea will turn up. And I did two… I started two books at almost the same time, and one turned out to be Clown, and the other one turned out to be The Green Ship, which are quite different, and one is about a toy that has independent life and runs about trying to find someone to rescue the… his fellow toys who are in the dustbin. And it was interesting to find that that was… that it was more serious than I thought it was going to be, in a sense. I mean it was about these people being rejected, and what you have to do in that case, and I discovered that it was a book that was… that had an urban landscape. And I mean I could have sat down and said, I must do a book with an urban landscape, because most people live in cities. But I don't think I could have done it that way round. I mean I found that I, for some reason or another, thought out of mime and clowns and things like that, there was this idea of the toy, which I invented the story to, and then again you had to... he was generally thrown somewhere, but… into the air, or through a window or something like that. So that you've got this business of designing the pages so that he was in the predicament on one page and fell out of it, or into the next predicament on the next page. And… that… I had two… in fact the book has no text, I just did it in… again, it was interesting to me to do it as telling a story entirely in pictures. The only word is the title. And it's published in some other languages, and it's published in… France, where it doesn't have to be translated, because the clown is the same word in France, conveniently. But… and I had two little reactions in France, which were quite interesting to me, one was a review on the radio, where they said, 'Each double page spread is a chapter'. And that… they were acknowledging that business that you brought it to a crisis and then you turn the page. And another French man said to me, they're sans-abri. So they were homeless people, I mean you could see that they were, sort of… and in a sense it was a kind of miniature version, which they are in that predicament.

The book The Green Ship started at the same time as Clown, but it… in a different way, and it was a… I had a… a sort of an idea of a ship made out of trees and… and branches, like a kind of topiary, as it were, and I did a little drawing of it, and I couldn't see what use there was in it. I mean I couldn't see that it had a story, and it just sort of hung around the place for quite a while, and eventually I thought, well, you know, I… I really should make an effort to think what the story is, and it did come to light. And it is kind of… it's written in a kind of… it takes place in a… in the world of children's book stories, almost, you know, it’s somebody… it's somebody writing it who remembers what was happening as a child, and how he and his sister climbed over the wall, into this big jungley sort of garden, and they find this… this ship. And it's been built by a middle-aged lady, and partly in memory of her husband who had been lost at sea, so it's a little bit like The Dancing Frog, it's a sort of parallel story. And what was interesting to me about it was that you could see it, as it were, from her point of view and from the children's point of view. So that, from the children's point of view it was something that hadn't happened to them yet. They got on to this ship, and they imagined they were travelling to places that they hadn't ever been to… to Egypt and the Antarctic and so on, and they… it was… it was the world of play in fact, so they were… they were sort of practising for life, even if they never went to those places, I mean it was sort of an adventure playground, in which they lived these experiences. The… for the woman who'd had the ship arranged, it was a different involvement, in that it was… a sort of vicarious sharing with the experiences of her husband, who’d been at sea, and had been lost at sea, and then these things come together, or they sort of come together when there's a storm on, and the ship is in a storm, and you draw the ship as though it looks as though it is at sea, and… this is a kind of… cathartic experience… because she goes through the storm, the children fall asleep, they don't know what is happening, and they come out the other end, and she's able to, sort of, abandon the ship, and she ties it up, at… at as it were in port, and carries on, and then you see the children, over a couple of double page spreads. They are growing up into adolescents, and looking back on this experience, and the trees are growing out, so that the… the ship disappears, and it just becomes trees and bushes. And so there's a kind of double action, in that the… the text is rather going… it's kind of diminuendo, in that it says, in… that… that there’s… it's rather sadly… the… the ship is no longer a ship, and soon nobody will be able to remember that it was ever a green ship, and so on. Whereas at the same time, the trees are growing away cheerfully, and sort of… as… as it says in Jane Austen, ‘Meaning to have spring’. So that there’s… you get a… you do get a sort of… tension between the… the words and the pictures, and I think it's… and I was… you know, I wondered whether… that would be… the fact that it would appeal to… or not appeal, but could… could… would have something slightly separate to say to an adult reader, was a disadvantage or not. But it seemed to work alright, and I got some letters about it, and I got one letter from a… a parent, a mother, who said, instead of going on holiday one year, we bought a little wood somewhere in the west of England, or Oxfordshire, or somewhere like that. And… her five-year-old son was going to build a green ship in this wood, and she sent me his drawing of what it was going to be like, so… obviously you could get that message alright, I think.

Another book is called Zagazoo, which is about children… the stages which children go through, or which boys at least go through, growing up, and I think… I mean if I'd had any children and had children growing up, I would have known too much about it to be able to do it. But because I hadn't, and had only seen these things from afar, I could simplify it so that the the little boy grows up and turns into one kind of monster or another, as he goes through the different stages. But when he becomes a teenager, he's at his most monstrous. And that is again… The Green Ship is a kind of book that… it could be real, it's the drawings of reality. The imagination is laid onto it, and you bring the imagination  in a sense, by the way you crop the pictures, or you have a picture, which makes the ship look as though it's moving, although it isn't, by you, by moving the frame across it. Then in Zagazoo you know it is never real life. It's a drawing, it only exists on the page, there are no backgrounds. It just exists as drawings, and you know that it's never real, and when the child is not born, it arrives in a parcel. It originally arrived in a brown paper parcel, but I realised that that wasn't interesting enough, and in fact it arrives now in a sort of parcel which has got crazy zigzag paper round it, which I did originally really just to sort of brighten up the page, but it actually helps the message, because it adds to this feeling that it in fact is not true. And those I think… again I wondered whether, you know, one or two people said, oh, of course it's for adults really, that kind of thing. But… and I remember meeting a… maybe I'm optimistic, but I met a couple… I mean, some friends who have a little boy who's about five or something and I said, some people said it's really for adults. They said, 'He got it immediately'. Well, I don't know that everybody gets it immediately, but I mean it's possible anyway. They seem to… people seem to go on looking at it.

So I… you know, I had a sort of sequence of the picture books got into more of a sequence, and the latest one is called Angel Pavement, which is a title which I stole or borrowed from JB Priestley, from a book that was published in 1932, I think, the year I was born, but… which is a completely different kind of book, needless to say. But that is about… it's about the pleasures of drawing, really, and it's about two girls who are… you don't know, but they are angels, or at least we know, because we can see it, because it's a picture book we can see their wings, but normal people can't. And they produce a sort of magic pencil, and in fact those drawings done with the magic pencil, which draws in the air, are just done with a pencil that's got four different colours in it… which we had a lot of when I did an exhibition called Magic Pencils, so I got a lot in the studio already. And so it really is about a drawing competition and a pavement artist, who can't put paving stones into the exhibition, so he's enabled, by the use of this pencil, to draw in the sky, because the little girls who are angels can carry him into the air. But it was really… the idea of a drawing competition, plus the idea of the drawings you could do with this pencil. And it's about the pleasures and purposes of drawing, really, in a simple way, and it ends up saying but when you start drawing, you can never be quite sure what is going to happen next. So it's supposed to encourage people to draw, apart from anything else. But that was... really also partly came out of a number of activities that came about with… from being Children's Laureate.

About seven or eight or nine years ago, I had been doing this sort of sequence that I'd done a lot of Dahl, I'd done a sequence of my own books, and I'd decided I was really doing a bit too much work. And so I said I would calm things down a bit, and I wrote and did little drawing and wrote a message to myself, proposing… it was a drawing of myself relaxing on a deck chair and saying I was going to try and behave myself, I was semi-retired or something like that, and that worked for about a year, and then in 19… just the beginning of 1999, I… there was this question of whether there should be a Children's Laureate, and who should be it? And what did everybody think about it? And some of us were, kind of, canvassed beforehand, and I was rather doubtful about the whole thing, and said, how can you expect somebody to find more time when they're already working on their own professional work, writing books or drawing pictures. But I… allowed my name to be put forward with a number of other people's, and then I was rung up and told that they'd picked me to do it, and my views of it of course changed overnight. I didn't lose the doubts and cautions that I had about it previously, but I to see the positive side of it. In fact I did that for two years. The advantage of it, from my point of view, was that because I'd scaled things well advantage, disadvantage, I don't know. I'd scaled things down a bit, so that in fact I had sometime in which I could take up these activities. Another thing about it was that nobody had ever been Children's Laureate before, so there was only a kind of vague notion about what it might be. Sorry. And so you could invent what it was, and of course there were a certain number of invitations, which came along with it. Would I go and talk here? Would I go and talk… give a lecture there? And so on. Which I did. I made one sort of policy resolution, which was that I wasn't going to go and talk to any schools, which may sound slightly crazy, but I mean, you could have multiple illustrations to school… invitations to schools, and be going around the countryside exhausting yourself. And of course, it's wonderful to talk to a school, and I mean you do get a lot back from it, and I've done it many times, but maybe you talk to 30 children, maybe you talk to 100 children, but you just talk to them. Whereas what I wanted to do was to talk to teachers and librarians and parents as well as children, to say that the activities that went to make up the children's writer or the children's illustrator were actually professional activities, and they were not childish, and they maybe had special requirements, but they're things that should be taken seriously, and that you should look into and if you were a parent or a teacher, learn something about, and try to develop some kind of criteria for thinking about them. And that in fact there was a lot of activity that went on in the background, and that would be interesting to know about. So that was how I set out to do it.

After the two years were over, I did a sort of diary of it, called Laureate's Progress, and I counted up, and I realised I'd actually done nine books in the two years although I wasnt supposed to be doing anything. One of them was a book called Laureate's Party, which was a paperback that my publishers asked me to do, which was about favourite children's books. And of course I discovered that my favourite children's books were hopelessly out of date, and some of them you couldnt even get, and so I had to develop new children's books, and it wasnt really my… I mean My 50 Favourite Books was what it was called, but in fact it was a review of books that might be interesting, which went from the youngest through to one or two actually adult books.
That was one activity, which I found was much more to do than I'd imagined. And I did, it was the moment to bring to completion a book that I'd been fiddling about with and doing some work on for some years, which was Words and Pictures, which again was about illustration, but entirely in terms of my own work, but looking at different… you know, designing books, telling stories, adapting to atmosphere, using colour and things of that kind. So I had brought that together. And perhaps in the end, the most interesting aspect of it was suggesting an exhibition, which you know about. But it was suggesting an exhibition, that I wanted to get some illustration into the National Gallery, and so I suggested that the idea of the exhibition was… when I say, the National Gallery, we suggested it to about three or four galleries, but the National Gallery were the ones that responded most positively. And the idea was to have an exhibition of pictures in alphabetical order of the artist, so that in fact, there was no difference between the old master, the modern painter or the illustrator, and we took that idea to several galleries. The National Gallery responded immediately, and had the room in which we could do it, available at the right time, and so we set about doing that. And what developed from that was also the fact that there was a meeting with… you Ghislaine and with Michael Wilson, the Director of Exhibitions, in which he said, 'I think we can only have one artist under each letter, otherwise its going to make too many'. And I said, 'That could be a bit of a problem for me, because under B, is it me, or Botticelli, or Bruegel, or someone like that.' And he said, 'Well I dont think youre in it, actually'. Shock. But he said, 'There's quite a lot of room on the walls, you could draw between the other pictures'. And I said, 'Are you allowed to do that?' And… he… Michael Wilson said, 'We want it to look as little like the National Gallery as possible'. So that was a whole… that was in a sense the first step in doing a lot of… not a lot, but some work in curating exhibitions, which set me off again. First of all it was that, and then there have been other exhibitions, which have followed in the same spirit. We hadn't done anything… I don't think anybody had done anything quite like that before, and we got the exhibition up, and I remember saying to my friend, John Yeoman, who… with whom I've done many books, ''Well now we just have to wait and see if anybody comes'. And he said, 'Never mind about that, are they any good at crowd control?' And his estimate of it was the nearer, because they… they were queuing up the steps of the National Gallery, and 250,000 people came in the four months that the show was on. And other shows, in fact, have followed on from that.

That exhibition Tell Me a Picture seemed to lead on to a number of other things, partly to do with exhibitions, partly to do with a general sort of overspill into other areas, I mean from picture books. Which is, I mean, something that is very interesting to me, because… it's sort of mixed up with education, and when the Children's Laureate started, it kind of brought in… brought back into life the ideas that I'd been thinking about when I was teaching. After that there was… let me think, there was… I was invited to do… Magic Pencil. It was Magic Pencil that produced the magic pencils that I was able to use in Angel Pavement, but that was an exhibition for the British Council of contemporary British children's books illustrators. And I think there were 15 or something like that. It was quite a big exhibition, it was very… I did it with Andrea Rose, who is the Art's Officer of the British Council, and that was what we wanted to do was not to have a huge multiplicity of images, but to have a lot of work, but it was like 15 one-man shows, almost, so that you could go into that particular person's area and learn what they were like, or either revisit somebody you knew very well as it were, or find out about a new person. And I think that I felt that was the way to do it, because I know from hanging exhibitions at the RCA and that sort of thing that you can you have to explain to people silently, what is going on. You can be baffled by too many images, and not knowing what you're looking at… I mean a multiplicity of things. So you met each artist as you went round. The extraordinary thing about that show was that it was it was on in Newcastle, it was on at the British Library in London, but of course its main purpose, as it was for the British Council, was to travel, and I there were about… I think there were about 300 pieces of work in it in the end. More than… I mean, it was very nice, it was more than I would ever have presumed to put in, kind of thing, you know, but Andrea Rose kept saying, 'Oh I think we should have more pictures, more pictures'. And in fact what happened is it went to Holland, it went to Italy, to the Museum of Modern Art in Bologna, at the same time as the Children's Book Fair. It went to Madrid, and it went to Poland, and… so it was about a year travelling, or more. But the other thing about it was curious, because these pictures were taken from books, were shown as pictures, as originals, and were not shown necessarily for children to look at, I mean obviously hundreds and thousands of children came to look at them, but I mean they were also addressed to students and adults, and other people who were meant to take them seriously in their own right. But curiously enough, although it was an exhibition of originals, the British Council made an exhibition of facsimiles, very good facsimiles of these works, which then meant they could send them without the usual kind of curatorial restrictions, to places who couldn't otherwise accept them, because they hadn't the museum conditions. So they went to South America and they went to… the Far East, and they went to the West Indies… all kinds of places, so that, I think the facsimile exhibition went to about over 30 different countries. It's still somewhere now, as a matter of fact, and that was very interesting, the extent to which there was an interest in that, and some of the artists involved… I think, Sara Fanelli, who we count as an English illustrator, although she comes from Italy originally… went to South America, and she went to India with it, and someone went to Taiwan, and I think John Burningham went to Malaysia. So there was quite a lot of travelling with it, so that… it sort of expanded itself.

Nearly all my books have been published in France, over the past 25 years. The first one, I think, was The Enormous Crocodile, the first Dahl picture book. But a lot of others, are nearly all published by Gallimard Jeunesse and in fact I actually talk to them when I'm doing the books, as well as to my English publisher, so a lot of books have… have been published there. And I've visited, over the past 15 years, I've visited quite a lot of schools in France, which is good for me because I can practise my spoken French, and… because they mostly don't speak English, except some of the children. And… again, so that I found myself in a situation that, at the same time that I was doing Children's Laureate, I found myself doing a book in the south west of France. Now, since I retired from the RCA, I've had a house there, and I spend two or three months there, in bits and pieces, each year, and I know a number of the local teachers there. And there was a meeting with them, arranged by… a local librarian, in which they said, we're really looking for a… we're looking for a author-illustrator of children's books who we can work with on a children's book. And… I fancied that. I was the only one in the room who was an author-illustrator of children's books, so I thought… thought they were looking at me, and I said, 'How interesting, what is it going to be about?' And… Genevieve Roy, who was the teacher, or educationist in question said, 'C'est sur l'humanisme'. And I thought, it's a book for eight-year olds about humanism, but that was the limitation of my French, because it actually means… they meant on humanitarian problems actually, it was all the things that… that… you know, like sort of: bullying, racism, war, pollution, and so on and so on. And could we do a book together with the local children? And… so I said, okay, and it was… I realised it was… there was an element of folly involved in it, but… and so I did some drawings of… I thought, how can a child… or it had to be two children, so there was a boy and a girl… encounter these different problems easily, and, since we were near the sea, I thought well, there was… there was a lot of fishing there, I thought, well make it a boat. So it was a sailing boat. But it was a sailing boat that would… I did some rough drawings, so it was a sailing boat that could… had wheels as well, so it could go on land, and it could float on water as a sailing boat, and it could also fly. And I just… you don't know how, I just said it could. And then the children were invited to invent bits of story about it, and how they… how these children would meet various contemporary disasters. They… they all wanted it to fly, curiously enough. It never sailed anywhere. It needn't have been a boat, except… I mean the idea of a flying boat is quite a sort of… a flying boat is quite a traditional thing in fairy stories.

And so they all started writing bits of story, and then I got all those back, and started doing some more roughs, and we built up a book, like that. And in fact the… we were in contact with the Inspector of Schools for Northern France, I think, who also put us in touch, via the Internet, with French-speaking schools in London and Dublin and Sweden, I think, and Luxembourg and Singapore. And so they were all making contributions to this, so eventually we sort of knitted this together into a book, edited their ideas, and so it was… well, it was, sort of, one illustrator and 1,800 collaborators. Some of the collaborators did drawings, as well. What was interesting about it was there were two great big meetings, one in La Rochelle and one in Rochefort, where lots of schoolchildren came; some came from London, actually, specially for that. And they worked on the book, and maybe their words were lost in the book, or were never reflected in the book, but they worked on those ideas, and they wrote poems, and they wrote sketches, and they wrote songs, and they did a lot of drawings about it. So that there's this interesting way in which you take the idea of a book, or you take a book, and it kind of burgeons out into… all kinds of activities which happen round it, and… but there is a purpose, and there's a manifestation of it outside school, which is so that it you know you're motivated, you know where you're going, you know you're contributing, you're part of a big network of people working on the same thing. And the teachers there ambitiously wanted this to be a commercially printed book, which they mentioned at the beginning, and they hoped in French and in English. And I said, well we can't be sure of that, but we'll do what we'll see what happens let's do it, we'll see what happens. And I took to Gallimard, who are my regular publishers, and they said well, we could do it, but it would take us we do 365 children's books a year, and it would take us a certain amount of time to work it through the system. And we would only give it a 365th part of our attention, in a sense. You know, although, I mean they do all my books, and they do them very well. But they said, perhaps I should take it to someone they'd worked with, who used to work with them, called Alain Serres, who had his own publishing house, which specialised in issues of this kind, children's rights, and citizenship and things of that kind. And, so I met him, and he said… showed it to him, and he said… which was encouraging really… is the first thing he said, 'Well of course a book by children is not necessarily a book for children', and I felt that, you know, we were sort of on a firm basis then. He, as well as a publisher, is a poet and a writer, and he… I put together a text in French, from their writing, and he reworked it, as it were. But he offered to publish it, and not only did he… because he was his own man, he not only published it, but he published it in September, so that it came out an… a year after we'd started it, which was really quite astonishing, and then, having got that done, we were fortunate that my English publishers published it as well. So it appears as a book by me, so to speak, with help from 1,800 friends. And we also did the book so that it doesn't end at the end, if you see what I mean. They travel in their ship, they arrive at a certain place, and then they… Alain Serres, I think it was, who pointed out, he said, we mustn't make it look as though you can only be safe living on this desert island, or wherever they land, you must start them off again, so they have a new boat, even more bizarre than the one that they started with and so the end of the book they're setting off again to find new problems, and so you're invited to think about that, or continue the book. And indeed that is what some schools have done.

I mean, there've been a lot of other versions of the French experience, I mean in visiting schools and book fairs. There are lots of book fairs in France, many more than we have here. There's hardly a town of any size that doesn't have a book fair or a children's book fair, and I've been to a lot of those, and it's very good for practising your French, because most… you have to speak French, and you don't feel so embarrassed if they don't speak English. The most striking development in that is that because we worked together on the National Gallery… was approaching the museums of the Paris museé, the museums of the City of Paris, to see if there was something similar that we could do for them. And… what happened, you will remember, is… is that we made a suggestion to… to the Paris Museums, and went and talked to them, and went away. And a year later we'd not heard anything from them at all, and we thought, probably that that was just maybe the end of it, and we said, well we would be in Paris on one day, and we didn't know if there was anything left to discuss, or whether the whole thing had gone down the drain. And received this message almost by return of email, saying, come at nine o'clock on Wednesday morning, and we will show you the exhibition spaces. And that was in the Petit Palais, and that was very… I mean, I think there was a great deal of happy accident involved there, in that the Petit Palais, which was built in 1900 for the Great… International Exhibition of that year in Paris, next to the Grand Palais, both those buildings were being refurbished, and the Petit Palais opened to the public, it was supposed to be in November, it was finally in December. So that January a year ago, we went and discovered that… we were doing an exhibition, along the lines… to some extent, along the lines of the National Gallery exhibition. I mean I think they wouldn't have accepted it if they hadn't seen that show had happened and been successful. But it wasn't exactly the same… we chose the theme of… we were invited to take pictures from the reserves of the Petit Palais, and we chose the theme of women in painting, in art, and found 50 paintings and prints from their collections. And then I did… as in the National Gallery, I did drawings on the walls, the difference being that the walls in the Petit Palais are extremely high, and it's a huge, elegant space, and… so the pictures could go along at the level you normally see pictures, well spaced out, and somehow or other one had to get drawings up the walls, because the walls were so large. And it meant that you could lift the drawings well above the paintings, so that they weren't interfering with each other, and also they animated the walls, and… the way to do that seemed to me that… how did you get the drawings up there? So I thought, well we would… we would make angels of them. We would make putti, as in Renaissance paintings, little angels with wings. But these were sort of updated, so they had contemporary trousers, and little trainers, and things of that kind, and T-shirts, and they were doing sort of activities that more or less related to what was happening in the pictures down below, and they were women in portraits, women in the country, in family life, and so on and so on, elaborate, formal portraits and all kinds of things of that kind, and there was also a section of prints, because the Petit Palais has a wonderful print collection. And there were 19th century prints there, of everyday life, and pictures by Steinlen and Vuillard and Toulouse-Lautrec, and there I was able to draw a printing press on the wall, larger than life, with these little creatures taking the... fluttering the papers about, up the wall.
And… so that was… we spent about a year doing that, and… for an exhibition which opened, at the same time as the Petit Palais opened. And… it was a wonderful experience because the Director of Petit Palais was so supportive, and he said that I was to have carte blanche, and he really meant it actually, that we could choose anything we wanted, and arrange the exhibition in the way that we wanted, so that both the choice of the pictures, the design of the exhibition, the sequence of the pictures, grouped in certain order which took you round the exhibition, and the drawings, were all produced as one single piece of activity. And we don't know how many people have been to see it, but we hope they certainly queue up outside, although maybe that's just to see the Petit Palais itself.

I think one of the things I like about children's book illustration is that it's illustration. I mean, I don't… I try not to think of it as a completely separate activity. I mean I think that you… there are certain things that you have to think about. There are certain modes of thought that you have to go into to do it, but fundamentally the drawing the drawing that I do in children's books, is radically difficult… different from the that I started off doing for adults. And in a sense the difference between one children's book and another children's book and that children's book and a book for adults the distances between them may be about the same. I mean in each case you're adapting drawing to a different situation, you're relating to the words of the book, either your words or the writer's words, so whether it's… Roald Dahl or Cervantes, or someone else, those… you're making those modifications of drawing. And it's sort of drawing that it goes back to, I think. One of the other overflows that I've been involved in is not particularly for adults or children, which is the Campaign For Drawing, and that started about four or five years ago. And it was an initiative to celebrate the centenary of John Ruskin, and it was primed initially by… with some money from the Guild of St George, which is something founded by Ruskin during his lifetime. And that was to promote drawing, to encourage people to draw, or to make them feel that they were allowed to draw if they wanted to. And, the it… it's for the whole population, and it was started by Julian Spalding, and the project is run by Sue Grayson Ford, and I was one of the patrons from the start, and we… their proposal was that there should be… everything should happen at one weekend in October. But two or three weeks beforehand, there would be a day, one event, which would be called The Big Draw, and to publicise the event beforehand, and then the actual Campaign For Drawing itself happens all over countryside. The first year I think there were 300 different museums and art schools and things of that kind, who… who invited the public in to do it. But there was… I can remember at that first occasion, they said, we're going to do something called The Big Draw. And I remember saying that I think if you were going to have a day called The Big Draw you really needed a big drawing. And the idea that someone came up with was to draw in the underground passage, which leads from South Kensington underground station through to the museums in Exhibition Road. And so we papered that, and… lots of people turned up to draw, and artists, and people from museums, and we were… we involved the public as well, in drawing, and it's a dismal passage, actually, normally, and it was fascinating to see how by four o'clock in the afternoon it had sort of transformed itself into a lot of people working together, side by side, in a cheerful spirit, and had turned it into a sort of… studio almost, really. That was the first move. It was also relatively cheap, because all it needed was drawing materials, and those we had given to us by the people that manufactured them, so we got off the ground then… I think it was about 300 different institutions did it.

Then we moved on to the museums, to the British Museum, to the Victoria and Albert Museum, to the Natural History Museum, and each year people were invited in, and more and more people came. A couple of years ago it was the Natural History Museum, and I think 14,000 visitors came on that day, to draw, and at the V&A I think we gave them cardboard suitcases to put their drawings in, and… I've been involved in doing the sort of logos and drawings and things like that, and talks, alongside everybody else, for these occasions. It… the idea of it I think, is that people should be… should be allowed to draw if they want to. Everybody draws to begin with. You… you… have… when you start out, I think you're learning a verbal language and a visual language at the same time, and they're more easily kind of related to each other. The… as the verbal language triumphs, the visual one fades, and you become inhibited, and you don't want to do it, and you don't want to show that you don't do it as well as other people. And it's an attempt to give that value. I think people do respond to it. I mean they obviously do respond to it, the number of people come to take part… both children and adults, and I remember going to such an event at the National Gallery of Wales, in Cardiff, where I'd suggested that they should get people of my generation to draw, because they would be able to draw things from 50 years ago, that young people perhaps wouldn't know about. And I went down there, and I think I was supposed to go at two o'clock to exhort these people to draw, who'd come into the museum, and, I remember getting there at two o'clock, and there were about 40 or 50 of them already. They'd all been there for an hour or more, and they'd said, 'Why do we have to wait for him? Can we start straight away?' So everybody… we had to stop them drawing, so that I could encourage them to draw. But I didn't… I mean I tried not to take too long over it. The other thing that was interesting about it was… I mean now there are 1,000 such occasions in the… in the campaign in October, but the other thing that I found particularly interesting about it was that it actually changed people's relationship with the museum. That was something which I hadn't expected to see. I mean I knew I was interested in drawing, and I you know, and I thought people ought to be able to draw if they wanted to, but… it meant they were going into the museums with a… with a purpose, which they didn't have otherwise. I mean previously, lots of people go into museums with no inhibitions at all, but some don't quite know why they're going there, or if they go, they feel that these works belong to someone else and that they are allowed to look at them. If you go in there to draw them, you… or to take in some other activity that goes along with drawing, you know why you're there, I think, and certainly, I mean… with those people in… also with those… with those people in Cardiff at the National Gallery of Wales, a lot of people said, 'I haven't been in this building for 40 years'. And they'd come to do that, and they were obviously, you know, interested in what was happening, and the focus, which you can see people giving to something as they draw it, they're looking at it in a way that they would not previously have done. They have a very real relationship to it, as they are drawing it. They have to concentrate on it in a way that most people probably wouldn't do if they went into a gallery of their own volition, they don't look at it in quite that focused sort of way. So that's another way that it seems to have spread out beyond the books. But one hopes that it means that people will actually not only go on drawing themselves, but take more interest in drawing, and being able to see it as not necessarily just a preparation for a painting or a preparation for something else, but as something interesting in itself.

The other campaign that I found myself involved in, it's slightly embarrassing to talk about it, because it travels under the name of The Quentin Blake Gallery of Illustration. And this has been going on for about nearly as long. The some friends brought me this idea they knew that I had an archive of my the originals of my own drawings, not quite all of them, but a very great many of them, so there are probably several thousand drawings, and they saw that as the basis for a gallery of illustration, which is something which, at the moment, doesn't exist. It was particularly interesting to me, because talking about illustration, teaching illustration, I'm aware that there isn't anything of this kind, and there is a huge amount of illustration, which nobody knows about. It's regarded of the moment, so it's seen as, in a sense as ephemeral, but it isn't really, I mean it's still all there. There are huge collections of illustration in the great museums, such as the V&A and the British Museum, and the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris, and no doubt elsewhere in the world, there are huge collections of illustration. There are also illustrations that belong to illustrators, or have been left to their families, which have no home to go to, and which one never sees, portfolios which are never opened. And there's also from the point of view of contemporary illustrators and students of illustration, a huge amount of illustration going on in the world in other countries… in America, and Japan, and France and Germany, which we don't see enough of. We don't know sufficient about what is happening in other countries. Nor is there enough knowledge, even among illustration students, of what has happened in the past. You can talk about 19th century illustrators, and get no flicker of recognition from the person you are talking to, even from a professional illustrator. So that I'm particularly illustrate… interested in 19th century French illustrators, of one kind or another, because I've… those are my ancestors, I think, or that's how I regard them. But I'm also very interested in English illustrators and take George Cruikshank, for instance, who illustrated the first two books of Charles Dickens, and dozens and dozens and dozens of other books, and Grimms' Fairy Tales, and all kinds of things in the 19th century… was one of the best artists of the 19th century; full of vitality and energy of an extraordinary kind. William Feaver organised an exhibition at the V&A, a wonderful exhibition, what? Twenty years ago probably, something like that now. It'll be another 20 years before we see those. And there's lots of illustration which one simply doesn't get to see, either because it's in another country, or because it's in the vaults of a museum. And it would be wonderful to have a gallery space, in which those things could be shown, exhibitions could be mixed together to show different aspects. The way that different countries treat illustration, treat the same subjects, and there's a vast amount of stuff to be shown, and also it would be wonderful to have somewhere where contemporary illustrators could show their work, and publishers can show what they have done in illustration. We haven't yet found a home for that gallery yet, we're still looking but we have done one or two exhibitions of my work, and there's also an exhibition, which is, in a sense, of the kind that we would like to do. That exhibition is called In All Directions, and it's about travel and illustration, or the way that travel has been means of transport: trains, boats, aeroplanes, have been shown in illustration, from the starting with Tiepolo and coming through the 19th century up to the present day. And showing different ways of doing it, because illustrators are very much related to the techniques of printing, and of reproduction, so that this exhibition's got engravings, etchings, lithographs, wood engravings, four colour halftone printing, all kinds of things in it, and so that it shows different modes of transport at the same time it shows different modes of seeing, and different modes of reproducing illustration. And that's an exhibition which has travelled about, and it has a catalogue, which is called In All Directions, which the Arts Council produces, and it's the kind of exhibition, which I think it has its own… I've written a kind of an essay in this book, which gives some explanation, but the most expressive thing about it I think is really not so much anything that I may have to say about it, but looking at those pictures together, and then you see that there is a kind of graphic tradition of illustration. It wasn't always called illustration, but this business of reflecting text, expressing a narrative, visually, has got a tradition, and that's something that we ought to be able to reflect in a gallery like this.

I've been very fortunate with French publication of my work. The first book that was published, I think it was the first book, the first book that was published by Gallimard anyway, Gallimard Jeunesse, was Roald Dahl's The Enormous Crocodile, which was the first book of his that I did. And within a year or two after that it was published there. And… my publisher there then was Christine Baker and she still is, what is it now? 30 years later, I suppose. And I'm… that was very fortunate for me… it was a great asset because, partly because she was very enthusiastic about what I was doing, but partly also because she's married to an Englishman she has an office in London and part of her job, of course, is to keep an eye on everything that's published in English. And they do buy, take on a lot of that. So it means that, since then, pretty well all the picture books I do have been published by Gallimard Jeunesse and I've got to know them very well. And when I… the publisher of… who really started Gallimard Jeunesse was Pierre Marchand who is very interested in… I mean he started a lot of, sort of, self-education series, you know, and factual, non-fiction things and things about travel and about sailing and so on. And he was sort of incidentally interested in children's books. But most of that was done by Christine and by Hedwige Pasquet who's now the Managing Director since Pierre Marchand died. And so I've got to know them very well and it's very nice to go and see them there and, in some ways, I've an almost more continuous relationship with them than I do with any English publisher, although I've always been published by Jonathan Cape and I've known Tom Maschler well, but not well personally as I know the people who run Gallimard. And so that has given a sort of interesting other dimension and, in fact, I… and I have got round to doing things, eventually, the things for them. I mean the book that I talked about, Un bateau dans le ciel, or The Sailing Boat in the Sky [sic], actually was offered to them but Christine said, I think you need to get it out very quickly, and we do 365 books a year, or something like that should perhaps take it to an individual publisher. And they recommended Alain Serres who was one of their authors, in fact. But everything else has been… almost everything else has been published by them. Certainly all my own books and all of Dahl's books and a number of others, and John Yeoman's books have been published by them.

I've also done one or two other things for them and recently two or three years ago, Christine said to me would you like to do a book of poetry for French children? And I did that and I'm not sure, but I suspect she thought it was going to be for much younger children than it was. But when I started, I started getting interested in the reading and finding out this, creating this anthology, and in fact what it was, in the end, was… and it's only about 30 poems and every one is illustrated. But they are, for the most part, they're poems for adults which a child could read, or a young person could read. So, I mean, there is sort of Baudelaire and Victor Hugo and other French writers, and earlier ones as well. What was interesting to me about it was as an exercise was that I and I don't know how I got onto this, the French normally do everything in chronological order so that if you have a book that's got early poems and later poems chronologically, they appear in that order in the book. So that helps you to make your structure of knowledge, I suppose. These I just sort of related to each other out of similarities so that there was one about the weather, there would be another one about the weather and meeting somebody and the next one would be about meeting somebody, you know. And they, sort of, went hand in hand. The other thing that was interesting to me about them was I treated them all as though they were written now, so I didn't do… I cut them off from the history, so there is a poem… and I've even forgotten who it's by for the moment, but which says, oh, what are we doing about this war business, why do we keep getting into this? And… you know, our masters organise it, we have to suffer for it, and so on and so on and so and so. This is a 15th century poem, or something like that, but you can you can read it. But I illustrated it now, as it were, and the same… there's a very… rather passionate outburst by a woman writer of the 16th century who says, oh, I don't know, what am I thinking about? I'm so confused, you know, and so on. And these conflicting emotions and I'm living and dying and so on at the same time. And I thought you could give that to a teenager, you know, with a few photos of her boyfriends on the wall kind of thing, you know. And so that that book is all done… as though today… and in a kind of… and it also goes from cheerful through to gradually more serious, to cheerful again at the end. So there are various sort of sequences at work in it and if you've only got 30 poems as you can… you can do that. And… I spent a long time trying to… because I can read French but don't… I mean, I'm not very intimate with it, so I spent a long time trying to think of a title for this book and… Christine Baker wasn't interested in any of those, and she said, well, in the office we call it Quentin Blake au pays de la poésie française… that was its, sort of, working title for them. So she said, 'I think we're going to call it that'. So that rather strangely is what it's called and… I followed on from that and so it's got a sort of drawing of me in a French landscape on the front. So that was a book that was done especially for them. I've also done other books which were just commissioned from them and theree was a series of books… there is a series of books, by Patricia MacLachlan who's an American writer who wrote a book called Sarah, Plain and Tall, about… life in the… Midwest in America in… earlier in the 20th century. And that was not illustrated in the English… in the American edition and… but they wanted it in a paperback and wanted it illustrated. And I've done three or four of those which is quite a strange business, illustrating an American book for a French publisher. But it's all a bit of the… it's all the internationalness of illustration, I think. And also, I suppose it was through them in a way, through contacts of Gallimard through to the publication department of Paris Musées, the Paris museums that we embarked on the Petit Palais Exhibition and of course they produced the book that goes with that exhibition.

Doing less teaching, or more or less giving up teaching, I was much more able to go to book fairs in France. And there's hardly a town of any note whatsoever that doesn't have a book fair of some kind or other. So it's… that's been a wonderful experience because you go to towns that you wouldn't have gone to as a tourist and you meet people who don't speak English so you have to speak French. And it's very, very interesting because you're sort of parachuted into this situation with people you don't know and yet they're all people who have something in common with you, so that you know what you're talking about because they're either teachers or librarians or book sellers or editors. So that's been a very interesting aspect of life and also you go to… you… they won't let you go without going to see some, at least some, classes in schools. And it's very nice to be walking across that playground with the teachers, you know, with one or two chestnut trees or something like that in the playground… the staffroom, and… thinking… I mean, it's not amazing or anything but it's just, it's a special experience because it isn't one that you can organise for yourself. You can't say I'll go to France on my holidays and go into the… you know, into the cour de récré because you have to be invited there and that's always been, you know, for… now for 15 years or more, that's been a very interesting thing to be doing. And, again, it's sort of I think it rather opens up one's ideas about how people react to what you're doing and the people that are seeing it, you know. I've just last month been to France and one of my visits was to a town called Thouars which is in the Deux-Sèvres which is kind in the left-hand side towards the top of France, but... just… almost up to the… just below the Loire. And they had done… what was it? Rather grandly referred to as Prix Littéraire Quentin Blake. But the wonderful thing about this as a prix littéraire is only my books were in for it and so that… it was the junior school classes… I think there were 25 classes there, hundreds of children… but they had to choose their own… what they thought was the best one of the… of the books that I'd done, the picture books that I'd done, and they were in... they were divided into two or three different age groups. But I mean the remarkable thing about it, and this is the interesting thing about it, is the amount of work that they had done associated with that. They produced a huge amount of work, their own poems, you know, their own pictures, their own rewritings of the stories or sometimes they put a bit of one story together with a bit of another story, and so on. So there's a huge amount of work which comes out of that and it's very interesting to see that too.
[Q] Which one did win?
I can't remember which one. I think there were three separate prizes. I mean I didn't get a prize, I don't think, but I got some presents when… but, of course, I had to… I… I met… all these children were in a big room, a sort of theatre in the town, and… I knew which one had won but I as I was there drawing, you know, on a sort of back projector so that they could see it all, I had to pretend not to know which one had won so that I did drawings of two or three other books before we got to the right one. I think… Daisy Artichoke was one of them. That's… It's interesting, some books almost work better in France than they do here and the curious thing about that book is that it's got very simple rhymes in it, you know, and it… everything… she's called Daisy Artichoke and everything rhymes with that, you know. And… I can't remember any of them now at the moment but you know, she had a lovely patchwork cloak and, etc, etc. There are only about eight rhymes for artichoke in English so it was quite a difficult manoeuvre to get these pictures to work and look different. And generally, of course, when your work is translated you just hand it over and it's translated into Hebrew or Japanese or, you know, I mean, German and… you know… they go off and you hope it's alright. But in French I am able to take a bit of interest in that so and I thought I wonder if that's going to be a problem for them, because there isn't very much…. And in French she's called Mimi Artichaut and I realised, just thinking about it, there are hundreds of rhymes in French for that so I was able to, I mean I actually translated it. I mean I wouldn't have got it right if I… if Christine Baker hadn't corrected my text but… I was able to reorganise the captions so that they… everything rhymed all the way through. And even once it was so easy I went and did a lot of other drawings which also rhymed with artichaut but… they're not for publication. I mean they're just nonsense.

Because I've done a lot of children's books and a lot of them have stayed in print, I mean there are quite a lot of them and that is a very, sort of, powerful area of publishing. One tends to get, you know, described as a children's book illustrator; that's fair enough. I mean that's why people know who I am as far as an illustrator is concerned. But I mean, as it links to what I was talking about, teaching illustration, and it is a… it isn't a separate activity. You have to have a notion about children and a notion about your readers but you're really doing those books both for children and their parents and, of course, you're doing them for yourself as well so that you're thinking about the drawing and you're thinking about the design of the book and you're thinking about the sequence. And you're thinking about a whole lot of things… which apply to any book. I mean the children's books, particularly the picture books, are very interesting because you have complete control over the whole thing and, in fact, the text goes into your pictures rather than your pictures being added to the text. But… I mean I started off drawing for adults and of course, because a lot of it is humorous, it crosses the age ranges without much trouble. I mean that's what helps. But I have done a number of books for adults; I mean there were some humorous books… I did a number of Patrick Campbell's books in the '60s and so on. And I've also done some for the Folio Society over, again, probably 30 years. The first one that I did was we're not quite sure whether it's a children's book or a book for adults, which was The Hunting of the Snark and that gave them the opportunity to design the whole book and drop the text into it, and there you have to do a complete design of the book so that you can tell the sequence of the story. But I've done other books for them and I've done a couple of books by Evelyn Waugh… where it's not hard to adapt to the mood of those books, although it's a slightly frustrating experience because he is so funny that and there's so much going on in a very concentrated way in the text. That it's quite hard to draw something which is kind of a rather lame edition to what is happening. And, in fact, what… a few years ago Joe Whitlock Blundell, who commissions the pictures for the… and designs the books, wrote to me and said we would like to do another four Evelyn Waugh books together in a box; would you like to illustrate them. And I mean I'd enjoyed doing Evelyn Waugh, but I didn't want to do four. And I wrote back and said… no, I didn't think… what I really would like would be something with… where there was more dressing up, you know, like The Hunchback of Notre Dame or something like that. And I… this is… I've never read The Hunchback of Notre Dame, I just seized this name out of the air almost as something where there was a lot of fancy dress going on. And I got a letter back, almost by return of post, saying, 'What a good idea, let's do The Hunchback of Notre Dame'. And then I had to read it and it was… and I did do it. But again it was a book that was very difficult to get hold of and of course you can't… where the illustrations are… you know, you cannot have that sort of freight of illustration that you get in a picture book so you've got to spread it out. You've still got to do the same thing of picking the right moments, the appropriate moments, but it's… if you're rationed in that way, of course it is quite difficult to do it. And I found it very hard to get started on that book and, in fact, I did a lot of drawings and I don't know how it was… I really only got going when I decided that they would be full pages which bled off the edge of the page. And I don't know why that was; I think it was because, perhaps, because they are very atmospheric, I mean, you know, there's Paris at night, all of this, you know, things of that kind, and… narrow streets. And perhaps it's easier to create that atmosphere if you've got a whole page where you're drawing the whole scene.

I'd done others before that... one I was most pleased with was a book by Cyrano de Bergerac and I think most people only think of Cyrano in relation to that play by Rostand which gets made into films and operas and things of that kind. But… it… Cyrano himself wrote three books, or two and a half books, one about voyages to the moon, one about voyages to the sun and one about visiting the land of the birds. And… I'd read that in a French paperback and it's full of things to draw and I actually suggested that to the Folio Society and I was very pleased that they took it on and they said… normally… I mean, there was… they had a tradition of having about ten pages of illustration in a book because it was really… they are intended as well produced reading copies, but, I said there were… I wanted to do it because there were a lot of drawings I wanted to do. And they said well, we'll pay you, as it were, the maximum fee that we pay for a book, but you can do as many drawings as you like. So in fact the drawings… the book has got about 100 drawings in and it probably treats Cyrano in a slightly, or very disrespectful way, but it's like a precursor of Gulliver's Travels and so you get things, like, you know, there's… whether it's the moon or the sun, I don't remember, they don't really exist, the moon or the sun; they are countries that you go to, that he goes to by being fired off like a rocket and lands up there. And there are places where the people actually don't wear any clothes at all or they're a completely different scale to us, or where they think he's a monkey and put him with other monkeys in the hope that it will breed, and things like that. And it's full of… and he goes into the… he goes to the land of the birds where he's going to be tried for the crime of being a human being, of course therefore being beastly to birds most of the time. It's absolutely full of things to draw.
So that was a… a treat for me and then I tried to say to them could I illustrate again, to do something rather different, to do a realistic, very… in a way a very realistic book, that Spanish book which is called Lazarillo de Tormes which is about the boy who is the servant to a tramp. And that was what it… it's quite a short book and I still think it might be interesting to do, but they came back and said, 'If we're going to do a Spanish book, we have to do the big Spanish book'. So I did do Don Quixote and I read all of Don Quixote for that. But again that's, to some extent, the problem of the images being spaced out between… in through a very long book. But it's a very interesting problem to treat it in two colours and to… find again those right significant moments. And of course in Don Quixote some of those moments choose themselves, you have to have tilting at windmills and you have to have, you know, one or two things like that. But there are other moments which you can find for yourself, paced through the book. And but of course it... it those… a 17th century book, or something like that is, in a sense, easier to illustrate because there isn't… what gets difficult later on is this, kind of, lot of contemporary writing or 20th century writing involves a kind of inward monologue or personal monologue, or a lot of inward thoughts, which don't… which can't… quite hard to relate to these images outside it. I was very pleased to come… I don't know if I can find it again… but reading something of Henry James, the probably letters or something, I mean he did… he was on record as saying, 'I do so hate to be illustrated'. Of course, when you see what happens to Henry James when it is illustrated, you can understand that that would be a point of view. There are… you have to find ways of doing things. I don't know, I've never thought of illustrating Henry James but I think it could be done.

As I said I've done illustration for or any age group, as it were. And I've also done quite a lot of painting which, again, is not for children and almost might not be for anybody. I've exhibited it at one time or another. I started doing it when, I suppose, when after I'd been at Chelsea Art School [sic] where I used to go to life classes. That's what I went there for, just to draw from life because I realised I didn't know how people moved and how their balance worked and that… things of that nature. Not so much quite anatomy as just drawing from the human form. And while I was… a lot of what I was doing when I was starting off trying to make a living was quite small black and white drawings for Punch and for other magazines. And… I lived in a sort of… or I had a room which was a, kind of, ground floor room in north London and that's where I started doing paintings. And they were kinds of continuations of this life room experience, I think. But they were done in with big brushes, I mean house painting brushes actually, you know, and with… in bright colours and a lot of them had very, sort of, black backgrounds. And so the women depicted in them, as it were, models, were you couldn't see their faces either, you know. They were sort of… they were about mood and atmosphere and things of that kind and also about making arm gestures rather than gestures which come from the wrist, kind of thing. So they were… that was, that was like a sort of… not a secret life, but I mean another life. There didn't seem to be any overlap at all and I was either doing one or the other. Gradually I got to work in colour in books and jackets for magazines and things.

I have gone on doing paintings. I've not done so many recently but I have a separate studio where I can do it… and where I've still got most of them. I remember even 25 years ago when I was moving flats, there was a whole lot of these paintings which had never been sold and I can remember a young man whose job it seemed to be to carry these pictures up to the new flat and arriving sweating on the landing outside saying don't… my friends, Mr Blake, he doesn't sell much does he? And I don't sell much and I've still got a lot of them.
But the studio that… there's been some sort of modification or compromise, I think, because I… in that studio in recent years, I've been doing more drawings and those drawings are somewhere… a little bit more somewhere between painting and illustration in that they're similar subject matter but the people depicted actually have faces, if you see what I mean, and they're slightly more in situations. A few years ago I was invited by the Camberwell Press to do a book for them and I got some… a sequence of drawings that I was working on and I continued with that. And that turned into not a real book in the sense that it was a creative book with a narrative, but a book of 20 watercolour drawings, a very big book about this size, of women reading. And Russell Hoban wrote an introduction to it, which I found very interesting, about drawing and about what the drawings are about. But they're sort of… as he points out, they're about women in different relationships that… to the book that they're reading and… you know, he kind of starts writing a novel on it almost. And is this going… you know, in this picture is this going to be a continuing relationship or is this just a one night stand? And the, you know… but certainly some relationship to the book that they're reading is involved in that and they have a different mood. And also somebody else who I was talking to about it… was, it was actually… just irrelevantly, it was Sir David King, the Chief Scientific Officer of the Government, and he said, when he was at Downing, which was my college, he said, 'They take me through all the different positions you can get in when you're reading'. And that is really the other thing that they do, you know. I mean sometimes they're, sort of, hunched up and sometimes they're relaxed and so on. So that is and they are brush drawings so that they're drawn with a brush with watercolour: there's no ink in them at all. They're just watercolour but they're, sort of, outlined drawings and they're drawings which, to some extent, I'm not quite sure how people would react to them, I mean I… they… I think they look a bit as though they're drawn from life and people have said to me who was the model. In fact, they're entirely invented; I mean they... you just feel yourself into that position and you imagine that you're reading a book in that position and, of course, consequently it's very easy to get them wrong. So there are a lot of ones that didn't develop any… or where the anatomy is too wrong, so that you can't accept it. They're probably… it's all slightly distorted anyway. But I managed to find 20 to go in the book and there are quite a few others of this, so this, it's… here it's a picture with, in some sense, a layer of implied narrative, as it were, which is what… Russell was looking for, in a way.

I've done other sequences of pictures which are either in books or not. I started doing quite a long sequence of children and dogs and I'm not quite sure, they're obviously… I've exhibited some of those and when I had that show at… Dulwich Picture Gallery that was a very good opportunity to show a set of about 20 of these. And they're… again they're quite big. I'm not quite sure what they're about… I mean they're about, in a sense, about children in unfortunate situations, so I mean I think there was a little feeling about, you know, you see so much about children in Russia or South America or India who live on railways or in sewers or, you know, and in complete… poverty and deprivation. And I think there was a little bit of an idea about that in it but I… it's not quite entirely about that and I'm not quite sure what the dogs are because they got very big… unnaturally large, and so I think there is some kind of relationship between… these children and… sometimes they're reacting to the dogs. You can see sometimes they're doing some kind of a little theatre act with them or they're… they're drawing them, or something like that. I'm not quite sure where this is happening or what is going on, but I think it's something more about the children's… I don't think it's documentary. I think it's about the children's relationship to… other things which might be protective or which might be threatening, or which might have something to do with the way that they're going to develop. I think it may be something like that. And… but anyway that's… a sort of separate… again, there's a sort of implied narrative but not a specific narrative. And then I've done another sequence; I started doing some pictures of birds as people. No, I think I mean people as birds, so that they've got birds' heads and feet and tails and wings. But they're wearing suits or pullovers or dresses or they're dressed as we are and they're doing the things that we do. And there's quite a long sequence of those pictures and there's about 60 of them in a book now, which is called The Life of Birds which… and that's got an introduction by Peter Campbell who designed the book, and he writes about art for the London Review of Books and does the cover of the London Review of Books. But… and his introduction is quite interesting because it's about… again, there's… there's a bit of this sort of seeking for the story involved in the pictures. And he also writes very interestingly about drawing, about the act of drawing, and… which he says… I mean he feels very much as I do, I think, that, you know, you can have interesting abstract drawing, abstract marks, but it's when they… when that gesture incorporates some gesture from real life or some movement or activity or so on that it becomes more significant. That's certainly what I feel like when I'm doing it. And these are… these birds are doing, you know, they're… some are people in penury, some are rich, some are librarians, some are children mucking about in the playground and there are a few, kind of, symbolic ones. There are half a dozen where there are people on… what do you call that thing? A slack wire really, rather than a tightrope, who are in the sort of situations in life… as a single mother and as a rather insouciance, sort of, aunty, you know, who's managing perfectly well on the slack wire, and a very aged figure where you wonder a bit whether it's… you know, whether he's going to get to the other side or not. So they're… again that's a way of drawing… everyday life which I think I couldn't do… I wouldn't… I don't know whether it's a… it probably is a limitation but, I mean, I don't think I could go and draw a tramp on a street corner in a documentary way or I would find it difficult to relate to that as a picture and it makes it easier for me to do it when they become the sort of parallel world. And the French version of that book which is called Nous les Oiseaux also had a separate and different introduction by the French novelist, Daniel Pennac, and he wanted to find the stories as well. In fact, he started writing dialogue for the pictures. But his introduction says, quite interestingly, that they're not… he says they're not… they're not illustrations, they're… he says they're visions actually, he says, and the words would be, if we wrote the words, that would be the illustrations. So that he says you could… you know, you could open them out, you could write a short story about any of them, almost. So they have got a lot of narrative in them, although you have to do the work yourself to decide what that man is talking to that woman about, that big bird to that smaller bird, you know. And I think there perhaps may be more things like that that I want to do which are… which have got narrative in them. Those… pictures, the pictures, are in a book, but some of them tend to be, sort of, coming out of books. I'm not sure that the children and dogs would actually… would make a book, I think. But it's in a sort of area that I've moved, in a way, out of books into that.

I've also noticed in the past, well, entering the 21st century, that… there are quite a lot of things that have come out of books that are not within the covers of the book, or don't have their genesis there. So that the Petit Palais Museum show… I mean there is a book that goes with it, but those pictures are enlarged to, what were they? 20 feet high or something like that, so they couldn't very well go in a book. And in the Dulwich Picture Gallery exhibition we did some big banners which were 15 feet high to enlarge those pictures and some other things on that scale. So that's becoming rather interesting to me and the thing that I've been working on now, which is in process at the moment, was that I was asked to do a set of pictures for the… what's it called? South Kensington and Chelsea Mental Healthcare Centre [sic], just off Fulham Road. And there I was invited to do… well we found spaces for 16 pictures in the refurbished wards, in the corridors and in the common spaces there. And, because I'd done these other enlarged pictures, I thought the thing to do would be… I've done the drawings like the size of book illustrations, but as I did for the Petit Palais, but knowing that they were going to be bigger. These are not the same huge enlargements but they're now about, instead of being that, they're about two feet six tall. And that makes a… it changes them in a way. But of course what is nice about it is that because the line is still very scratchy and the watercolour goes on in a rather irregular sort of way, all of that is enlarged and so it gives it hope, you know, it gives it a sort of a texture and quality. It gives you something to look at in that, like the handling of a painting, as it were. And those are... they're a kind of, they're… the wards are for elderly patients on a medium-term stay, residents there. But they've… the whole thing was being refurbished and so, in fact, there is… there's now a special lighting so it was an art gallery, you know, and… so these pictures go along both sides of the corridor and around the corridors. And there's one in… a big one in the… eight feet long, in the dining room. And they kind of reflect… the activities that you could be doing if you were that age, well I am that age, and it… and they're… cheerful, I mean they're not about being… they're not about your mental problems. At the same time they're not about… quite about everyday life. I mean they're about eating and about playing music, they're about reading, they're about having bunches of flowers and things of that kind. They also seem to be about climbing trees as well, which is… because everything happens in the branches of trees, or a lot of it does. And if you're elderly you don't swing from one branch to another but this… developed a kind of parallel world which is… so it's sort of fictional but it relates back to what you were doing or what you might like to be doing. And when I was talking to Nick Rhodes, who's the psychiatrist there, and Stephen Barnham who commissions the work for these mental care hospitals, I was talking about the you know, what these elderly patients can do or what their limitations are. But of course I realised that a lot of the things that I do in my drawings are things that I don't do and can't do anyway. You know, I mean the drawings are full of activity of people, you know, dancing and climbing trees and jumping and running and things… none of which I can do, you know, possibly… probably not at all and certainly with no skill whatsoever. So, they're all… it's a kind of… it's that situation that I'm used to finding myself in, in a way, is that I'm projecting myself into some extension of what we do anyway. It's about everyday life but it's… transferred into a situation where one can do it with more flexibility and vivacity and invention that you could do normally in everyday life.

Well, I mean, we don't really know yet how… how… what effect these are going to have. We're… we’re going to have… you… because these drawings are… are prints, the… there is the advantage that… we can also use them in other hospitals where we want to, and we shall extend the range of them. And, because they are prints… the hospital trust, I think, probably it doesn't have a great deal of money to pay for pictures in the individual patients' bedrooms. But I'm doing a whole set of pictures which I've got in… I've done about 50, I suppose, or something like that, which might go into their bedrooms. But they will be prints so that the… the trust doesn't have to buy all the originals. They can just have the right to… to print them. What we don't… I hope that… that they… that they have the right effect. I mean we… all we've got is anecdotes so far I mean, you know, some of the… some of the patients have certainly looked at them with interest and, I think, so have the specialists who… who work there because I mean pictures in that situation are not only for the patients, but they're for everybody who works there, or visits it. And if you're going in with your elderly relative the fact that you're in to some welcoming environment which acknowledges activities and humour and colour and has gone to the trouble of lighting this exhibition especially for you, where you're going to be… you hope that changes the… the whole atmosphere of… of the thing. The… what was amusing to me was that the… when I went in when we were… they were actually hanging the pictures, there was a… there was an elderly lady with a stick and grey hair who was looking at them very crossly and saying, what is the point of these? I mean, nobody knows what they mean and there's absolutely no point in having them here at all and I can't… you can't see what they are. And I think Nick Rhodes who was there, said, I think you may be seeing a bit of reflection off the… why don't you look at this one over the other side? And there was a woman playing a… a double bass and… and she said, I can see that's a double bass because… I can see the top and I know about that kind of thing. And… but, I mean, really, what is the point of having it? I mean, of… of a thousand people in this situation, only one would know what that is and that person is me. And I think… but I think… I mean, I think it… probably her character has always been like that. I think part of the problem was that she genuinely had difficulty in seeing what they were and… and was converting that into a fault in the pictures. But I mean, you know, she's entitled to think that but… but… and it… it was salutary in a way to… to think that they aren't necessarily going to like them. But, mostly the people there have said, oh, it's… no, it’s delightful, I mean they encourage us to do the things we're not supposed to be doing, we think it's wonderful. And… and have said… you know, they obviously do go back and look at them again and have said, you know, there is actually a lot to look at in them, isn't there? And it's one of those things where, I think probably, you know, having done picture books contributes to that because, in fact, there isn't a huge amount of detail but there is the detail… there are elements which you can read at a second visit, as it were, so that there are things that you didn't notice to begin with, or there's a little relationship between one person and another or a person and the cat, or something like that. So that there is… there is more… there, again, is a sort of element of implied story of… of a parallel life going on… which… so you don't use it all up at once. But it's going to be… I think it's going to be interesting to… to try and find out how people do react to them. I mean the initial thing of doing a cheerful picture in what might be a non-cheerful environment is… is worth doing in itself, but it will be interesting to find out more about that. And also we've got… now that there's a set of pictures for the bedrooms which we can use there and perhaps elsewhere, we may be able to find out how people react to those. Because most of those pictures… some of them are just… they're just cheerful pictures or lively pictures. I mean, there's cats running about or eating flowers, or something like that; there are some pictures of flowers. But there are other pictures where there are older and younger people and there are… there are pictures of birds which have some kind of personality in them but look doubtful or diffident or aggressive or, you know… and it may be interesting to find out whether that, any of that, does mean anything to anybody or whether it provides… that to choose one of those pictures or to… or to want or not want one of those pictures opens up some area of discussion where… the picture means something to them, again in relation to perhaps their personal narrative.
