richard.meier

The prominent American architect Richard Meier (b. 1934) is best known for the Getty Centre in Los Angeles, one of his many public projects which broke from his usual style of sleek, white buildings. In all his work – carried out with characteristic refined style – he refuses to bend to the trends of modern architecture. He has won many awards including the Pritzker Prize for Architecture, considered the field's highest honour.

When I was 14 years old I had a small table, like a draughting board, in the basement of my parent's house. It was a little damp down there but it was okay because it was... no one bothered me and I would make little model boats and model aeroplanes, that's, you know, that's what 14-year-olds did, and talking about books, I read Frank Lloyd Wright's books when I was 14 years old and I remember looking at House Beautiful at Frank Lloyd Wright houses and trying to, you know, make a little model from the magazine article. And at that time, there weren't so many magazines and those that one got, you sort of, really looked at carefully. And I remember that I thought this was... it was one of the prairie houses of Frank Lloyd Wright's... I thought this was amazing. And my parents were very social people and they always had people over for dinner. Their friends came to dinner quite often and I remember they always used to ask me, you know: 'What are you going to do when you grow up?' At a certain point you can't just say: 'I don't know'. You'd sound dumb, so I said: 'I am going to be an architect'. They said: 'What?' 'I'm going to be an architect'. Well, they didn't know any architects and I said... so as it went on, and I kept saying it, you know, at 14 and 15, I never questioned it. I never thought about anything else. I said that's what I want to do, that's what I'm going to do. I thought, boy, was I lucky... was I lucky to be able at that time to say this is what I want to do and do it.

So then after I said I was going to be an architect, then I had to figure out what that meant. And I started looking at what schools had architectural courses and three schools, sort of, stood out in my search: University of Pennsylvania, Cornell and MIT. My father had graduated from MIT and so he was very thrilled that I was even considering going to his alma mater. And so one weekend we went to Boston and looked at MIT, and then went to Ithaca and looked at Cornell, and went to Philadelphia and looked at Penn. I applied to all three and I got accepted at all three. And my father said: 'Oh good, you're going to go to MIT'. I said: 'Well, Dad, I hate to disappoint you but I'm going to go to Cornell'.
[Q] Why?
It was the most beautiful school. I mean it's amazing, just idyllic in every respect. It was really the most beautiful campus, the most beautiful setting. I was too young to be able to discern, you know, the difference between the educational qualities of the three schools, but it just seemed to me, you know, Cornell was just so far and away a better and physical environment in which to study. And MIT was like a factory and University of Pennsylvania is, sort of stuck in the city. You know, I said: 'There's no question'. So I chose Cornell and I'm very happy I did.

They had very good visiting... Cornell had a very good visiting professorship and people came, you know, for 2 weeks, 4 weeks, 6 weeks at a time and that really was the most interesting part of the curriculum because well, Rudolph came at that time. People came from the West Coast, the Bay Area, people came from South America and it was a very interesting group of visiting professors.
[Q] Who was the dean?
The dean was a man named Mackesey. Terrible, he was a city planner.
[Q] So, who was the... 
There was no, there was no main... it was more the environment and the sort of the students who were there that, you know, sort of, gave it its flavour rather than the faculty.
[Q] Peter Eisenman, too? 
Peter was a student. He was one year behind me at Cornell. He began in Liberal Arts and changed to Architecture. And he was a... he spent a lot of time as a cheerleader.
[Q] You are related?
Yes, Peter is a distant cousin. Peter Eisenman is a distant cousin who... we became friends at Cornell and continued to see one another ever since. And Peter was instrumental actually at the conference... in creating the conference that existed at the Museum of Modern Art that then resulted in the [New York] Five Architects book.

After I finished Cornell, studying architecture, I went into the army for 6 months and when I got out I decided... I took my little portfolio of student work and decided I would go to Europe and work for somebody. And I went first to Israel. I travelled around Israel, and looked at the work being done there, and met architects and was offered a job, but since it was the first place I went, I didn't really want to stay there. You know, I wanted to move on so I went to Greece from Israel. Saw architects, saw architecture, had a great time and then went to Rome and spent a month or two in Rome, travelling around, going to Florence, went north to Milan. And of course, not so easy for a foreigner to work in Italy, so when I carried my portfolio of student works, they all thought, that's interesting, but, you know, it's hard to work here. So I left Rome and I went to Germany, travelled through and looked at Baroque churches, met architects. I wasn't offered any work in Germany.
I really wanted to go and work in France and work for Le Corbusier, so when I went to Paris, I knocked on Le Corbusier's door at 35 Rue de Sevres and they... 'What do you want?' I said, you know: 'I would like to come and be interviewed for a job'. 'Get out of here!' We don't do that, but anyway, I went back the next day, knocked on the door, the same thing happened. So I decided, oh, I'll just go and look at things in Paris while I'm here and I went to see the Cité University, you know the Swiss Pavillion of Le Corbusier's and other things, and I happened to be there at the Cité University the day of the opening of the Maison du Brésil, a building that Le Corbusier did with Lúcio Costa. And it was an opening ceremony, and Le Corbusier was there and it was early, so I went up and I introduced myself and I explained to him that I was trying to get to see him to come and work for him. We were sitting on this bench in the lobby while they were kind of preparing for the opening event. And he explained to me why he would not have an American in his office, which went back to the League of Nations competition from which he was disqualified because he used the wrong kind of ink. And then at the United Nations when his sketch books were lost and American interest sort of didn't appreciate his talent; that he was supposed to have a show at the Museum of Modern Arts which was cancelled during the... that's because it was... that's the beginning of the war and that never happened. And then at Unesco in Paris, he was supposed to do the project, but it went to Marcel Breuer instead. So he was angry against American interests and therefore he wouldn't have an American in his office.
So I left and I came back and worked for Skidmore, Owings & Merrill for 6 months. Then I went to work for Marcel Breuer, where I stayed until I opened my own office. Opened my own office - I slept in one room and I worked in the other room. Not really an office but I called it an office.

I had one table, a big table and at first, I worked alone and I did a beach house in Fire Island. That's where some people from Princeton, who were... he was teaching at Princeton. They said, we have $9000, we bought this site right on the ocean. Well, even then $9000 wasn't very much, but we built the beach house in nine days for $9000. And the way we were able to do that was I was reading the New York Times magazine section and, you know, the advertisements in the back of the magazine section and there was a company in Michigan that made pre-cut log cabins. You would, you know, say, I want my log cabin ten by ten, whatever it is. They'd cut the material, they'd ship it by boat, and put up the log cabin.  So I said well, if you could do that with a log cabin, you can do that with a real contemporary building. So I said, look, here's a design and they cut the lumber three by six, three inches thick, so it's an inside finish and an outside finish, no insulation and we built the house out of that pre-cut lumber, sleeping on the beach, in nine days.
[Q] Right.
So that was published actually in the New York Times magazine section after it was finished. My parents felt, well, you know, if it's okay for the New York Times maybe we could have our son build a house for that.  And so I then I did the house for my parents in Essex Fells. They had been living in a three-storey house and they didn't want to walk up and down stairs anymore and they wanted to live in a ranch, what they call a ranch house, one level. So I made the one level house for them in Essex Fells.

Richard Kaplan, he’s a friend of mine, you know Richard?
[Q] Yes, of course. 
And his father and the Kaplan Foundation got together with the National Endowment for the Arts to create artists' housing in the... in the Village, in the abandoned building which had belonged to Bell Telephone Laboratories, which were 13 inter-connected buildings. And Richard said to me one day, would I go down and look at it with him because they wanted to make this renovation and I did. And I remember walking through the place that was a mess, really, just... and Richard said, you know, I’d love to do this but I can’t because the family foundation is, sort of,  part of the support and...
[Q] That's his work.
And would I be interested? So I said, sure and so I... they said but we have to do all the drawings in nine months and start construction in nine months otherwise we lose the financing. So we worked day and night and produced the drawings for Westbeth, to convert it to artists' housing. And since it was subsidised FHA finance, there was a limit that people would pay in terms of rent, so someone would get a duplex studio and an apartment and pay a hundred and something dollars a month. And the idea was those artists would move out after two years and younger artists who were struggling would move in. The problem was there was no mechanism for moving them out and so they’re still living there today, paying $180 a month.  Amazing, that’s amazing, those who are still alive.

That too was, as I remember, they were building different hospitals around the state and it was a state-financed project and which I remember going up and they said, would you be interested? And I said, yes. But actually, initially that project was designed to be twice as big, but because of budget restrictions, they cut it back, which was just as well.
[Q] It's huge already. 
It's huge.
[Q] And it's interesting the way you approached from a very industrial point of view,  you know, the windows...
Well, it seemed to me, you know, that was the beginning of a whole investigation into pre-fabricated parts in terms of building materials.  Because it had seemed quite natural that, I mean, we were not going to build it out of brick. We'd need a bigger brick and so the metal panels started to be sort of like a unitised way of building. And we had developed, actually for a building not built... I had it in the back for a long time... at Fredonia, a physical education facility, a five by nine metal panel and outside was painted steel and inside was natural steel. It was an insulated panel. Weighed... it weighed a lot but there it is, just put it up, boom, you got the whole cladding of the building. So you have the structure and then you have the skin.

One of the things that occurs to me, when I look back at, you know, those times when... more or less, you know, the beginning of things, which is really a combination, not only of working but also teaching and of doing, you know, a lot of things that simultaneously because, it wasn't so much work but you know 8 hours a day, every day of the week I had work to do. And so teaching at Cooper Union, a whole other change had took place there with Michael at Princeton and other things. You know, it all... it was a vibrant time. You know, it was a unique time, in many respects and even, sort of, the way in which things happened. Not only to me but I think to other people as well, in a sense, you know, the Fire Island House, more or less, I mean maybe if my parents wouldn't have asked me to do their house if I hadn't done the house on Fire Island... I don't know, but after that was published in the New York Times then I got this call from people named Smith, and so the Smith House was in a sense a really, the first, you know, time in which I could start to think about things a little bit differently. And I remember going up to the site with the Smiths, this beautiful site overlooking the Long Island Sound, on the water and they said, you know, they bought this site fairly reasonably because there were people who had owned the site and had a house designed and the house was so expensive that they decided to sell the site, you know, for what they paid for it. I said, well, maybe we had better look at what they had designed for the site before we begin because if that was so expensive, I mean, we don't want to go through the same exercise. And I looked at the drawings and they had this big sprawling house on this bluff overlooking the water, which was all rock and so of course the blasting of the rock in order to build this house, you know, caused it to be very expensive. And I said, you know, it doesn't make sense. The only sensible way to build on this site is to build vertically because then you have the minimum foundation and you know you have a maximum view. It makes the most sense, so the Smith House, in a sense, was something which... you know, after it was published, really led to many other things happening. And it makes you realise the importance of publication in terms of conveying ideas about architecture because you know, most people don't go and look at the works. They see it either when it's published and I hope that's different today.

I remember after the Smith House was finished one of the newspapers in London, I don't remember which one, wanted to run an article on their Sunday magazine section. And they asked a photographer who I knew, I didn't know him well, but I knew him, named René Burri to go up and shoot... take photographs of the house for the newspaper.  So I went up. It was an autumn day and we went up there. It was a beautiful fall day. Colors of the leaves all around were just changing and he was standing there getting ready to take a photograph of the house. And the people who lived next door were burning leaves, and there was smoke coming from the fire of the leaves and kind of enveloping the house. I said: 'Well, hold on, René, we can't take...' 'Oh, this is perfect, this is perfect!' He loved it and then he, sort of, took a branch that was on the ground, and kind of held it up in front of the camera and was shooting the house through the branch. I said: 'That's no way to look at architecture'. I said: 'He's a friend of mine, hey, get that branch out of there'.  So that's why I said, look, I need someone who understands architecture, not who's just making, you know, pretty pictures to photograph. And I said... Ezra Stoller, who I had known of and I respected, seemed to me to be the best. And I said, you know, I want someone who's just going to look at the building and figure out, you know, how do you show it? And that's how I got to Ezra. But you know, it's sort of, like learning to walk. You know, you take one step at a time and soon you know... you know how to do it.
[Q] And you kept that thoughout your careeer? 
Yeah, yeah.  Well, Ezra was great to work with, you know... I would go with him and we'd sit. I'd say: 'Ezra, you know, come on, take the...' 'No, the light's not quite right'. You know, he knew, in terms of what... where the light should be for every picture.

I began by doing houses and then got this you know, larger public work but at the same time, all the... you know, I was always doing houses, so it's always a relationship of the small-scale work and the large-scale work. I think that in some ways that was very good because we never lost, sort of, a sense of human scale in the large-scale work because you're dealing with houses and designing the things that go into the houses. You know, you're always conscious of every single element and I made sure that was also true in the large-scale work, that every single element was considered as part of the whole. And so the attention to detail and the, sort of, maniacal concentration on how every single thing is made is part of, I think, the practice as has developed over the years.

Architecture is about making of space. It's about how you show what... how you create places that people move through and live in, and work in and exist in. And going back to the early work and in some ways, my parents' house was very much influenced by Frank Lloyd Wright. I'd been to Fallingwater, you know, the most extraordinary building in the world. I mean, it was nothing like it and Frank Lloyd... and Frank Lloyd Wright... as a student I'd read everything that he'd ever written and you know, you become enamoured with Wright, no matter. You can't help it.  And when I did my parents' house, I had brick walls which began in the living room and then extended out into the garden. It seemed to me that this was in keeping with Wright's notion of the extension of space, you know, from interior to exterior. And the walls would then become garden walls and the interior walls would become elements which defined the living room, and dining room and bedroom spaces. Each space then opened out to a garden... these walls and when the house was all finished, I looked at it and you know, I liked it but I said, you know, interior is different from exterior. The minute you put up a glass membrane that wall, which is on the inside, doesn't weather and that wall which is on the outside does weather. You know, moss grows on the brick. It changes color slightly. The outside is not the same as the inside and this notion of organic architecture although it sounds wonderful, is wrong. It can work in certain climates, you know, perhaps in Southern California but in the Northeast, you have to protect the materials. The wood, which you cut down and use as a building material is no longer organic, the tree is dead. You have to protect that wood. You can protect it by staining it or by painting it, so after that I said, you know, architecture is manmade. That which is organic is around us, the changing light of the day, the trees, the... that's organic, so there's a relationship between what's manmade and what's organic. And as an architect, I can only deal with that which is manmade and therefore the painting of white to show that it's manmade, the articulation of space. The whiteness in the way it shows the difference between opacity and transparency, between planar surfaces and linear surfaces are all part of, sort of, the philosophy that began, say, with the Smith house and then developed over the years.

Well, Le Corbusier has always been an influence because of the... you know, the... not just his philosophy on the five points of architecture, the separation of skin and structure, which has always been important to me, but also the quality of space that exists in Le Corbusier. Early on and for a very short time in fact, I used the Modulor as a dimensioning system and then threw it away because it doesn't work in every condition. In any event, but what it does is always relates you to human scale, which is what's important about the Modulor. It's based on a 6 foot policeman, I'm 6 foot but not a policeman and... and it gives you, you know, this desk is 2 foot 3 and-a-half. It's a Modulor dimension... that... it's the right height. You know, I don't like 2 foot 4. You know, it's just a little bit too high, so there are aspects of the Modulor which I find, you know, very important, as it were and... and it's really having to do with human scale and when you think of Le Corbusier's work and you go into it, if you haven't been there and you've only experienced the building through photographs, you're amazed at the intimacy of it.  How it's a real human scale. You go into Ronchamp, I mean besides being an extraordinary work from the sculptural point of view, it's the... the way in which the moulding of that space and its relationship to human scale and light is made.  So it's the quality of light, the quality of human scale, it's the... so many aspects, you know.  And the richness of Le Corbusier's work.
[Q] But also formally you were very attracted. 
Yeah.
[Q] To details - rails and ramps and...
Yeah. Well, the whole idea of promenade, of movement, and how you move through space and the use of ramps as a... as one way of moving through space seems to me to be, you know, very important. It began with the Athenaeum in New Harmony, Indiana, which is really all about movement. It's about how you move through the building and see the landscape in this unique setting. Fortunately, the building had no real program, and it's about the experience of being there, and how that experience of being there has to do with the Wabash River, the fields, the town and in a sense, the building frames views and enables you to understand the uniqueness of this place.

It's interesting because as an architect you sort of react to what is brought to you in a way, you know, so when I was asked to go to Hartford to do a building at the Hartford Seminary, originally, I think they wanted to do a renovation and that didn't seem to be interesting. And they said, well, we own this little piece of property across the street. We can build a new building there, which we did and they had quite a limited budget. And they had office space, and a library and meeting room; and they said, well we don't have room for a chapel. I said, wait a minute, it's the Hartford Seminary, I mean, the chapel is the heart of the building it seems to me. Well, I know but we just don't have funds. I said, well, why don't we make a meeting room into a chapel and you can use the chapel for a meeting room? Rather than making a nondescript space, you know, and you using that. So we made the chapel but it... it sort of was, you know, trying to make ends meet, as it were, in that situation and it's still used today and, I think, quite successfully.
But as I was saying, you never know what something going to... what you're going to be able to do with something when you begin. You say, gee, that's a great project and it turns out that for reasons that you never knew in the beginning, it wasn't such a great project and you say, gee, how did I get involved in this? And then there are other things, you say well, that's not so interesting but I'll give it a try and it turns out to be a great experience, so it's... it's something you should learn with age, but I never learn, you know, are the things that are not worthwhile because there aren't many things I think that are not worthwhile. I said I would never do a prison, not interested in doing a prison. A prison lacks life. I'm not interested in doing a petrol station. You know, I'm not into... there are many things which are easy to say no to but then there are others that are, gee, I can make something out of that. You know, that... that could become something of interest and I've been fortunate in, you know, actually in having a lot of, you know, really good, interesting projects to do.

The reason the metal panels investigation began was that the nature of the projects had, no... had... let me just go back a bit. The natures of the projects were such that you could interpret what... how they might be expressed, that, you know, that they could be something different because they were... of the use that they had. And... and after the... for instance, the Athenaeum has no use, has no preconceived notion of what, you know, that should be in relation to where it is, what it's next to. It's out in a field, you know, you don't have to work in a... in a historic context.  If it were in the center of New Harmony, which is all of these kind of historic buildings, you might have to think about it differently, but it's not. It's, sort of, aside, it's separate.  And that began a sort of investigation into building materials that, sort of, could be made in a factory, be economical, shipped to the field where you would have control over the way in which it's made. So even if it's in some remote place, you know, doesn't mean you have to use unskilled labour. You know, you can control the quality. And the size of the panels were, as I said a scaling device to relate to human scale, so we began with panels which were two foot six by two foot six, two foot four, two foot eight. You know, kind of working around a dimension, like a door dimension, you know, that you could relate to and then, of course, in the beginning the joints were caulked and not where we wanted so we invented a system where the water would run behind the panels. You know, the panels would become the cladding but not necessarily the exterior surface in terms of weather. Then we would have a back-up system and block; and that would keep the water out of the solid portion. So we experimented with all different ways of doing it to find the best way and to get the cleanest expression of the panels and the tightest and cleanest joints.  So the joints read, you know, in a... in a way that, you know, the building was designed - never with, kind of, pieces of panels, you know, always... and so the whole module of the building was then based on the panel dimension. And in this way, you know, everything can be interrelated, as I said earlier. I mean every aspect of the building then can relate to the module of the panel.
[Q] You were the one that developed the panel? 
Oh yeah, no, no, we developed...
[Q] It's wasn't something around before? 
No, no.
[Q] You just, in a sense you invent your own material to express your own architecture. 
Right. Well, you know, Frank Lloyd Wright experimented with those concrete blocks in California, which as a... as his kind of building material. Unfortunately, you know, they weren't that well made and they deteriorated and I wanted to make sure we had a building material that we could use that would look as good in 50 years as it did the day that building was completed and that's proven to be true. In all these cases I go back to a building that was done 10, 20, 30 years ago and I'm amazed, you know, at how... how it looks. I was in Florida last week and I saw the house that was completed in 1979, so it's almost... almost 30 years. It looked brand new. I said, I couldn't believe it, I mean it was so... I'd looked at this and I said look at this, this is phenomenal. Well, they keep it well and they maintain it well, without question, but I said, I... I was just so happy to see it.  So I think that, you know, that, you know, that's what architects do, they make buildings that have a life and hopefully it's a long life.

It was the late '70s that I was invited to take part in a competition in Frankfurt for a... a new museum. And in fact actually, it's an addition... the Frankfurt Museum is an addition to an existing building from 1803, [unclear] which was like a four square. It was a cube and this building had to attach to that but it was really separate from it. And I remember Hans Hollein, and Venturi, and someone else and I were invited to do this competition and I won. And that building then moved ahead. And it was approximately, in area, approximately 100,000 square feet, and so as I... after I won the competition I was working on that museum I was interviewed in Atlanta to do the High... for the High Museum and I remember all I had to show was the model of the Frankfurt Museum. I had never done a museum. You know, I had done exhibitions but I'd never done a museum before. So I showed them the model of the Frankfurt Museum. I said. oh, you know, this is the kind of museum we're doing and I am amazed but we were selected as architects, never having really built a museum before. And so the High Museum was really the first built museum because the Frankfurt Museum although it started before the High Museum and the way they built in Europe and in Germany in particular, you know, it takes a lot longer. They were both the same size and both about the same budget. And the Frankfurt Museum was built in five years and the High Museum in three years. So the High Museum, although it started later, finished earlier, you know, received a good bit of acclaim at the time and was very important then in, sort of, my getting other museums as a result. And the whole idea that I wanted to have for the High Museum, because Atlanta's cultural community was decimated with an aeroplane accident at Orly Airport in which 110 people lost their life, from Atlanta on a trip to Paris to look at art. And so in a sense, this building was to commemorate, you know, those in the community and to show that the community loves art and it's sort of moving on, you know, after this terrible accident.  And so if you... it seemed it needed a social space, being Atlanta, as much as a museum space, and so the museum is organized around a top lit atrium in the center and you take a ramp from one level to another. And you know, I've always loved the Guggenheim Museum, it's a great building. New York is so lucky to have this building of Frank Lloyd Wright. And I did a little reading room renovation in the Guggenheim, but it always seemed to me that the sloping floors, and the sloping ceilings and the sloping walls, sort of, put you on a, kind of, propelling motion as you're going down the ramp as you're looking at art. That the great thing about that space is you can look at a work close up and then you move away and you see it from a distance, you see it from a different way and then you move again and you see it again. And this whole idea of seeing a work of art from multiple points of view, I felt was very important. So at the High Museum, the idea was to straighten out the Guggenheim by putting art on flat floors and having a ramp, which took you from level to level but enabled you to look through the galleries and see the galleries from different perspectives. So in a sense, you can say the High Museum was straightening out the Guggenheim.
[Q] And then, Frankfurt? 
Well, Frankfurt was again another kind of situation because you move by ramp from level to level and again, the circulation space is different from the gallery space but the nature of the collection at Frankfurt was such that... you know, it's decorative art... it's relatively small-scale objects. And so the spaces that show the art had to be kind of broken down in scale to be in relation to the collection and so the ramp hall that you move through, again, looks into the galleries but also looks out to the city and to the river, to the Rhine on which it sits and is located. Yeah, it seemed to me again, the movement system should be gradual. It should be leisurely and it should relate both to the interior and to the exterior space. And it's similar in concept to the High Museum but different in form.

The Frankfurt Museum, I think, was extraordinarily important in Germany because it was the really first major post-war modern building that, in a sense, bridged the gap between the pre-war architects and the post-war architectural community. It looked back and had perhaps some of the aspects of, you know, the great German architects that practiced there, the kind of planar quality against the transparent quality of the building, the openness of the space, you know. And I think in Germany it was seen as, sort of, a part of a continuum that others, sort of, didn't take part in and it was very important to younger architects especially in saying, you know, modern architecture in Germany has a history and we've ignored that history. We tried to bury that history. We tried to destroy that history. We really should renew that history and move on. And I think that's what's happened as a result, but there was a huge, just appreciation for that building as, kind of, turning the tide at that moment and as a result, you know, I've done many things in Germany of all different scales.
[Q] Can you tell us about the sequence [unclear]?
Well, a lot of the... when I look back, a lot of the work that I did in Germany, in France, in Italy, was a result of competitions that I won. The Frankfurt Museum was a competition. After that I was invited, I remember I got a letter from the Mayor of Ulm, inviting me to take part in a competition for the Stadthaus on the cathedral square in the center of the city. And I opened the letter and I see that it was not only sent to me but was sent to a number of other architects including my friend, Hans Hollein.
[Q] Again.
Again. And so I got on the phone and I called Hans. I said, Hans, you know, I see we're both invited to take part in this competition in Ulm, you know, what do you think? He said, Richard, why would you ever think of getting involved in Ulm, they've had dozens of competitions for the cathedral square in the last hundred years and nothing has been built. I said, well, I know but that it looks like an interesting project. Oh, forget it, said Hans.  So Hans didn't even do the competition and I won. And so we built the Stadthaus, so you know and did... redid the whole cathedral square, so in a sense we've brought the heart of the city back to the center of the city by getting rid of the parking lot there where people were parking right in front of the cathedral and making that a marketplace and a place for all kinds of events. So it's a small project but it's a very important project and that led to Mr Weishaupt coming to me to make a small museum and worker's cafeteria in Schwendi, which is a village near Ulm. It's only 20 minute drive from Ulm to Schwendi, and you go through this beautiful, bucolic countryside and then he has his factory. And when the workers come to work by bicycle or walking every day, they come under the building, you know, undercover, and then go to the factory and then come there for lunch. So you know, one thing sometimes leads to another and many years later, Mr Burda, who wanted to build his... a museum on... in the city park - the city gave him the land in this park in the centre of Baden Baden and he paid for the building and put his collection of contemporary art in the building. A small building but it's just a jewel, you know, and only in Europe do... is there this relationship between private and public enterprise. Where a private person gets to build a private building in a public park and then donates it to the... to the city. It's very unusual but these things happen and then, you know, the cities are much richer as a result.

Before that even in Germany, you know, again... again because of the recognition from some of the smaller works. You know, people like Siemens and Daimler-Benz all asked me to do projects for them, you know, of a fairly large scale... office complexes. The Getty was an amazing experience in terms of the whole selection process. Since, they didn't quite know what they were doing, they asked 110 architects to send, you know, a resume and samples of their work for them to review. And they had a professional advisory committee that went through all the brochures and out of the 110, selected 30 architects.  So then from the 30 they asked for more information and recommendations and an interview. And so from the 30, they then selected nine and they disbanded that first committee, and had a second committee which was composed of members of the board of trustees and other advisors. And they went to all of the nine to look at a building and to come to the office, and from that, they selected three. And with the three, you had... they went... every member of the committee came to the office at different times. They had to take them to show them different projects. I remember going to Atlanta three times with different people to show them the High Museum and went to Frankfurt. They went everywhere, I mean they travel around the world and after a year of this, finally I was chosen as the architect.
[Q] Who were the other two?
Jim Sterling and Maki were the other two finalists.
[Q] [Unclear] 
And so that was the beginning of... of the Getty and that took a year. And I remember when I... it was... it was a Sunday night and I was sitting at home with my children, Joseph and Anna. And we were having dinner and the phone rang, and it was Harold Williams, who was the president of the Getty Trust. And he called to say, Richard, we're very happy to tell you that the board of trustees has finally chosen you as the architect for the Getty. I said, that's great, Harold that's wonderful, and he said, do you think we could have the building completed in three years? I said, it's taken a year to select the architect, I don't think we're... we don't even have a program for the... for the... what we're going to build there. I don't think we're going complete it in three years. I said but maybe in 12 years it would be finished. It took 12 years.
[Q] Yes, I remember when you were moving the mountains. 
That took three years, just to move the earth but it was worth it. If you go there today it's amazing. It's really... if ever I'm seriously depressed, I should just get on a plane and go to the Getty.

There’s a museum and they had a collection which was evolving... changing. There's something called the Center for the History of Art and Humanities, which is a place for scholars and probably the greatest art library in the world. There’s a Conservation Institute, which is not only conservation of works of art within the museum but, you know, how do... how do you preserve the mummies for the next 500 years? So it’s interested in conservation at every level and throughout the world. Then there’s an administration for the Getty and all of these different departments are, sort of, just beginning and trying to figure out what their mission is and what their space requirements are. And we only have so much space, so we have to, kind of, divide it up among the different entities of the Getty Trust and then there’s the public and so we have, you know, restaurant and cafeteria, and facilities for the public. And then, how do you get to the top of the hill because the building's at the top of the hill but there’s no room at the top to park the cars, so we had to park at the bottom of the hill and it’s a long way, you know, to ask people to walk. So we have to figure out the movement system from the bottom of the hill to the top of the hill and we have a tram, and all of these things. And then there’s a community and the community said to us, you know, we’re delighted that the Getty is going to build here. Whatever you do is fine as long as we can’t see it, and we can’t hear it and we can’t smell it. So they had their requirements. And it’s, sort of, balancing all of these different factors and trying to make everything come together that made it take that long.

Well, the best clients are the individual clients, where you can have a conversation one to one and, you know, everyone has a different opinion, you, sort of, work it out but it’s, sort of, a kind of dialogue. The most difficult clients are public clients... the public agency because you have, you know, everyone interested in something different and they couldn’t care less what the other person is involved with. And so, in doing two federal courthouses, you know, the chief judge tries to take the lead role but he’s quickly outvoted by the security guards and the maintenance people. You know, they have more to say than the judges but... and it makes it difficult because you’re trying to, you know, satisfy everyone’s needs and at the same time there’s no hierarchy because it’s public... it’s a public plan. And then... so I would say the public client is by far the most... the most difficult and then the, I guess, the other multi-headed agencies, you know, are equally difficult because you don’t have a single client. You have dozens of people and oftentimes, both in terms of the public and the large group of people, those people change during the process. The same people are not necessarily the ones you begin with that you end up with, they’re different people coming along the way with different... other expectations and requests. So it makes it difficult, so the institutional clients, the public clients, are tough. Private clients are much better.
[Q] The worst client you had? 
 The worst, well that’s a good question. You, sort of, tend to forget, sort of selected amnesia. That’s all I’m going to say, ah, that wasn’t so bad.

I think that architecture, which as I said, I think of as a continuum, had a blip, yeah, in the '80s. That blip was called  postmodernism and there are a lot of people who, I guess, were disenchanted with the idea of continuum and felt that there should be a return to previous periods in terms of how architecture was thought about. Which was basically a pastiche but I don’t think they thought of it as a pastiche. They thought of it as, sort of, a historical revival, in a sense. And... I never for a moment considered this a... a viable idea although many people went that way. I said, you know, that’s not for me and I’m not going to succumb to this kind of popular moment. And... turned out to be right, that it was nothing more than a blip. It went nowhere but you know, it’s interesting because it didn’t only exist in architecture. It existed in music. It existed in literature. To some degree it existed in... in painting and sculpture. I think it existed in almost all of the arts, not that everyone succumbed to it but there were people who were, you know, doing, sort of, this retrograde kind of work at that time. Fortunately, I think, for all of us, you know, it was short-lived.

One of the things which makes working today different from, say, 20 years ago, is the consciousness of the need to make buildings which are not only ecologically sensitive but which also reduce energy consumption and are thoughtful in terms of energy-saving methods. So that buildings, you know, like the Smith House, you know, would no longer be possible today. The code wouldn’t even allow it, you couldn’t have that amount of glass. It’s something of the past and so today, you know, what one has to think about is very judicious use of... of open transparent surfaces in order to maximise the energy-saving elements within a building. And right now, in fact, one of the projects which we’re doing in Italy is... is going to achieve a Platinum Leads Certificate because not only is the building energy efficient in every way, but you know, the water is recycled within the building. Every material is thought about in terms of its longevity and its quality. Every aspect of the building, you know, is, sort of, given a mark, as it were, in terms of it's energy consciousness.  So this changes the architecture and it changes the expression of the buildings.
[Q] And for example these glass buildings?
Well, the glass in many of these buildings has a U-coating to reduce the amount of solar gain within the building. It’s probably, at least double, maybe triple glazed, you know, single glazing just wouldn’t be possible in these buildings. It has all kinds of, I would imagine, you know, solar controlling devices.

No matter what I say, the Getty probably will always be considered, you know, one of the most important projects that I’ve been involved with. And my sense of why it is important is that it creates a place, a place that didn’t exist in Los Angeles. A public place, a place where people can come, they can experience the entire city in terms of the way in which they view it from that site. They can take part in the cultural activities which go on there, or they can just come to it, not as an amusement park but as a special environment in which to have lunch, to have dinner, to be with their kids, to sit in the gardens.
[Q]  The Acropolis.
Yeah but, but, at... but it’s a creation of a place and it’s a creation of a public place and for me, the public spaces are, you know, are really the spaces which are important. People who work there would not agree, of course but... but it’s that aspect of the work, that is the most important to me. And then when I think about other projects, the... the Stadthaus in Ulm. You know, it’s a very nice building but it’s really the creation of that public square in the heart of the city, which the Stadthaus, in a sense, gives activity to. To the restaurant, to the exhibitions but... and encloses the square, is important. So it’s really the public... and in Barcelona, you know we’ve cleared out that whole area. The Plaza in the front of the building never, since it wasn’t part of the building, you know, we never really got to do much there but it’s become a Mecca. Every teenage kid in Barcelona with a skateboard comes to that place. And on the little ramps that lead up to the building, you know, becomes a place for all the skateboarders and all the older people come to sit there and watch the skateboarders, so it has a life that goes far beyond the life of the building. And it’s really the creation of those public spaces that are important to me. More important than the objects are the spaces that they make as a result of their being there and so when I think, you know, the various buildings, they were all great but what gives me pleasure about the Perry Street and Charles Street buildings is it’s three buildings in one place. It makes a statement about that place far greater than any one big building could do. It becomes a gateway from the Greenwich Village to the Park and people say, oh, I like to walk along Charles Street or like Perry Street because they really feel they’re coming to some... something special. And for the skateboarders and the bicyclists along the park, they stop and they say, hey look at this you know, it becomes a kind of landmark and they’re moving up and down the Hudson River. And it’s those things that I think are really what makes architecture so exciting... is that, you know, you’re dealing with things outside of what you’re making but that you can change other things as a result. I always like to think that our project for the World Trade Center, which I did with Steven Holl, Charles Gwarthmey and Peter Eisenman, you know, it’s not just... it’s not about making a building... it’s not about making a monument. It’s about making a place and that memorial square that we created, by the way in which the buildings hugged two sides of the square. And the way in which the square has, like arms reaching out into the water, as shadows of the fallen towers, you know, that was making a place and making a statement about a place. It wasn’t about putting up an iconic building. So when I think of, you know, lots of things that are happening, you know the things which seem to get attention in the newspaper are, oh, you know, the funny shapes that people make today which the computer, you know, enables us to do things much more differently than when we sat and just drew them and with a computer, you can manipulate forms much more quickly and much more easily. It doesn’t mean that it’s any better, it just means it’s different and it’s, you know, but it’s about making the place, that is what it’s all about.

Well, you know, in making any building it’s all of the spaces in the building which need to be considered, there may be a hierarchy of spaces but it’s those spaces that belong to everyone. Spaces you move through and where you come in contact, you know, with other people. You don't come in contact with them in your office as much as you do in, kind of, in passage as you move through and so those spaces are really public spaces as well. The places people come, and kind of rub shoulders, and stop and talk and say hello and have conversation. Those are the spaces that belong to everyone and they should really be the most important spaces. Those are spaces that are, in a sense, the public spaces, the movement spaces, the spaces that you circulate in.
[Q] [Unclear]
Exactly and from, and those are the spaces you want... you want people to say, ahh, I’m so happy to be here, you know, it’s a great place to live, or to work or to look at things.

I think that, you know, as I look back, it probably began with the Smith House and then went to the Douglas House, you know, somewhat later but which was a different expression because of the nature of the site. Looking down to the Lake Michigan and on a steep slope where you enter from the roof, you know, not in the middle of the house and this desire to create an articulation, a separation, a reading, as it were, the difference between public and private space. The difference in the architectural expression and therefore the private spaces were closed, and contained and cellular. And the public spaces were open and transparent and interrelated to one another and I think it was, you know, this kind of desire to just, you know, to have the architecture talk about the difference between public and private space that was I think in the sense something, which I would like to think, continues to this day. It may be very different, for instance, in the house in Florida, the Neugebauer House. There is public and private space, and they are differentiated but maybe not in the same way but there the difference is that the public side, which is the entry side, is really the closed down side; and the private side, which is the transparent side is the water side... it looks out to the water. And the light really comes down and animates that circulation space between the wall separating the outside and  the cellular spaces that open out to the water. That differs from, say, some of the earlier houses, in that it doesn’t have the kind of vertical movement system. It’s really concentrating on a horizontal movement system and therefore has a different kind of organisation and idea behind it but it’s animated, it seems to me, by the requirement. You know, when I first was approached by the Neugebauers, they told me that they had... were about to purchase the site in a gated community in Florida. And I said... sounds like trouble but I said, you know, do they any requirements in this gated community, in terms of what you can build? They said, oh, no, no, don’t worry about it, it’s going to be fine. I told them that I was going to select you as the architect and they’re thrilled and I’m sure whatever you want to do is going to be all right.  I said, well, I wouldn’t be so sure and do they have any regulations? So they say, I think they have a little pamphlet. I said, well, why don’t you get it, and send it to me and let me see what it says. So he sends me this pamphlet put out by the Naples Homeowners Association and one of the things it says is that all the roofs of all the houses had to be sloped roofs with a 1 and 12 slope. So I said, you know, I don’t think this is... I don’t know how to do a sloped roof house. I don’t think this is for me.  So... oh, no, no, I’m sure it’s going to be fine, don’t worry. I say, yeah but I can’t do, you know, a sloped roof house. So he says, oh, no, don’t... so I said, oh, we’ll give it a try. So we worked on it and we worked on it and he said, okay, let’s take this sloped roof and kind of, do this with it, with the priority of direction towards the water and then the lower roof on the entry side. And then light comes in both... from both East and West as well as through the skylight that separates the two.  And we had to present it to the building committee. And we took a model down and we showed the design and they said no, no, you don’t understand, you know, it means a sloped roof is like this. I said no but it says 1 and 12, this is a 1 and 12 slope. No but it’s like this, so we went back another time. No, you’re not, do you not understand us? I said but it doesn’t say that. It just says 1 and 12, so they had no... they had no real way to refuse it. Of course, afterwards they rewrote the code, you know, to say that it had to have an apex in the center but otherwise, you know, we would never have done that house.

I think I’ve, you know, always been concerned with light. Even that first little apartment I had on 91st Street, I remember two small rooms but what made it great was, I got East light, I was only on the 3rd floor, I got East light and I got South light in the windows and you know, if you live in New York City, light is so important. I mean, just what people want is space and light and you know, having the sunlight coming in and working there during the day as we do here with the South light coming in. I go around opening the blinds. People on the computer don’t like it because they can’t see their screen so well. But I want to see that light come in. It’s so beautiful, the way it changes during the day and the way you see the sun set over the Hudson River. It’s magical, you know, it’s extraordinary. Half the... most of New York City, you don’t see this kind of light over the Hudson unless you’re on the Westside. It’s much better than being on the Eastside though. I’m never up early enough to see the sunrise but it’s not as dramatic as the sunset and I think it’s just this, I’ve always felt this wonderful quality of changing light that we have all around us and every place is different because of the quality of light. You know the quality of light in New York is not the same as the quality of light in Los Angeles, totally different.
[Q] I heard you talking about the white is never the same because of the light.
That’s right, well, you know, the whiteness which we look at. Look at it in this room, at the different, different intonations of white. Look in the office, how the light changes and the colour changes and you appreciate that colour. Colour is all around us. Look at this beautiful pink sweater this young lady is wearing. You know, the whiteness enables you to perceive and appreciate all of the colour that’s around us.  It's the colour of nature, the colour that comes from everything. The buildings don’t have to absorb that colour. They have to reflect that colour. They have to allow us to appreciate so much colour and you paint these walls a dark colour, you lose everything, you know, and it’s like gloom as far as I’m concerned.
[Q] So white is all colours. 
White is all colours, right.

Earlier we talked about, you know, why am I so popular in Germany, for instance. Well, I don’t know, if I’m that popular in Germany but in any event. In any event because I think that starting with the... the Frankfurt Museum and with other projects that are there as well, Ulm, Weishaupt, Siemens... going on and on, what people have reacted to was in working in these historical centers, the new building is not a pastiche. It doesn’t try to replicate, you know, what was there and what is there. It talks about our time. It talks about what can be but it deals with human scale and it’s really that human scale experience of the building, the surroundings, the relationship between the building and what’s around it that makes it what... what’s important. And it shows you that, you know, modern architecture, you know, is not alienating. It’s as inviting as historical buildings if the human scale of the quality of the experience of moving through the building is... the people can relate to. And I think that’s what... what it’s about and also the sense of public space, which is so much a part of the experience of most European cities, you know. Public space is where people come together in different ways. Whether its in the cafés, around the squares but there’s a sense of public space in European villages, and towns and cities that we don’t have here. We have no; we have no recognition of it. We have no, and that’s why some of the emerging areas of New York City are so extraordinary. You go down the Lower Eastside, you see the number of people out on the street, cafés and the life on the street where people come together. It’s always on the street but nevertheless they’re... it’s a creation of a place even though it’s a streetlife but we have no small squares or public spaces. Our public spaces are Central Park and Rockefeller Center, that’s it.
[Q] Now, sometime you also do contextual relationship in proportions, alignments...
Well, where it’s appropriate, I think that, you know, you can find elements within the context that you can incorporate in the design because it’s a cornice line, you don’t have to express it as a cornice, but it may be a way of a plane stopping in relation, you know, to that line that seems to run around it. In Ulm, the skylights don’t replicate the hip roofs but they make reference to it and yet are fresh and abstract.

Every project. It’s not a project I can think of where, you know, I don’t go first and look at the place, you know and experience it. You know get some sense of, you know, what’s around it, what’s it feel like and smell like. And, you know, not that I get any flash by that but at least I know, have a sense, you know of the environs and that’s very important. And then usually, we make a little context model, you know, of everything around the site left empty and then I start, you know, yellow paper. People want to put it on the computer much too quickly, you know, that’s the way of the world but so, but the good thing is, you know, it doesn’t, once it’s on the computer it doesn’t mean it’s frozen. I mean, throw it away and start again just as easily.  But we begin by making sketches and making study models. The models, sort of, start like this, and they get bigger and bigger and the drawings start like this and they get bigger and bigger. There’s a kind of back and forth between models and drawings then it evolves. And then, you know, we test it with the client and sometimes that throws us one way or another.

If I were to list, I don’t know if I could really prioritise it because many things go on simultaneously and you can’t say orientation, climate, location, site, context, I mean, they’re all...  Interrelated.  Yeah, they’re all part of it and they’re all things that you’re thinking about at the same time. You're not just thinking, you know, how context irrespective of  orientation, light and... and movement. So all of these things kind of happen at one time and then, so that’s, sort of, one grouping of elements. The second grouping of elements would be, you know, what is it, what’s the program, what is it, what do they want of you? What’s the problem you’re trying to deal with? And then the third thing is okay, how do you take those elements and make something that goes beyond just solving the problem because if it’s just solving the problem, you know, what’s the point?

We were all teaching and working in New York, Peter Eisenman, John Hejduk, Charles Gwathmey...
[Q] Michael Graves...
Michael Graves and myself. And I taught at Princeton with Michael and then Peter came to Princeton and I went to Cooper Union where I taught with John Hejduk, so, you know, we're all kind of, milling around, you know, talking together and I think it was Peter that said, look, why don’t we have a, sort of, little session. And we’ll get a conference room somewhere and the five of us will each present a project that we’re working on at the time. We’ll get... invite a few other people to be, kind of, critics, Colin Rowe, Stan Anderson, I don’t remember who else was there but and then they would kind of, criticise the work that we present and... we got Arthur Drexler, who was a chairman of the Department of Architecture to agree that we could use a conference room at MOMA, you know, for this session. And there must have been a dozen people there, not many more, maybe a few more than a dozen, not many and we each presented a project and we had a discussion. And, you know, of course, Peter had a tape recorder there. I think I still have the tape somewhere and the whole thing was taped. And that was really fun, you know, why don’t we put out a little pamphlet to commemorate this event, six, eight or ten pages, nothing. Maybe ten pages, everyone gets two pages, I remember, so it was going to be ten pages plus a little introduction by Arthur Drexler and maybe some comments by Colin Rowe; and that would be it. So it took, you know, in order to put all this material together because what we presented was the work that we were doing at the time but we didn’t really have it all in presentable form. So it took up a long time to kind of, get it together. By the time we’d got it together, Peter said, look, it’s taking so long, why don’t we not just show that project but we’ll show what we’re currently working on as well, so each person gets two projects to show. And instead of two pages each, you get ten pages each, I don’t know, something like that. And that went on, you know for another year, putting this together because John Hejduk wanted colour to show his project and then we said well if John has colour, does Michael get colour then all the expense goes up and it became a real point of discussion. Anyway, then we didn’t have a publisher because you know, we were doing all of this and we got George Wittenborn because I used to go to Wittenborn every Saturday morning to buy books. We said, okay Wittenborn, would you publish it and they did. We then finally got out the book, Five Architects, just as a, just as a memento but little did we know, it would have this huge influence on what was happening.

What we’ve just been talking about, in terms of the exchange of ideas, the kinds of events that took place in New York among architects. It took place in the schools and teaching, but we’re, you know, as we look back, we think what was unique. It was unique because there was a respect, I think, for one another’s work, for what people were doing. There was appreciation. There wasn’t a sense of competition. It was really, it was almost a support system rather than a competition. And I think, you know, maybe today since the times are different, the situation is different but there isn’t the same communication. There isn’t the same closeness. There isn’t the same kind of, interchange, not only among our generation. I don’t see it in the younger generations. It doesn’t exist there. There are a lot of good architects who’ve worked in this office and in a sense graduated and gone on in terms of their own practice. They seem isolated to me. They don’t seem to be connected formally or informally with others, either through teaching or through practice. And I think that’s a shame because I think that it’s an enrichment that one gets from this experience, which I know we’ve had together that I think these younger people are missing.
[Q] So is it a by-product of the media situation? 
It could be. I honestly don’t know whether it’s the media. The media is trying to make stars out of any number of people and it’s sort of, the media’s star of the week, as it were, that we see. It could be the media’s attention on architecture. The media didn’t even write about architecture and Ada Louise Huxtable didn’t exist, writing about architecture in those days. She was perhaps pivotal in terms of architectural criticism and the most brilliant and prolific and sensitive critic around. And after Ada Louise, I think it became more a reporting on architecture than a cultural criticism in the way in which she approached it. And so it sort of, you know, what’s the headline today? We just saw it.
[Q] However, it was true that forty years ago, the "New York Times" would have never talked about this, but today they do. 
Yeah, that’s true. No, I’m not saying it’s necessarily negative. It’s just different. No, I mean in the "Times" today you have two articles on architecture.
[Q] They’re not always right but at least it’s there. 
At least it’s there and the... and the public’s interested. I mean, the public interest otherwise, it wouldn’t be there. The public wants to know. They want to know what’s happening and where is it happening.

The change that also has occurred during this period in the... I should say, I can’t say, ease of transportation but in fact it is. Because today you can get on a plane and tomorrow you’re in Tokyo or Rome or wherever. The ease of communication, it’s something. For reasons, which are not that clear to me, only in recent times has the United States embraced architects from all over the world and in fact sought them out in order to, in a sense, attract attention to what they’re doing. When the High Museum decided that they were going to have an addition, they didn’t come to me. They said, we need to have an architect that can make the headlines the way Richard Meier put the High Museum on the map when he designed the first building and we can’t do it with Richard Meier because everyone knows Richard Meier. Therefore, we have to find a foreign architect to do that and so they chose someone that would in a sense, bring attention to the new building in the way that they had hoped that it would. And a lot of institutions say, gee, if they did that, that’s what we should do and so the, you go to a place like Des Moines, Iowa and they hire an English architect because they say, you know, he’ll make a splash for our museum because he’s not from Des Moines. He’s not from the Midwest. He’s not from the United States, you know...
[Q] But not hire you?
But that was before the splash  of the culture up here. And so it’s, sort of, the idea of splash that then enables lots of people from all over the world, you know, to get work here. People in India don’t, or Japan or elsewhere, you know, don’t come to American architects for the same reasons, except in Dubai, or Abu Dhabi or places like that, where it’s being run by splash masters. They feel this is a way of not only giving it credibility but giving it some pizzazz that it wouldn’t have if there was a... another way of doing it.
[Q] But they came to you recently also for a beautiful project in China.
Well, that doesn’t mean that you know, the Chinese government doesn’t also have this attitude and therefore came to me to do six houses in China in order that, you know, these houses, in a sense, show a different way of creating space and a different lifestyle, in a sense. So when they came to me and I started working on these houses, I said to one of the members of our client, I said... you know, I, we have a Chinese kitchen and a Western kitchen in the house. I said, well, I know how to design a Western kitchen but I’m not familiar with, you know, the organisation of a Chinese kitchen, so I need a little help to, kind of, tell me, you know, how do I organise the Chinese kitchen... does it have a refrigerator, a stove, you know, these things. He said, don’t worry. I said, what do you mean? Well no-one’s going to cook there. I said, what do you mean no-one’s going to cook there? These houses are not for someone to live in. These are houses for exhibition. These are houses, which we’re going to have, and people will come from the countryside and all over. This is what they’ll aspire to but no-one’s going to live there.
[Q] No [unclear].
Can I make up a story like that? So that’s what we’re doing.
[Q] So tell us about, in your lifetime, how did the client change, the developers in the sense that the client change, 40 years ago, 20 years ago and today? 
The clients are all... I mean, all the clients are different. I mean with the Chinese client, there’s no one person. I mean, it’s a, sort of, a kind of, group. It changes, you know, floats in and out. There’s no one head of the organisation. Well, I met someone in China and presented the project to him. He said yes, I mean, that’s all he said. He said yes, okay, you know but it’s not like he said make the Chinese kitchen bigger.
[Q] But for instance, you know, the client in Miami is a different kind of client than the client in...
Well, no, the client in Miami is very different from the client in New York because both developers and attitude is very different, so I don’t think it’s more... I don’t think it’s so much the times as the people who are different and they’re...
[Q] They didn't have these kind of people before.
No, actually, one of the things, which has changed quite  dramatically is that in many of the situations in which we work, whether it’s with a developer, an institution or even a government, many of the people that we’re dealing with are architects, trained as architects. And therefore, come with, in a sense, a greater understanding of the process and also everything else, you know and that has.. that has really been helpful in many respects because they understand, you know, what it takes to... to make something and how it’s done. And they understand the process and so it's not really dealing with... with someone who’s not knowledgeable. The clients are much more knowledgeable and much more professional than before.

Lewis Mumford was an architectural critic, and a very important one. There are probably people between Mumford and Ada Louise Huxtable but I don’t know who they are. Ada Louise Huxtable changed, in the United States, the media’s interests and perception of architecture in the most profound way. She was a really the first of, at least in my lifetime, I think, the first serious, thoughtful, conscientious commenter and critic of architecture. And the "New York Times", I think, to some degree at least, appreciated the quality that she brought to the newspaper. Other cities then, in fact, followed. In Los Angeles, they have architectural critics, Chicago, major cities have people writing about architecture but rarely of the quality of Ada Louise Huxtable. But nevertheless, they saw that, you know, there was something the public was interested in, and wanted to know about and therefore found people, you know, to write about them. More often than not, these were reporters  more than critics and so the writing, you know, took on more of a reportage aspect than a critical one. Although there are people writing  for the "Chicago Tribune", the "Boston Globe" and the "Los Angeles Times", you know, that attempt architectural criticism and attempt, you know, to try to raise the level of what is being built in their city. For many, this has become... they feel it’s almost like promotion and therefore they try to get different people to write about their project, whether it’s in the Real Estate section of the "New York Times" or it’s something just to give it notoriety and credibility. There’s then this aspect of, kind of, promotional writing as opposed to critical writing, and sometimes it’s hard to see whether something’s one side... on one side or another. Then there are critics whose opinion, you know is going to go in a certain direction. And they’re going to write about certain kinds of things in a certain way and other things in another kind of way but the general public probably doesn’t have that level of discernability and therefore, at least I believe most of the things I read in the newspaper. I probably shouldn’t  because it’s probably as distorted as everything else is but in architecture, I think what’s happened is, it’s kind of promoted an awareness of what’s happening and that’s very good.
[Q] But at a professional level, who would you say that... the critics that really contributes the most.
Well, I happen to think that  Nicolai Ouroussoff is a good writer. I don’t always agree with what he says but I think it’s thoughtful and it’s well put together. I always liked Herbert Muschamp as a critic and I thought he was extremely good but it was, it, he was... he was all over the place. And, you know, Paul Goldberger in his attempt to, I think, try to be fair to whatever he’s writing about, sort of, keeps jumping back and forth from one side to another and you never know quite where he stands as a result because he’s always saying, on the other hand. But I think that, you know, he is certainly a thoughtful critic most of the time.
[Q] Kenneth Frampton. 
Who?
[Q] Kenneth Frampton?
Well, Kenneth is... is really more a historian and critic than someone that you would associate with what’s going on. He really is an extraordinary writer and critic but he’s not...
[Q] A theoretician.
Huh?
[Q] Theoretician. 
Yeah, he’s more of a theoretician. Kenneth’s more of a theoretician than he is a critic. And Joseph... Joseph Rykwert, I think, just has too many other interests. You know, really, I mean, he can write about anything and be brilliant but... and architecture’s one of the things that interests him but it’s not the only thing that interests Joseph. And I think Joseph, were he to focus on architecture would be much more influential than he is.
[Q] Frampton is good at that.
Yeah. But unfortunately, there really aren’t that many people who write well about architecture.
[Q] But I would say there were people like Frampton, for instance, who made a large contribution to the development of architectural thinking... in the last forty years.
Yeah, yeah, that’s true.
[Q] Very important figures, like Mumford. 
No, no, I think that Kenneth Frampton has probably been the most important figure, you know, in architectural education and literature.

Well I think that in a lot of... a lot of the things that we’ve been talking about have influenced the younger generation of the last, say, 20 years. The books, the... the combination of practice and theory, the interest and... and I think attitude. You know, when... when I was in architecture school, for the most part and most of the people I know, you know, when you graduated you went into architecture. For many young people today they stay... either stay in school or teach. A lot of people stay, sort of, in academia, as it were, for a longer period of time and therefore I guess they’re not as much in a rush to go into practice. And are also looking at other areas in which they can work as an architect rather than traditional practice. So, I think that that, sort of, in a sense, affects  the young people and I think that all the influences, you know, from both the schools and the publications influence, you know, influence the work that’s being done by young architects. And sort of the blip that we talked about, that occurred in the '80s, you know, they don’t even... they don’t even know about it. I mean it’s like it doesn’t exist, you know, it’s not part of their educational experience. I mean it’s, sort of, like what’s happening now is more of an influence on them.
[Q] However, a lot of the teachers grew up during that blip, unfortunately, and have an influence today in that lack of... how can I say? Lack of redaction.
Yeah. I don't... I mean I only know the places where I've gone to lecture and seen their work. So... someone in the office just did a slide show of what she was teaching when she was at the University of Florida. You know, it was terrific, abstract exercises in making of space and, you know, very, very good. So I don't see where she was influenced, at least by...

My daughter is designing things. She has no formal training in architecture but she likes to design things. She’s always liked to make things  and is now working on a series of lighting fixtures. I guess the lighting was so bad in our apartment, she decided she had to do something about it and she didn’t want to just go out and buy it. Yeah, so she’s working on, on doing some lighting fixtures, which are very, very interesting sculptural objects and I think, you know, she could be a good designer but she needs some...  some discipline as a designer. My son is making sculpture, so he’s free to do whatever he wants. You know what they say, a sculptor can make a square wheel but an architect has to make a round one.

Well, one of the highlights was the dedication ceremony at the  Frankfurt Museum. It was dedicated by the president of Germany, who made a very nice speech and I made a very short speech in which I said that as an American, and as an architect and as a Jew, it was very important, what we made here because I felt that it created a bridge that was very necessary and very important; and how proud I was to have been part of that.
[Q] You met the Pope also, could you talk about that?
Oh yeah, oh yeah, well that... that was... that was a good moment. After I was selected by the jury of the competition for the Jubilee Church, I got a telephone call from the Vatican saying would I like to come and present the model of the church to the Pope. I said, that’s not a question, that’s a... of course, I would be thrilled to do this.  So we set up a date in... again in October and I shipped the model over to Rome from New York. I had an audience with the Pope at 11 o’clock on a Wednesday morning because every Wednesday is a public audience from 9 to 11. There’s 16,000 people from all over the world and there’s Mass, and so this was scheduled in the room adjacent to that in the Vatican for 11 o’clock.  So I get there at 8 o’clock in the morning and the model was sitting over in the corner of the room and the door is over here and the room was really dark, no windows, nothing, not even a tiny light, so I said to the Swiss guards, can we get some lights on the model, so when the Pope comes in, you know, he can see what the model looks like. And, the Swiss guards disappear. I looked at my watch, 9.30, I called the Swiss guards, some lights, luce, luce, we need some lights in here. 10.30, I said I'm really getting nervous. I, got to get... something happening here. I couldn’t get the Swiss guards to bring the lights, what am I going do? I started walking in the hallways, looking for some moveable light fixtures that I could move in. I went back into the room it’s five minutes to eleven, the Pope is coming in. I said to the Swiss guards, you know, can we get some lights? We need some lights! The Swiss guards pick up the base and the model and they carry it from where it is in the corner of the room to the door. I said, what are we doing this for, we need some lights, so when the Pope arrives... Just then the Pope comes in, all the television cameras are on and there was light.
[Q] And what did you say?
I said to the Pope, I said, 'Your Highness, it’s a great privilege and honour for me to present the Jubilee Church to you and I appreciate this opportunity'. He turned to me and he said, 'You’re an American?' Then I explained the design and he looked, looked around. I had brought a drawing that I had made of the church.
[Q] And he said, are you Jewish? 
No, no, he didn’t say that.
[Q] Ah, I was waiting for that!
I think that was part of what he meant when he said, 'You’re an American?' But, so I presented him with a drawing and you know, gave him a gift. I got, he gave me a coin, you know... you know a Papal coin and we talked about the project then he left.
[Q] So he liked it?
Yes, as far as I...
[Q] Well, that’s good, so you met the Pope. 
Well, and the Pope... no he really liked... he liked the building and in fact, he was scheduled to dedicate the church when it was about to open. Only he passed away just two weeks before the inauguration.

There are so many good architects today, really doing good work, I mean and you know, I could mention all my friends, you know, as people who I think are doing good work but there are a lot of people I don’t know. About four years ago, I remember or longer, I had to go to Chile. I was asked by the United States government to look at a site for the embassy in Chile and I went down there. I looked at the site and everything.
[Q] In Santiago?
Yeah, in Santiago and I met young Chilean architects who, you know, were adamant that New York, Washington was not a place that was well thought about among the people. They felt abandoned by the United States but I met some really good young Chilean architects doing terrific work.
[Q] That's a big surprise - yeah exactly...
Under, you know, under this...
[Q] Nobody knows about this Chilean architecture. Santiago is a fabulous city.
Yeah, wonderful, I wouldn't have know about it otherwise and you know, they’re so, there are people doing really interesting work.
[Q] Out of the curcuit. The circuit is really the circuit you know. Its the London, Milan, New York kind of... 
Yeah but yesterday, two young women from New Zealand came to talk to me, I don't know why they came but they came and so I talked with them for awhile and... and I said to them, you know, I have no idea what’s happening in architecture in New Zealand. And they said, you know, there’s an enormous influence and an enormous respect for my work. They’re really plugged in but we don’t know what they’re doing. I mean they, they get, you know, the information.
[Q] Yes, it's amazing. It certainly happens... we go to places that we hardly know about on the map, in a sense.  And they know everything about you. 
Exactly, right, exactly. I felt embarrassed, you know, that, I mean, they knew more about me than you do.
[Q] That's amazing.
So, I think that’s very encouraging, myself, I think it’s extremely encouraging that all of this is going on at this moment because it was... it didn't used to be that way.
