richard.gregory

The late British psychologist and Emeritus Professor of Neuropsychology at the University of Bristol, Richard Gregory (1923-2010), is well known for his work on perception, the psychology of seeing and his love of puns. In 1978 he founded The Exploratory, an applied science centre in Bristol – the first of its kind in the UK. He also designed and directed the Special Senses Laboratory at Cambridge which worked on the perceptual problems of astronauts, and published many books including 'The Oxford Companion to the Mind', 'Eye and Brain' and 'Mind in Science'.

						Well, my father, you see, as you know he was an astronomer and he was also a sort of philosopher in a way. He had a rather occult view of the world but he had the strong ideas that he wanted to live with dominating his life and then he wanted to persuade everybody around him that he was Plato and Aristotle bound up in one, you see, with the ultimate truth in his head and he couldn’t stop talking about the ideas that were in his mind. That was fine except he just couldn’t stop, he couldn’t be questioned, and if you did sort of try to get him to rephrase it or question it or modify it, he’d get really quite annoyed. He just had to have all this pouring out all the time and he used to bore the pants off people and I decided I just wouldn’t do that because I tend to get dominated by ideas as well, like you do, like any intelligent person does so I interspersed the great philosophical musings that were going on in my mind with jokes, you see, to leaven them, to break the thing up a bit. It had two results of this. One was that I thought I wasn’t going to bore people, which of course is completely fallacious because it spoilt the flow of the discussion and ruined it and secondly I felt that it broke up one’s brain circuit so instead of going around in circles, or repeating what one has said for years and years, it forced one to sort of think again, to change one’s mind. And also, the third thing, I suppose, is it brought the other people into the act and even if they didn’t know about inductive reasoning or the nature of gravity or some such thing, they could at least share a joke so it was a social impact but largely I think a whole load of jokes are detrimental actually.
					
						I was born in London, in Little Venice, in fact, and my father was at University College as an astronomer, a young astronomer, and I think my parents had been married about 18 months or less when I was born so I was wheeled in my pram around Little Venice, I believe, my first encounter with the world, which I still like. I like that part of London very much indeed actually. Then my father built the Observatory at Mill Hill, which was the University of London Observatory, he was the first director of it, so among my first memories really I suppose were the building of the Observatory which was dramatic and wonderful really with its dome and the whole bit. I used to go for carpentry lessons. Every Saturday I used to pedal along in my fairy cycle along cobbled, well, actually it was rough stone, come to think of it, along the road to get there, which has now got a super highway, it’s ridiculous. About five years after it was built, it became impossible because it was a major road up to Apex Corner and so on, and then all the lights, of course, were put onto the road, and my father and I thought it was infinitely powerful. They had the lights on the, it wasn’t really a motorway, but a major road, covered with a special cowl on the top of the lights to prevent the light going up into the sky and I suppose I felt that a father who could do that, was pretty powerful, you see. He was that sort of a chap. He could make things happen like that actually. He could. I think I was really brought up looking at the universe and wondering what on earth was out there, which is what made me interested in perception. But my father was also a bit of a gypsy. His parents had a large house covered in ivy in Parkstown, full of possessions, and I’ve got rather a lot of junk here as you can see, and my grandparents were like that but sort of Victorian knick-knacks all over the place, you know. Incredible collection of stuff. My father hated possessions, he really felt that he would like to just sort of forget his family, go off somewhere, live some somewhere else at the drop of a hat and possessions tied him down. So he was both tied to the nature of the universe but also to being a free agent in his own world really and he was eccentric. He gave up Victorian values to a very great extent and he was an ardent nudist. He got very keen on nudism, which I found intensely embarrassing, I might say, at the age of seven or eight or something like that. He was very keen on it and used to go on these nudist weekends and this sort of thing, which at that time was sort of fashionable. People like Joad and people; I think they were nudists as well. It was the thing to be if you were an academic but it never appealed to me one bit and I must say still doesn’t. So I think my early life was a mixture of rather, fear of my father because he was a very dominating character who wouldn’t stand idiocy or, you know, he wouldn’t understand normal child behaviour really. Also, wrestling really with a conflict between standards that one was supposed to have in one’s school, behaviour and so on, and then the gypsy-like father who was a reputable academic and also pretty jolly zany. So it was a series of funny conflicts going on.
					
						My mother was absolutely sort of standard English lady, rather a good family. Great-uncle was a viscount and the whole bit, you know, she was quite an established sort of person really in that sort of way and she found it pretty embarrassing too, I think. So I lived really with a mixture of fear of my father, embarrassment, fondness of my mother but she was a bit feeble and wouldn’t stand up to him. Anything you did, she’d say- oh, marvellous, darling, you know, she didn’t have any criticism at all which meant that one had no guidance. On the other hand, my father never really approved of anything at all, whatever one did, so that was a strange sort of vice, so to speak, to be squeezed within. Then I went to this rather zany school, King Alfred’s in Hampstead, which was a sort of experimental school where there was really no discipline at all. If you didn’t want to do anything, you didn’t, but one could make things and I made things. I made an electric clock and a calculating machine and all sorts of things, which was great. I rather liked it actually, I must admit.
					
						My father’s father was a vicar at Parkston and he had a certain amount of private means, he had a large house, and I used to spend the summers there actually, it was called Melville, very nice house in Parkston. It had crown cranes on the lawn. My grandmother had two aviaries. She was absolutely potty on birds and animals and she had a load of animals including a monkey called Patapan, which bit me in the arm. I’ve still got the scar actually if you don’t believe me, there. This monkey and I had a complete war. We absolutely loathed each other but it was always putting grape skins everywhere and there was a very nice conservatory that I used to sit in a lot and this monkey like it as well. He was always putting these wretched grape skins everywhere and I really felt that having animals in the house is not such a good idea. I think really houses are for humans. I’ve always felt that ever since. My grandmother was an amazing woman actually. She was a bit of a poet. She published a certain amount of poetry. She was an expert on Horace Walpole’s letters, really an acknowledged expert, and very good on French literature and poetry, a very cultured woman actually. My grandfather was an athlete. He was a cricketer and all-round athlete, gentle man, with a very dominating wife, and a man of peace, a man of the church. How much he really believed I don’t know but I think he was a very good vicar probably. So that was the sort of thing and then my father found this is home, he was brought up in, he called it The Cover. When he went there he felt smothered and it was rather a torporish place actually, very near Bournemouth, you know. But they knew a lot of very interesting people, it was quite a- In fact, they knew Alfred Russel Wallace who lived near there. Alfred Russel Wallace retired near Bournemouth because he loved gardening and the climate is pretty good round there. My father used to play in his garden. I, of course, couldn’t remember who Alfred Russel Wallace was but my father could and he mentioned to me a couple of times this grand old man with a beard that he knew as a boy, you know. So that was broadly that and I went to see this house the other day. You know it’s very strange, isn’t it, when you go to see a house in your family later on? It was covered in creepers, a beautiful garden, very large and wonderful, with a huge mulberry tree that my sister and I used to sit in and lovely pond with fountains, the whole bit, and crown cranes, I mean it really was something. Went there now and it was complete shambles, you know. Most of the garden has gone, all the creepers are off the wall, and it’s now about six or eight apartments with people living in it, which I suppose is okay, but I find this conflict of what you’re seeing in the moment, the real time, the present, with one’s memory, you know, in a situation like that, is quite extraordinary. It’s like two films running at once on the screen. You get your memory images, which are incredibly strong, and then you open your eyes and there’s this, house, what has happened to the creeper? Where’s the pond? Where are the birds, the monkey, indeed? The whole lot, all gone. This juxtaposition of the past in one’s memory and the present I found really strange when you visit something in your past.
					
						It’s about 100 years old, it’s one of the earliest sort of experimental schools where children are supposed to be allowed to do what they want to do and we had virtually no lessons in the afternoon at all. We had games and we made things. We had workshops, art as well, and one was allowed to sort of invent things. I had a sort of game, I think, of inventing things all the time but I did actually make one or two things. I made an electric pendulum clock and I made a calculator with wheels, a geared calculator, that was fun, and stuff like that so in a sense it was partly pretend and partly real. I did actually try to invent things, always have done, but I’m really a sort of failed inventor, as I should probably tell you because very few of my inventions have ever really got anywhere, do you know what I mean? But as an activity in life, I think it’s absolutely super to have an idea and not simply to say to oneself, well, somebody else will have done it before, or it’s so obvious, why bother? Or it’ll be of no use. It think, you know, to be brought up with the idea that it’s good to accept challenges, it’s good to have enough self confidence so that you can actually try and do something new, is absolutely right. I think optimising self confidence is very much what education should be about and I think my school, I mean the school I went to, King Alfred, was rather good on that. It supported kids. Our Christian names, of course, were known to all the staff and we, apart from the head, used their Christian names. It had a sort of informality about it, you know, and it was like a big family, that’s why I mentioned this, in the sense that you got support and very little punishment. If you did something silly, on the whole it was just accepted. Against that, it was absolutely appalling for learning languages and really for learning mathematics because one just was not made to sit down and jolly well learn a lot of boring stuff and that’s been a handicap to me. I mean my languages are absolutely abysmal, you know. I go to Germany or France or something, I can just about order a meal if I’m thinking about it, and that’s it. No way could I have an intelligent conversation in French or German which I think is a terrible handicap and when I see German students and friends and I go to Germany and they all talk English, it actually makes me quite upset that we’re insular in that way and certainly don’t learn languages properly as children. So I think the lesson really is that some of what King Alfred did, that is to give people the confidence to think for themselves, is brilliant, but not to have sort of rote learning and make one actually learn verbs and the whole bit, is also a tremendous disadvantage and I think somehow, in a good education, you really do need both and it’s like, indeed, making something in a workshop. You’ve got tools but if you can’t use a tool, you can’t actually make anything worth having and you’ve got to learn how to plane wood straight, how to saw properly without the saw jamming, and mentally you’ve got to have the same facility for basic skills in order to be effectively creative. So I think my school made you creative but not all that effective because of the lack of primary basic skills.
					
						I think a lot of one’s autobiography and one’s memories are really fiction. I think you re-invent or invent your past with snippets on the whole, of course, you do it to your own advantage. You make yourself come out as a decent, honourable person, amazingly creative, amazingly intelligent, all these different things, but most of it is fiction, to be honest, you know. But I certainly have always tried to have new ideas and to, I don’t say succeed, but, you know, to try to write things and think of things and make jokes and so on, that’s perfectly true. And I think it was partly from my father but I also think it was partly a way of rebelling against him because he was a very authoritarian character so this is a paradox, isn’t it, that one’s father, who was an incredibly dominating factor in one’s early life, I think all fathers are, certainly in my case, my father rather than my mother actually who was completely different, inspire one partly to be the opposite of what they are. It’s not that you follow them so much. Now, I think my early background was really a mixture of being a bit dominated by my father even rather afraid of him, and actually trying to have ideas that he hadn’t thought of, and we might get to this later but the idea, one of the ideas I’m most fond of actually, is my system for reducing the effects of atmospheric turbulence in telescopes and, to be honest, I think part of the fun of that when I first thought of it was that my father hadn’t thought of it, and he was an astronomer, you know what I mean? It’s a dreadful thing to say but I think one’s parents set one up in their image and in a way one breaks the image as you grow up, I think, and I found this with my grandson. He doesn’t always do what I want him to do and I think he’s exactly the same; he’s really rebelling against me, his grandfather, and possibly his father at some stage, wanting to be his own thing. So this is a problem about education or bringing up in a family, isn’t it, that you both absorb the values of the family or the school and at the same time you say to yourself, that’s the last thing I want to be, I want to be something completely different. So I think creativity, in a way, comes from this sort of conflict but to be effectively creative, you’ve absolutely got to have optimal confidence or, if you like, optimal arrogance, over arrogance and you’re completely useless. If you don’t have any arrogance, you don’t do anything. You’re not alive really, mentally. So I think this is it. And I think my school was very good actually for giving one optimal arrogance.
					
The war started when I was at school. I was 16 when the war started and I was very sort of patriotic and I wanted to be a bit of a national hero and all that sort of stuff, you see. So I volunteered for the RAF as a fighter pilot and I really wanted to be a fighter pilot and, in fact, I joined the RAFVR when I was at school, I had a little silver badge on and you strutted around, you know, you learned how to march and all sorts of things and there were various courses. I took an engine to pieces and did all sorts of things like that and learned about, to some extent, about flying and aircraft and so on in the RAFVR when I was at school still. Then when I was, I think, 16 or possibly 17, I forget now, 17, it must have been, I was actually in the RAF. I was suddenly in it and I claimed I wanted to be a fighter pilot but I wasn’t because I’d had an ear operation. I’d had a mastoid operation on this ear and apparently if you get violent pressure changes, you know, zinging up and down fighting in an aircraft, you can have problems so you were not allowed to be a fighter pilot if you’d had a mastoid operation. They didn’t tell me that until I was actually in or I could have stayed at school, see what I mean? So I’d left school, stuck in the RAF without having gone to the sixth form. I missed the sixth form because of this. Oh, I did six months farming and stuff as well, by the way, and, you know, filling up sandbags and teaching old ladies how to put out incendiary fires with Stuart pumps and things, I did all that sort of stuff.
So I was actually 18 when I was actually called up, so I had about a year messing around doing all these things. Well, then, there I was, so I did an intelligence test, which I did reasonably well at, and so I did radar. I went at Cranwell, number one signal school, which is absolutely a great place. I adored Cranwell. It’s the sort of college in the RAF, you know, and it was wonderful. I learned about radar and I learned about radio and communication and stuff like that and I really enjoyed that. It was great. A very civilised place, I mean we acted plays and we had music society, the whole bit, it was very, very nice actually.
Then I got a posting to the Gold Coast and an amazing thing happened. The telegram had a mistake on it. We lived in a road called Courtland Avenue in Mill Hill, which is near my father’s observatory, and the telegram had Portland Avenue on it so I didn’t get it, so by the time I went to Blackpool, which was the place where we did our square bashing and, you know, all the rest of it, I was a week late and I was posted as a deserter. Absolutely. I was more or less handcuffed, I think I was handcuffed actually, the whole bit. Then I explained what had happened and fortunately I had the telegram so I could prove what happened, well, in half an hour it was all sorted out, you see. But anyway everybody else had tropical kit and pith helmets and stuff for the Gold Coast and, of course, I didn’t so I had this extraordinary, I think it was about over a month actually, in Blackpool with nothing to do and I investigated psychical  research. I used to go to the mediums and see whether I could see how they faked it, you know. I had an absolutely glorious, I think it was six weeks, doing my own private investigations and I would, because I was in uniform, you see, I was fairly anonymous but they latched on to me very quickly. They knew I was a bit sort of different in that way, I suppose because I kept going back and I used to find out quite a lot about how they tricked people, and we used to play about with, is it called a Planchette Board where you’ve got these letters around and all that sort of stuff? I got terribly interested in all that. I never believed it but my father, I think, did believe it, you see. Although he was a physicist, he was at Cambridge as a physics student and then at Cavendish, and then an astronomer, he actually had a strong sense of the occult and he really believed that spooky things happen in the universe, very much so.

						Well, it was partly because my father was interested in the paranormal and, in fact, he studied what they call a physical medium called Rudy Schneider, obviously German, and in his observatory, there was a very nice workshop and they made apparatus for studying this physical medium and it had a table that tilted with an electrical contact, and it would fire a flash on a camera so the idea was that when spooky things went on, it would be caught instantly on the camera, you see, and he had a sort of tunnel with gauze on it and infra-red as well, and various things like that, so he did quite a sophisticated technique for that time, I’m talking about, you know, in the late 30s. Rudy Schneider, there was a record of him which I remember my father had, and he would breathe like this for minutes and minutes on end, you know, how on earth do you manage that? I don’t know, in his trance, he’d go into these deep trances and then physical things would happen. For example, he’d hold a handkerchief from nowhere, with no hand, and then you pulled it and the handkerchief, if it wouldn’t get torn, at least it got sort of pulled tight with only an ectoplasmic hand at the other end of it and stuff like this, you see. I was brought up with stories of these experimental seances that my father used to do with Lord Charles Hope I think it was in his sitting room. The argument was, of course, that as it was his private sitting room there wouldn’t be a secret trap door, the whole bit, whether there were or not, of course I don’t know but presumably there weren’t. He wrote a book with Charles Hope, I think, claiming really that there was some genuineness in these phenomena so that sort of set me up. It was interesting because when I was very small I used to get the dramatic stories of these wonderful things happening, you see, so that was sort of in my mind. So when I went to Blackpool with nothing to do because I’d done my square bashing, and I wasn’t posted as I should have been to the Gold Coast, I had to kick around to be posted somewhere else, you see. What did I do but investigate the local mediums because they were there and I found this really very interesting. So I tried little experiments and tricks on them and all that and I was admitted to the inner circle of one of these mediums where she had an evening at her house with things going on and I remember the thing that amazed them most, I can’t say it amazed me all that much, it must have been Christmas time because there was a load of Christmas cards on the mantelpiece and these voices and trumpets and stuff were all going on and all of a sudden these Christmas cards all fell off onto the floor, draught, somebody blew it, you know, this sort of thing, so that little manifestations like that would happen and you got these voices, which I’m perfectly certain were actors’ voices in a way, but it was rather fun and enjoyable. I used to enjoy it very much indeed. So I think this is what it was really.

So there’s a paranormal streak in your makeup?

Well, I never really believed it, no, but I enjoyed trying to find out and I suppose, you know, my later interest in the brain and the mind and perception and whatnot, is, in a way, related to that. What are the limits of human thinking and perceiving and understanding? In what ways can we be fooled both in perception and also with conceptions, if you like, with thoughts? I think if you’re going to study truth you’ve absolutely got to study untruth and you’ve got to be very, very aware that truth is damn difficult to attain, that one’s best ideas can be riddled with error, that if one’s teaching one can inculcate, is that the word I want, total nonsense to one’s students very, very easily, and what seems plausible may be wrong and what seems implausible, and this is very important, I think, could not only be right but when it is right, is going to be much more exciting than something which seems obvious. And so it’s always a game between the implausible, the improbable, but therefore new knowledge and exciting and that which is reliable and trustworthy but a bit tedious and I think this is something you’ve got to live with when you’re teaching and when you’re doing research and the paranormal is a wonderful test case where you can pit your mind not only against the universe as in physics, but against people who are trying to fool you and make money out of it.
					
						I got posted to the most boring posting in the end because I didn’t go to the Gold Coast, where, mark you, I would probably have got some rotten disease or something, it was very dangerous, the Gold Coast at that time actually, and I went to Canada. Why did the RAF go to Canada? Because it had training command and pilots would be trained in Canada. There were half a dozen very large airforce bases in Canada and I was posted onto training command and I went to a place called Debert which is Nova Scotia, which is absolutely in the wild, and I was there for a long time actually. Very, very cold and we got snowdrifts ten foot high and that sort of thing, and the aircraft would kind of blow away in the middle of the night, you know, it really was something actually, it really was. Nothing there but sort of Christmas trees everywhere, incredibly boring place, I thought, I must admit. But I had quite a lot of fun there because I tested out radar and airborne radar, did a lot of flying actually in Canada and I actually rather enjoyed it in many ways. It was totally away from the war zone. The only thing I ever did which was faintly brave was pulling a chap out of a burning aeroplane which actually was rather brave, I’m quite proud of myself looking back at it. I was standing on the petrol tanks in the wing of the burning aeroplane, you know, actually pull this sort of sliding thing open and we got him out. Other people rushed up and we got him out. He lived, he never walked, oh, he walked again but he never flew again, that’s right, his legs were cooking in this thing. It was an extraordinary sight actually. Standing on this aeroplane, all these flames around this chap’s legs, you know, how are we going to get him out? Are we going to get blown up and so on? It was a dodgy situation. But when I compare that with actually being in a war zone, which I never was, I mean it’s pitiful. It was the one event in the whole war, apart from this air raids and so on, where I was ever in any particular danger, you know, honestly. The only time we ever saw a German was when we were flying over the Bay of Fundy and there was a German submarine and the chaps were swimming around the submarine and we didn’t have a depth charge with us. We normally carried depth charges but we didn’t have one on that occasion so we waved to them and flew off. That was my war experience, you know, for almost six years, it’s crazy really. And then I went to Kingston, Ontario, which is an absolutely beautiful place on the Great Lakes and that was lovely. I had my own racing dinghy and did a lot of sailing there. That was really nice, so I had a rather sort of soft war, I have to admit, really. And I tried to teach myself physics. I used to make atomic models with wire and beads. I used to go to haberdasheries and get beads and make models and one has lockers to put one’s possessions in. Mine was full of these atomic models, you know, which was quite fun.
					
I went to Cambridge. I actually got a scholarship from the RAF and I went to my father’s college, Downing, and I did philosophy and experimental psychology, two years of philosophy, and I was very, very fortunate because among my teachers was Bertrand Russell and I met him for an hour every Thursday for a couple of terms in 1948 that was. I went up in 1947. 
And that was wonderful. It was in a lovely room in Trinity and he would sit on this sofa, smoking a pipe. He had a second pipe which was cooling down so he’d smoke his pipe and pick up the cool one and then smoke that continuously. But instead of talking about logic and inductive influence, which particularly interested me at that time and he’d just written a book on it called Human Knowledge, he was terribly concerned with Berlin and what was going to happen because the Russians had got into Berlin before the Americans, you know. It was a big problem at that time: who was going to run Europe? Who was going to dominate Europe? This was before CDN, of course, he got very involved after that in atomic energy, it was before that, but he was so concerned about this political thing, it’s only really when we talked about Wittgenstein that he’d get interested again and the reason for that, between you and me and the gate post, was that he wanted to be remembered as the great philosopher of the 20th century and he was afraid that Wittgenstein, who of course was his protégée, would pip him at the post and he really wanted us, young men, of no consequence whatsoever except that we had a future - he was 76 by that time so he didn’t have so much future - would accept Wittgenstein as the master instead of him, Bertrand Russell. It was quite interesting, so he really did sort of worse to his views to a great extent, you know.
[Q] Was he impressive? 
Well, the thing is, you got... was he impressive? Yeah, he was, but the thing is you got an enormous halo effect with people like that. I mean when you are young and you’ve got somebody like Bertrand Russell, he was 76, you know, he came to Cambridge one day a week at that time. I think he was between marriages or something. He was such a grand man. We looked at his Principia Mathematica, his other books, and I’ve read many of his books actually, and his prose style, his writing, of course, were absolutely wonderful, that one couldn’t but think of him if not as God at least as somebody very close to it, almost not quite mortal, you know, and consequently whenever he said anything, one tended to think there must be the ultimate truth in it, and if one didn’t understand it, one ascribed that to one’s own stupidity not to him making a mistake, you know.
I think the thing, little tiny episode that I remember now vividly because I suppose of arrogance or something, but I had a really rather good conversation with him and I can remember exactly what it was about. It was about Keynes' Theory of Probability and Keynes needed an initial probability to get the thing going so he took it at point five, in other words, that things were equally balanced when there was no evidence whatsoever, and then the mathematics went on from there and I said how can you really justify that? It was obviously something he’d been thinking about because he suddenly woke up and got excited about this and we had a really good conversation about it, and he’d just written this book, Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, which I think is a very, very good book, it’s not one of his most successful books, I think it’s very good, and it’s about scientific methods inductive inference and so on. And there was a pile of them, it had just come out, by his chair, and he took the top one off, signed it and gave it to me, and I was so bucked about it and I still have it with his signature on it, in it. That was really nice. I mean he was such a reputation, he was just outstanding that suddenly to be given a book by him was a wonderful treat, you know. I think these little tiny things, one never forgets actually. It’s one of the great things about going to Cambridge or one of the other great universities, you had amazing visitors, amazing teachers, that one could completely respect, you know. I think this is really important, that universities have people who stand out as amazing in an international sense actually. And then when you get the little silly episode like that, you see, it has tremendous significance. If he was Joe Bloggs, who had the same conversation and then he produced some crummy book or something, it would have meant absolutely nothing and I would not remember it now, 40 years later. As it is, I remember it, 40 years later, vividly. I can see him sitting there.

						I find memory completely mysterious. I mean I know, of course, regions of the brain where memories are stored but the amazing thing is that we don’t actually know the physical changes in the brain that store memory. On the other hand, of course, we have a lot of analogies from computer memory. I mean we know that modification of a physical system can store information as, indeed, when you write on a page with ink, I mean one is producing a physical change which represents abstract ideas, represents the past, anticipates the future, gives you an idea, right or wrong, completely separate from the paper and the ink or the electronics in the computer, takes on a life of its own, software, if you like. And I think this is one of the wonderful things that technology is helping us to understand the brain through analogies actually and I think the hardware, software distinction, you’ve got the physical system, which can represent by rules, by encapsulating and calling up knowledge symbolically, is the key, how the brain works, memory and so on, also, of course, for computers. There’s a big analogy there, I think, actually, but the trouble is we don’t really know exactly what the hardware of memory is. It’s amazing. I mean it’s almost certainly that you get immediate memories lasting for a few seconds which are dynamic oscillatory circuits and then that’s laid down as changes which are probably connections, synaptic connections between nerve cells which form more or less permanent groups of cells which fire, you know, but the details of that are simply not known, which is extraordinary. There must be half a dozen Nobel Prizes sitting there to be won.
					
I stayed at Cambridge. I actually went into the what we call the APU, the Applied Psychology Unit, which was owned and run by the Medical Research Council, which is just, well, it’s on the fringe of Cambridge in Chaucer Road actually. It’s a big old country house, it had just been bought to turn into these laboratories and, in fact, there was rather an amusing story. The chap who bought it was a chap called Norman Mackworth who was actually a medical doctor who was a research worker in our department, the Department of Psychology, and he saw this house and he laid out his own money and bought this mansion assuming or hoping that the MRC would follow it up because he didn’t want to lose it. He was certain that this would make the most wonderful laboratory, it was a country house with lovely grounds, you see. It worked out, his gamble paid off. He bought the thing in one weekend, told the MRC, the Medical Research Council, that he’d bought this thing. They absolutely did their nut, as you can imagine, but finally coughed up, bought it and it’s, in fact, the biggest medical research laboratory outside London actually, and has been very successful indeed. I started there and it was a wonderful laboratory. It combined people having abstract general ideas with very, very practical problems and I think that mixture of the theoretical and the practical, well, it certainly suited me. I think it suited a lot of people very, very well. I remember I wrote a long essay about the brain as an induction machine, following really from Bertrand Russell and thinking about induction and all the rest of it and I still think these problems about how you gain knowledge by instances, generalising, then creating an hypothesis, which you then test, which go on in science is really what the brain also does. We are sort of little scientists inside our heads to a great extent. Anyway, I wrote an essay on that which went on and on but at the same time I did practical things, some quite dramatic. I spent a year working on escaping from submarines for the navy. Sir Frederick Bartlett who was my professor, wonderful man, and he was again a person I respect totally looking back on him, he seconded me to the navy for a year actually at Whale Island in Portsmouth. I used to go down in the submarine and then we did a big experiment where we changed the atmosphere, we increased the CO2, reduced the oxygen, as though one was in a stricken submarine, you see, and then we had, I designed escape gear, a replica of the 42 operations required to get out of a submarine for each man using the twill trunk system, no, sorry, using a gun tower system, where each chap had to get into a gun tower, open the lower hatch, get into it, close it, put oxygen into it, put the upper one up, then you had to drain the water out- 42 separate operations for each person actually to get out of this thing. Meanwhile you had to wait to be discovered because if you got out of the submarine when you were at the bottom of the sea, nobody knew you were there, you were going to get drowned, no point in doing it. So what they did, they sat down there waiting to hear the screws of surface ships circling because, you won’t believe this, but the sonar thing was on the bow of the submarine. The first thing that happened was that broke off if it hit the deck, you see, at the bottom of the sea, and so they lost communication. It was quite extraordinary. The only communication was listening for the screws of the surface vessel so what I was working on was how long one should wait to be discovered down there, you see, by surface ships as the oxygen gradually failed and the CO2 gradually took over your consciousness, you know. Given that it was 42 operations for each chap, I mean, and then you had about maybe 50 chaps getting out of this thing, how long could you wait to start the escape? It's quite interesting. So I worked on that.

I was actually in charge of it. I mean I had 60 submariners in my first job actually, I had 60 submariners under me, but of course I was 24 by then. I mean I’d been in the war, I went to Cambridge when I was... no, wait a minute, yes, I was quite into my 20s. I wasn’t all that young actually. Anyhow, I ran that experiment and one of the problems was recording what went on for a 10-hour period. We were 10 hours in this pressure chamber... it was actually built by Haldane, Haldane’s original apparatus which was down there which we used and I had the problem of recording what the submariners did and the mistakes they made as the CO2 increased and the oxygen diminished. Of course you start doing damn silly things and the only recorder we had at that time was a strip of paper with pens on them, and it went wiggle, wiggle, wiggle along the paper, and you ended up with a mile of paper, literally, which you had to read off with a ruler recording the times and what happened, you see, each pen representing one particular sort of an event. I thought to hell with that, so I invented a digital recorder which I called THOTH, T-H-O-T-H, which was the Egyptian name of a god of language and wisdom, you see, and so I shot back to Cambridge and I spent about a month building this amazing machine which was really fun, it really was. Shall I tell you roughly what it was like? It was based on a palentype dictating machine. It had a keyboard and then it made letters, but you could press any numbers of letters at the same time and they came out in a row so you could get combinations of letters, unlike an ordinary typewriter. I had solenoids which pushed these keys down, then I recorded time with a thing like a mileometer on a car but with printing typeface on it so this was twiddling around continuously and I had an old RAF clock for that actually which pulsed it and it went round and round like this, and then it printed. So when something happened this thing went clonk and then printed a load of letters on the paper plus the time coded with this thing, you see. The paper was stationary until something happened so instead of recording on miles of paper, like an EEG, it was all there as a neat record, you see, so it was a digital recorder, and I think it could have been the first actually. It certainly wasn't available at that time. Now, of course it would look Heath Robinson in the extreme but it was an attempt at least to make a manageable thing.
But of course what actually happened was, it took such a long time making this thing, getting it to work properly, that there was a lot of displacement activity went on and I got so interested in my recorder that I probably put less effort into actually getting the results on the submarine experiment than I should have done, you know, it was tricky. But it did have an effect, they actually redesigned the submarines, and they redesigned them so that two chaps got out at once which a) speeded it up, and b) it meant that if one of them passed out, which you did because you suddenly took oxygen that can make you sick, and then you could choke and so on in the escape chamber, so whether that was a result of our experiments I don’t know but we advocated that it should be redesigned to get two chaps out at once and this did happen. So possibly we had some tiny affect, I don’t know.
[Q] But not as a result of THOTH?
Not really, no. I mean THOTH did actually get manufactured. I’ve been amazingly unsuccessful getting any of my alleged inventions onto the market but THOTH was actually made. It was called the Gregory-Russell Recorder, Russell, not Bertrand Russell, another Russell, was actually a fairly wealthy man who owned a small instrument company and he made it and then it was actually developed by the Cambridge Instrument Company and they made it for a time as well. Of course, we miniaturised it and it was quite a neat device in the end, but then of course it got superseded by computers. This was way before computers were available. But it was quite fun doing that.
I think there were lessons there actually. I mean in a way I think I deserve credit or points for actually having the energy to build a completely new device to solve a problem. On the other hand, it wasn’t exactly the right thing to do in the middle of a big experiment where 60 submariners were involved and they wanted to get the results. On the other hand, would we have got the results if we’d had all this measuring to do off miles and miles of paper? You know what I mean? It’s a tricky one, isn’t it, really?

						I lived in the mess down there and actually I really loved it and I used to go down in the submarines and this is rather amusing actually, French liners used to come in to Portsmouth, particularly the French ones for some reason, and we used to have sort of B movies. We’d fire torpedoes at them which had wooden heads in them and I did it myself, it was absolutely wonderful. You got onto this periscope, up periscope, you know, fire one, fire two, all these things, you see, and then you saw your torpedo streaking along, biffing into the French liner and it used to dent them. They stopped us doing it in the end because when you hit the liner, although it had a wooden end on it, it made quite a dent into the liner but we used to practice, you know, sending torpedoes like that. Oh, I must tell you something else. It was so amusing. This is one of the submarines I used to go on, of course it was not nuclear, these were electric submarines. This one really amused me, it had the wardroom was all of eight feel long, like a long sort of couch really, bench, with curtains on the end and if a rating wanted to talk, he obviously had to get permission to talk, you see, and you got a knuckles biffing on the curtains and you saw these knuckles that you see when a rating wanted to talk to one of the officers, but the wardroom itself was absolutely marvellous because it had little brass portholes on the wall. Of course, the last thing you ever get in a submarine is a porthole so what it was, it was like a ship pretending to be a pub pretending to be a ship, with brass portholes stuck on the wall. I thought it was so amusing, really lovely.
					
						Well I went back to the APU, worked there, Applied Psychology Unit, and I did experiments actually on measuring neural noise, that is the randomness of the spikes of activity in the nervous system, coding information, and I related this to ageing and I measured the noise level using psycho physical methods and then tried this out to see whether as you got older the noise level went up so that as your memory gets wonky when you get older and your vision gets worse and so on, my question was, was this due to masking by internal noise in the nervous system or was it loss of signal? I also applied this to hearing. Now I’m 82, I absolutely know that we were on the right track, my golly. One is living in a load of random activity going on in one’s nervous system and, indeed, one’s vision gets worse, one’s decision-making gets worse, you slow down. You slow down partly to compensate the noise. If you take longer to make a decision, the signal increases linearly but the noise to the square root so actually get an increase in the signal to noise ratio and you become more affected so old people slowing down is actually a very, very sensible thing to do to avoid the degeneration of signals through noise in the nervous system. And these were tricks, of course, I had learned from radar. I knew about noise, you see, any instrument, any detecting instrument, is subject to random noise, integration and so on, is very familiar to me from radar. Then I found the nervous system was carrying out these procedures that we use in electronics, in radar detection, which is really quite exciting. And then, of course, I mean electronic equipment gets a bit groggy when it gets older and the noise increases, the transistor, this is before transistors, but the valves, etc, all get more noisy and exactly the same thing in us. So this sort of connection between principles of electronics, particularly detecting systems, and storage of information, through memory, and the nervous system was powerfully important to me from the war and a lot of my early work, if I can call it that, was really drawing analogies from what I’d learned from radar, etc, into how the brain might be working and my assistant at that time, Jean Wallace, who was my research assistant, and Violet Cane, who was absolutely brilliant, a mathematical statistician, she was fantastic, she was, by the way, the first woman professor in Manchester and there was a marvellous headline in the paper, what was is it, 101, I think it was, there were 100 male professors and she, no, 99 male professors and she was the only female professor in Manchester. She left in the end to go to Manchester, anyway, she was of that calibre, she was top notch mathematician, and we developed theories of signal to noise ratio for threshold, that is for the discrimination of brightnesses and shapes and colours and so on in the perceptual system using signal to noise ratio ideas. We actually won a senior prize for it, which was really nice. Actually, there was some money in it, which was amazing because I was incredibly poor, we all were. So that was actually great fun. But I think it illustrates actually how doing one thing, particularly a technical thing, like radar or submarines or anything like that, is not irrelevant, it’s very relevant, it seems to me, when you’re thinking about theories, about how nature works, how physics works, or how the brain works. I think there are processes and principles, you know, which absolutely link technology, physics and physiology and psychology. Many, many principles which operate. A good example, of course, is feedback in server systems, control systems, which were only just invented at that time and it was a wartime idea of gun ranging and guns aiming automatically and this sort of thing. You then looked at human beings in tracking things and thinking of things and aiming at things and perceiving things, and blow me down, the same principles very much apply, which got me interested in artificial intelligence.
					
						I was interested in astronomy and I spent a lot of time when I was a boy with telescopes and looking at the stars and particularly globular clusters. I was mad on globular clusters, which look like wonderful bunches of grapes out there in the heavens, for some reason they appealed to me, I don’t know why but they did. And then of course they flickered around and one really did wonder what was actually out there. You got this flickering image and reality obviously is completely different from the image in a way and yet that led you to it and I think that sort of appearance in reality situation made me think a lot about perception. I saw the eye as the teeny weenie telescope with the same sort of problem that any telescope or any observation has of interpreting what is out there from limited information. It’s a deep sort of problem really. I think that got me interested really in the brain through philosophy. It was really how do we know reality? It was what’s called epistemology, you know, the theory of knowledge, which is what appealed to me enormously when I did philosophy at Cambridge. I think that I saw psychology as experimental epistemology, certainly experimental philosophy, and the brain itself really was just a black box at that time. We hadn’t a clue how the thing worked. One didn’t know whether different parts of it had special functions. One really knew amazingly little about the brain. One knew a lot about the eye, the retina, and the nerves that go into the brain, you know, and so on, and, of course, that had been largely discovered in Cambridge by Lord Adrian who discovered what is called action potential of little pulses assist you running along nerve and that was all fine but how those signals got decoded, how they were made to represent, how they gave you perception and, of course, above all, consciousness, awareness, was largely, largely is, actually, still highly mysterious and that problem appealed to me, really from philosophy, I think, actually.

And It hasn’t changed?

No. I think absolutely not. I mean I still have the same wonder about it. I still find consciousness completely mysterious. I don’t have an answer to why a physical system like the brain can make us feel pain or see red. I mean lots and lots of people are working on this now in philosophy. At that time it was actually a taboo subject or an ignored subject. It was simply regarded as impossible and people didn’t want to spend time on it so that’s changed. An awful lot of very, very bright people now, of course, are thinking about exactly that. At that time, no, and it wasn’t part of psychology, you could read a whole psychology book and it would have nothing about consciousness in it at all, you know, it was really bizarre, and of course you got the unconscious, Freud's unconscious, and what I think is rather a joke actually is this. I think this is profoundly true. At that time and before Freud's unconscious was supposed to be mysterious and odd and doubtful and difficult to imagine, now it’s consciousness that is mysterious. It’s changed completely. There’s nothing odd about unconsciousness, for heaven’s sake, I mean tables and chairs don’t have consciousness, neither do computers so far as we know, so the fact that 99% of the brain is not conscious, absolutely no problem at all in our generation whereas the fact that 1% of the brain suddenly lights up, so to speak, illuminates the world with feeling and sensation, is totally mysterious. Very odd, a complete reversal.
					
						When I was at Cambridge, I really had a sort of perfect life. I had a wonderful laboratory. We built a new wing on the building, we shared the building with physiology and there was a bit of a war that always went on between the physiologists and the psychologists and we always came off second best because they were sort of superior beings to us, you know, they sort of pecked us, so to speak, but I actually was amazingly lucky because I had the whole top floor of this new wing of the building and I ran this as a laboratory, it was called Special Senses Laboratory and I built an anechoic chamber in it for sound experiments and I had a dark room, a very nice workshop of my own in which I could make things and also it could help the students quite a lot. It was very useful actually to have that. And then, not only that, I actually had a telescope in the observatory, in Cambridge Observatory, 'cause I got this idea for taking photographs through turbulence of the atmosphere and improving them while I was at Cambridge and they gave me the oldest and smallest telescope in the observatory, a beautiful telescope, it was, I think, 99 years old at that time and in its own little building, it was absolutely delightful. I had such fun with that and I modified it, set it up for our apparatus and I worked with a very good engineer, Steven Salter, who worked with me, for me, and we built this very interesting apparatus actually, which I spent years on and in the end tried it out in New Mexico and Arizona on big telescopes and so on. It really was a very, very interesting project, how to get better pictures through turbulence of the atmosphere, it was a wonderful problem. Incidentally, that was financed by NASA before, no, by the American Air Force, just before NASA, for the moon landing, because we tried to get better pictures of the moon for choosing the landing site in 69 so all of this was in the 60s leading up to the moon landing. Anyway, all that was going on, you see, and I was top of my form really at that time, and then I got interested in artificial intelligence because the physiologists were not getting into the brain and I got fed up with this so I got bored with the peripheral physiology, the retina and all that, I wanted to know what on earth was going on in the head partly because of the philosophy of it, you see. So the idea of making computers intelligent and seeing things was amazing because you could then extend the philosophy into technology. Again I thought that technology and philosophy and physiology and psychology were all, you know, helped each other and if we got this going it would be fantastic. So we tried to start a brain institute in Cambridge, failed because they’d got two subjects going at that time, ethology was one and there was another one, I can’t think for a second what it was, but there were two new subjects so that we couldn’t start a third one so we tried to go to Brighton and that didn’t work for various reasons so in the end Michael Swan, the Vice-Chancellor, set us up in Edinburgh and I moved with Christopher Longuet-Higgins, we were both fellows at Corpus. He was a brilliant chemist, theoretical chemist and we started this department with Donald Michie who was already there in which we built the robot called FREDDY and it was a big department. We had 60 academics in it and lots and lots of money and it was only partially successful. We were too early. Computers were simply not up to it and, quite frankly, we weren’t up to it. I mean we didn’t know how to programme computers. Christopher learned very well. I never did learn properly because I was made head of department, I had to administer it, which I’ve never liked doing. Christopher and Donald didn’t get on terribly well together which was a problem and all sorts of other problems and I really missed Cambridge. I had all this wonderful set up in Cambridge and my fellowship and free port in the evenings and all that, and there we were in the bleak North, you know, quite honestly. I found Edinburgh, in a way, an amazing and beautiful and wonderful place but, golly, it’s cold, it really is. I never really settled down properly in Edinburgh. At any rate, we had this sort of dream of trying out our ideas, philosophical and technical, with new technology in order to see whether we couldn’t make an intelligent machine which could see things. We were the first in Europe and we worked with two American departments that had just got going, Stanford and MIT, and every year we came together in a big workshop. We wrote a great big book each year, which was a sort of bible really of the subject, and there was some good work done, some of it was very good. Some of our students were excellent and it’s an ongoing department, I mean it’s a major department now so it wasn’t a waste of time doing it but it didn’t suit me actually, it really didn’t, particularly after Cambridge. So I decided to try and run my own small laboratory again and moved to Bristol.

Why Bristol?

Well, A. I didn’t know Bristol, B. it was near London and I got fed up being far up in the north, and I was offered a very nice laboratory actually in the Medical School without having to build anything, I could just move in and I got fed up with dealing with buildings. Actually, it was an incredibly funny thing that might amuse you. When we went to Edinburgh, we were offered a very nice, large church for our laboratory belonging to the Church of Scotland, it had been deconsecrated. Then they heard we were going to build a robot and the idea of a robot walking up the aisle was just too much and they withdrew it. We got up there with no laboratory. We had plans and everything, they completely went down the drain and we were there with no laboratory at all and in the end we got an army building given to us by Michael Swan. Michael said we can get the chaps out in six months, they’re still there, you know. It was bizarre actually. So I gave up, you know, Cambridge and my fellowship, my very nice laboratory which I really loved with not a lot of administration and so on, for administering in a place that was far away from anywhere I wanted to be, freezing cold, but with very bright, excellent students and colleagues, you know, and we did, after all, start a new subject, which is quite a difficult thing to do.
					
						Well, it was quite small, it was called Brain and Perception. It was one corridor in the Anatomy Department so we had about ten rooms, I suppose, it had its own, again it had a small workshop and its own dark room and it was a self maintained lab and I was very fortunate in the fact that I got funding from the MRC so I had to sort of write a letter and see them about every three years I think it was, and it just got renewed without any fuss. I never had a problem over funding, it was brilliant actually. I had good PhD students and the whole thing and it was a perfect life really. One could do what one wanted to do. I travelled a lot. I wrote a lot of books and stuff and gave a lot of lectures all over the place and it worked very well actually. It worked very well indeed.

What did you find out?

What did I find out? That’s an interesting question. Well, first of all, we did this stuff on signal to noise ratio in the nervous system thinking of the signals coming into the eyes and the ears with having to, so to speak, overcome a lot of randomness going on all the time in the eye, in the brain, in the channels to the brain. I worked at some degree on that continuously, then I developed ideas of perception which is really central to the way I’d been thinking for ages which is that a perception is a hypothesis, it’s a guess as to what is out there based on a certain amount of data from the eyes or hearing obviously from the ear but it’s augmented and made sense of by a vast amount of knowledge stored in the brain and what I emphasised was the knowledge from the past necessary for interpreting the information available in the present and if you didn’t have the information already there, the world would be completely unseeable and understandable but, of course, a lot of that information from the past, knowledge from the past, is misleading, A. because it was wrong in the first place, B. because it could be out of date. And that can then generate a load of phenomena such as illusions that you get errors not because the physiology has gone wrong but because it’s not appropriate its functioning to the situation because the knowledge and assumptions and rules by which it’s working are not appropriate to the situation. Its inappropriateness of function became a sort of central thought, it’s not just a mechanism going wrong like a gear wheel breaking or some such thing or seizing up, it is, it’s working perfectly okay physiologically, but doing the wrong thing. Now, I can actually draw an analogy here actually. Who takes a battle, you’ve got guns and you’ve got defences and this is the hardware, the physics of the situation, but just as important, of course, are the strategies by which the hardware is used and if the strategies are not appropriate to the availability of the guns, what they can do to the castle walls and so on, then you’re not making optimal use of the physical possibilities and it’s a question of optimising the physics of the thing, and this, I think, is what cognition is in the brain. It’s the strategies by which the physical physiology is used to attain some sort of end which might be eating your breakfast cereal or it might be seeing the cup of coffee in front of you knowing it is coffee and so on and it’s this hardware/software thing which is really the use of physical processes with strategies which are guided by knowledge from the past and I emphasise what we call cognition, the knowledge and the rules by which the physiology is used, that was my emphasis.

Is that what you discovered then or what you know now?

That’s what I was working on then. I saw it then, yes.

Is it different now?

No, I still think that’s absolutely fundamental but what is rather interesting, at that time, I think a lot of people thought that the cognitive ideas were a load of old rubbish. That is, they were so vague, they were a bit meta-physical, even a bit occult, you know, how could a physical thing like the brain embody rules, software and so on? But what’s happened has nothing to do with me, it’s computers. The fact we’ve become familiar with the idea that the physical system in a computer, in a little box with electronics, can actually carry out mental operations. After all, we talk about mental arithmetic. You can do it with little gear wheels and still call it mental which is very interesting. So in a way the insight was there 200 years ago with the discovery that you could make calculating machines with wheels which go right back to Leibniz of course. In fact, I think 1642 was the first one, the year of Newton’s birth and yet that was known, it wasn’t somehow appreciated and I thing what I did was to push this idea, which was really inherent in most people’s thinking but not sort of explicit, that cognition is not like a sort of balloon coming out of a cartoon’s head, it's built into the system as a strategy by which it operates. 

And the illusions, are they a bit like your jokes, sort of a necessary part of the mix?

Yeah. The illusions are amazingly interesting.
					
						Well, this is a chap who was called Sidney Bradford, he’s always known as SB, and my assistant, Jean Wallace, saw in her local newspaper that he was going to have an operation on his eyes, you see. After 52 years, he was 52 and he’d been blind since he was born or at least a very few months old, so we shot up to the hospital. It was really quite dramatic and I shoved everything in the car I could think of that we might be able to use to test his new gained sight using basically the stuff from my practical class because I do practical class on vision, you see, and we shot up there and lo and behold it was all true. He’d just had the operation done the day before and we were installed in the hospital. The surgeon, Mr Hirtenstein, his name, was extremely helpful to us, it was really good, and there was this dramatic thing, this chap who’d been blind all these years, what would be able to see? Well, when he first opened his eyes, he saw a complete blur and then he realised it must be the surgeon’s face because the voice was coming out of it so, oh, golly, that’s a face, sort of thing, you see, and that was actually the day before we got there. We got there the next day but it was just really a blur and a nonsense to him, the first day. But by the time we saw him, the day after, really it was quite remarkable. He could really begin to see things that he already knew, this was a critical point. I’ll give you an example, if I may. This was about three days after the operation, he had a big watch, which he had in the upper pocket of his coat, and he’d take this out and he’d feel it. It had no glass, you could open it, and he’d feel the hands and he could tell the time. Now, when we showed him or he saw the clock in the wall of the hospital, he could immediately tell the time so I borrowed an alarm clock from a nurse, twiddled the hands round several times and he could tell the time. I mean he just didn’t sort of know it was teatime, he could tell the time by sight without us having to teach him, this was the point. We also found that he could read upper case letters. He could read capital A, capital B, but he couldn’t read a lower case e but he could read an upper case E and so on. We found that the kids in the Blind School had been taught to read upper case letters on brass plates with their fingers. They were taught this because it was quite useful to them but they’d not been taught lower case letters, squiggly letters, you see. So they’d done an experimentfor us. So we established really that when he had touch information as a baby he could see immediately, 52 years later when he’d had the operation, that the knowledge from touch served for his new found vision and this really switched me on to the whole idea of knowledge being absolutely vitally important to see, you know. The other thing we found was that he was remarkably free of illusions because having taken all this stuff up from my practical class, I had a load of illusions and he didn’t get them so all my students got these illusions but he didn’t, see what I mean? And that really struck me. So I then realised that part of the reason for illusions is not the physiology going wrong which was the prevalent view at that time, the signals in the nervous system, but that the brain couldn’t make sense of them without knowledge so the illusions were not misleading to him when they were not using knowledge that he had available. Of course it was restricted because he only had this touch knowledge, you see what I mean?

Could he recognise trees and buses?

Yes. I got him to draw buses actually. He loved transport. His great regret was that he couldn’t drive. He was dying to be able to drive a car. He never did drive in actual fact but I got him to draw a bus and the first drawing was a touch bus, like a blind man draws it, mainly from the inside and he never could draw the, from memory anyhow, or the imagination, the front of the bus, the bonnet. He couldn’t draw it at all. He could only draw bits that he knew from touch, which was really quite interesting, and this remained so. He added bits onto it including writing in later drawings but they were basically touch drawings, like a blind man’s touch. Touch dominated completely, you know, but it was this business about- that he could only see things that he knew about it. For example, he could judge distances horizontally, it was a big ward he was in and he could judge the distances of tables and chairs amazingly well. I got him to look out of the window. It was about 60 foot high, really high window, and he said very clearly to me- yeah, I could hang from the window sill with my fingers, my feet would touch the ground, and he couldn’t see vertically longer than his own body length, see what I mean? He had to experience the distances to see them, all the shapes, to see them. I thought that was amazingly interesting so that you calibrate yourself when you’re a child by walking around, touching things, handling things, and then looking at them at the same time, then your visual brain learns in coordination with exploratory touch.
					
						We started the exploratory in Bristol, which was hands-on science centre. It was quite an ambitious project. It was the first in Britain but not the first in the world, I hasten to add. The first one in modern times really goes back to Bacon I think actually, in the 17th century, you know.

He only imagined it.

He imagined it, absolutely, it was an imaginary island. He imagined it but at least he imagined it, which is something. Absolutely right. Well, the first chap who really did this actually was Frank Oppenheimer who was Robert Oppenheimer’s brother who, of course, did the atom bomb in the war. Frank was his younger brother who was also a physicist, and a delightful man actually. Well, I actually gave a lecture in San Francisco in 1969 to the new Eye Research Institute, it was called the The Smith-Kettlewell Lecture, I gave the first one which was The Smith-Kettlewell Eye Institute. Now, this is the sort of important thing in my life really. Frank went to this lecture which was all about illusions, perception and knowledge in the brain, all that sort of stuff, it was a sort of philosophy of perception. Frank was a physicist but he really liked this because it had phenomena, you could make measurements and it was sort of philosophy but linked very much with science and it appealed to him. And I got to know Frank extremely well, we travelled around America a lot together and he had just got his exploritorium going the year before actually, which was at that time just an empty shell really, a huge great building. I don’t think there was anybody in it yet; he’d just got the thing there. So anyway we did a lot of discussion on how to get perception into a science centre so that people going round the exhibition could do experiments on themselves and on their friends, link what was going on in their minds and their brains to physics, and he really liked this a lot and I got interested in his physics and he got interested in my perception so it was a very sort of happy situation, quite honestly, and it’s really what got The Exploratorium going. Actually, I think I had quite a significant effect in the way it was planned and designed and developed actually. Well, then ten years later, I sort of started to think of myself, I was coming near retirement, why don’t we start something like that in Britain, you see? So we did. We started The Exploratory, I dropped a syllable, I started with the Exploritorium and then it became The Exploratory, which was in Temple Meads, the Brunel railway station here, before that in the Victoria Rooms, it ran for quite a long time in Bristol, about 15 years, and we had two million kids round in ten years at Temple Meads, that wasn’t bad, and it was really, I thought, really quite successful and it was great fun. They could do their own thing, they could do experiments, they could try out their own ideas, it was very much hands-on, very little money but it didn’t matter, I don’t think.
					
						I got personally the idea that hands-on was important from studying Sidney Bradford, the blind man, because we had found that by actually handling things, literally with his fingers, that that information from touching objects was absolutely vital for seeing and when you come to think of it, it’s logically necessary. I mean you see things as hard, for example, or hot, or cold, like an ice cream, but, of course, the image in the eye is not hard or hot or cold, of course it isn’t. So you’ve got to learn to associate the purely optical information in the eye with non-optical characteristics of objects like a knife is sharp, for example, and can jolly well cut you. That you discover by experiment, often a hurtful one. I mean kids hurt themselves, you know, because objects are dangerous as well as useful whereas the image in the eye is nothing. It’s just a shadow basically so you’ve got to sort of enrich the shadows in the eye by knowledge of the properties of objects in order to see that objects can be used, can be threatening, can be rewarding, from images, this is the point and of course artists cash in on this with pictures. Interesting, we could perhaps talk about that in a minute. Well, anyway, what I wanted to do in the Science Centre was to extend the experience of SB, the blind man, to normal children and through adult life that you learn to see and understand and seeing and understanding are completely linked by active exploration, doing things. That was the philosophy behind it. 

And how did that relate to Bacon?

Well, Bacon, I don’t think had all that really. I mean in his island, his concern and I’m sure you know more about this than I do, I think that he was concerned to show the public the potentialities of what we now call science and technology. I don’t think either word was available at that time actually but what we now call science and technology, and then he had what he called his lamp, so the thinkers. He had about ten lamps with brilliant ideas and then he had lesser luminaries actually trying out experiments and he said that anybody could be useful in what he called, what we later called science for gaining knowledge and relating it and so on, that could be done by ordinary mortals with a few really brilliant lamps and so on. So he really invented the research laboratory and also invented exploratory because the idea was the public would be involved and I think Bacon’s dream is absolutely wonderful, absolutely wonderful, and it’s just sad that it didn’t get carried out 300 years earlier, you know, than it did.

Why won’t pushing buttons do?

No, I don’t think pushing buttons do at all, I really don’t, and I don’t think video does. I mean video is fine or pushing buttons when you know what it’s all about but the stages of gaining information to perceive visually or by hearing through exploring actual world of objects and their properties is, to me, the crucial point and I think of the child really as a sort of a scientist who bumbles about, does all sorts of things rather randomly, notes connections between things and above all notes connections between the physical properties of things and the patterns of shadows, if you like, inside their eyes. The shadows become real to the brain through knowledge with objects which is obtained by active discovery through touch.
					
						"Eye and Brain", yes, that was fun. Actually I could say that was one of my few successes actually. It was a successful book and is, it’s in its fifth edition in umpteen languages, just going into Chinese. It’s been in Japanese twice, it’s been translated twice into Japanese but it’s now going into Chinese. Anyway, the point about that, it was based on this sort of philosophy. It’s a book of psychology, not exactly written for students but I hope they’d be interested in it but it was never written as a textbook, it wasn’t intended as textbook and it’s meant to be of general interest but with some real ideas in it and I was very fortunate because it’s very well illustrated and that is because George Weidenfeld, a great publisher, started a thing he called the World University Library, and the idea of that was to have very, very well illustrated books and because it was in lots of languages, ten languages, it would have the same illustrations in all and therefore the cost of the colour printing was relatively small, you know, because it was distributed over umpteen languages and this actually became the first volume in the World University Library and it was actually done not directly by George but by Colin Haycraft who at that time worked for George and then bought Duckworth and ran Duckworth and he was my friend for life. I mean he died a few years ago, unfortunately, I think the accountant killed him by the way, and I finished the book on his kitchen table as a matter of fact. Very, very friendly with Colin, he was a lovely man. I never made any money, of course, because of Colin but apart from that, he never paid his authors. Anyway, the book did actually take off, I have to say, it really did, I think, really because it had a philosophy in it which was accessible, well illustrated and, frankly, I think because it was right. I believe very much in its, you know, in its message now.
					
						I did "The Intelligent Eye", which was based on my Royal Institution Christmas lectures. These are lectures that go back to Faraday every year in the Royal Institution and in the last few years they’ve been on television, six of them. I think it’s fewer now but it was six when I did it and George Porter was the director at the Royal Institute at that time, whom I liked enormously. I had great fun doing all that and the lectures were called "The Intelligent Eye". I had lots of experiments but the problem was that I was planning these lectures, a lot of work doing these lectures actually, just when I had moved to Edinburgh from Bristol so I didn’t have a laboratory because we didn’t have our laboratory in Edinburgh because it was supposed to be this church which was taken away from us before the last moment, if you see what I mean, and being sort of 400 miles away from where one’s supposed to be was very bad actually for getting going in Edinburgh in a new department. At any rate, we did, in the end, do it and I think the lectures worked, I thought, rather well and it resulted in the book "The Intelligent Eye", which I’ve always rather liked. It emphasised the importance of rules in the perception and again I had a whole load of illusions when the rules were not appropriate although the physiology is working all right, it’s misdirected, and then you generate systematic illusions. Then by looking at the illusions and measuring them you can deduce what the brain was trying to do, in other words you can work backwards and discover its strategies from the errors, you see, by the mismatch between what it’s doing from past experience to the present situation. You can infer the cognition or the rules or the strategy or the assumptions that the brain is working from. I rather like that, so that illusions become key phenomena for investigating mind and brain. Errors are very, very crucial so there are practical interests like in flying or driving really matters, you see the thing right or reasonably right, you know, but when you get a systematic error it’s immediately evident but what’s going on in there although the physiology is working perfectly okay. I’ve always found that an extremely exciting idea and it’s really the central idea, I think, in both those two books, "The Intelligent Eye" and "Eye and Brain" really. I still believe in that.

And since then you’ve done loads more books.

Yeah. Partly successful. I did "Mind in Science" which, in a way, I think inspired Brian not nearly as good as, Bertrand Russell’s book, "Human Knowledge: it's Scope and Limits". It’s an ambitious book in that it’s got the philosophy of knowledge gaining, epistemology, it’s got the history of psychology back to the Greeks with quite a bit of physiology, so it’s really a sort of history book back to the Greeks plus a sort of philosophy book about what’s really going on in physiology and psychology so it’s got an overview with a historical basis. I enjoyed writing it but it’s never really taken off. It’s only been printed once, not in print now. I can’t honestly write it up as one of my successes. It wasn’t a total success but I learned a lot writing it.
					
						The Bristol laboratory, which is sadly no more, was in the Medical School. It was just one floor in the Anatomy Department of the building, and I moved here for various reasons but it was quite a good choice I think, I like Bristol. Bristol University has been very good to me indeed and, indeed, goes on supporting me in my old age, you know, I still have the secretary and a couple of offices and so on in the university, which is great, and I was given funding from the Medical Research Council, really, quite honestly, to do whatever I liked. It was amazing. I didn’t have any special thing we had to work on and I found the Medical Research Council absolutely amazing employers. Once they sort of liked you, obviously they’ve got to trust you to some degree, you get total support. They’re wonderful, I think, and I just hope that remains. I really would like to say that I think if that ability to find a niche for yourself where you can do your own thing, if that goes and the competition gets so great that there are no places to just work away without worrying about support and so on go, I think we’ve really lost science in this country. I think it’s absolutely crucial, really, and, of course, it also attracts students because they know that with a bit of luck they can end up in their own choice of environment and work on what they want to work on, which is what science is about, plus accepting challenges as well but you need that part of it. Anyway, I was very lucky because I got my niche in that little laboratory with about 12 people and we worked on lots of things. One of them was the hearing aid. Now, the hearing aid is the thing that I think I most regret in my entire life because I think it was a really good idea and we all get a bit deaf, I’m damn well getting deaf, everybody does, yeah, and I felt that hearing aids are pretty awful things really. I mean when you think of the industry of ophthalmology and glasses and so on, it’s a very reputable, very, very good industry, I think, they do a wonderful job, they really take care of their patients. I didn’t feel the same was true, to be honest, with hearing at that time at least. Mark you, the problem is much more difficult, the problems of deafness are much greater than the problems of needing glasses; it’s a relatively easy thing to deal with. But anyway, I got interested in it from having measured the signal to noise ratio in the nervous system, relating it to aging, when I was at Cambridge. Then I thought, well, why don’t we use these ideas to try to design a new sort of hearing aid which would increase the effectiveness of the available signal and somehow diminish the noise level which is a random activity going on all the time, you hear it, very often, buzzing in your ears, which gets in the way, like being at a party where you can’t hear other people because the other people are making a racket, drowning them, so that we’re really living in a sea of randomness in the nervous system and you have to pick out what’s significant from all that randomness. I wanted to try to make a hearing aid that would help.
					
						Well, I found from not my work, the work of J.C.R Licklider who is an American physiologist, that the information, it’s a little bit technical, the information in speech is not at the peaks, wiggle wiggle way, it’s at the crossover where the energy crosses over at zero energy access where the sound waves, pressure waves, of course, in the air are going plus and minus, nothing in the middle, and then it crosses over. Now, it’s the moment that it crosses over the zero energy that gives you the information. Put it another way, you’ve got the drum in your ear, goes in and out, it’s when it’s changing direction that you get the signal and the fact that it moves a long way in or out doesn’t matter so much. It matters for music but not for speech. So what I wanted to do was to reduce the amplitude of the wave in the ear effectively to then amplify the middle bit where the information is but there’s a lovely, interesting, technical problem that if you limit the amplitude of a wave you don't just get rid of that energy it gets created as harmonics and it sounds distorted and sounds perfectly horrible. So I couldn’t simply limit the wave like that for peak clipping without all this distortion stuff coming in. Then I thought, well, is there a way of doing it? Now, this is really intriguing because the mathematics of it tells you it’s impossible that any wave, when you limit it, the energy has to go somewhere and it goes into these harmonics so it’s impossible but, do you know what, it isn’t impossible. The trick is this and it’s really amusing, this, you take the speech band, you know, from sort of 50 cycles up to, let’s say, 300, 3,000 cycles, let’s say something of that order, then you move the whole speech band outside the speech range. That is, you make it inaudible by putting into, let’s say, 100 kilocycles. Now, you could do that using a radio technique, which is called modulation and heterodyning. You modulate the carrier, that is, you have a carrier which you make wiggle up and down with the information on it, but when you remove the carrier to a different frequency, you’ve still got the same wiggle, the same information, but it’s no longer in the speech band. So what I did, I did the processing out side the speech band and the same mathematics applies, that you generate all these rotten harmonics and things but you can’t hear them because they are right outside the speech band. You then heterodyne it back down again into the speech band, filtering off the rubbish, which you can do because it’s separated. Then you get a lovely thing, you get speech which is not distorted but which is limited in the wiggles, in the amplitude, therefore you can amplify the bits in the middle where the information is without the distortion of normal peak limiting. So that was the idea for this hearing aid and we made it. We made an experimental one and then we made, I think it was 30 or 50 portable ones you could put in a pocket. There were never that small, you know, they were sort of six inches big but this is before micro components were available, but they were reasonable. You could put in a pocket, okay, and I tried these out and on the whole it was successful. I think it is good and it prevents blasting the ear to pieces, many hearing aids simply damage the ear by, you know, just simply putting loud noises into the ear which is the last thing the ear wants, not to get further damaged. So A. it protects the ear, B. it increases the actual signals it’s getting of speech, I’m not talking about music, but of speech, and it seemed to me a really rattling good idea all round. So I took this to industry and I couldn’t find anybody who wanted to make it because the hearing aid people were stuck with their hearing aids, they didn’t want to try something different, and an electronic firm didn’t want to get into hearing aids which was its own sort of industry and mainly concerned, by the way, with making everything smaller and smaller and smaller until it doesn’t work properly, in my view. That’s my view. So, but in the end I did find a firm which took it on and it was really annoying. It was all going fine, in the end an administrative decision was made that they didn’t want to get into hearing aids and it was abandoned so one of the real failures of my whole life, and regrets, is that this thing never got manufactured. I deeply regret it because hearing loss is a hell of a problem as you get older and well over a million people in Britain, probably two million, you know, suffer from it. Careers could get ruined, like solicitors, they can no longer hear what’s going on and so on, and it’s just a terrific problem. I think it needs a lot more research, honestly.
					
						It’s run very informally. I don’t like administration much. I don’t like being pushed around so if anybody is stupid enough to put me in charge of anything I only run it in a sort of rather casual way, as casual as possible, because I believe in people having their own freedom, their own ideas, and I also think that people have fallow patches and every now and again do something silly, and I don’t think they should be automatically judged negatively, you know, in that sort of way. So you’ve got to allow a bit of time for people, so one of the fun things as far as I’m concerned is picking people with potentiality who then turn out to be good. This happens about one times out of ten, I turn out to be right, you know. An example which did turn out to be very nice was Sue Blackmore who’s a very charming lady whom I know you know, and she was a bit zany, wanted to do paranormal stuff and years ago I decided, from my father really, thinking about his work but there wasn’t much in it, well, I thought nothing in it actually. I didn’t really believe in telepathy or any of those things, but here was a young lady with lots of go about her, and she might prove me wrong so I thought that will be absolutely great, you see. So I took her on and gave her a space and so on and she’s made a tremendous success of her career, initially exploring the possibilities and looking at what work was being done, analysing it, then becoming more and more critical, in the end deciding that there’s absolutely nothing it in whatsoever in ten years. So she’s made two career successes, one showing that it was worth doing academically and, two, showing there’s nothing in it at the end of the day. But that was not a waste of time. She played that game well. Her personality sort of shone out and everybody appreciated that and it made people think ultimately as to how the brain works, what is consciousness and all the rest of it. The interesting thing here, I mean there are deep, mysterious questions such that although you say that ESP and all the paranormal stuff is nothing, it remains true that undoubtedly in the brain are weird things going on, particularly the fact that when I look at a red shirt, I see red; if somebody stands on my toe, it feels pain; if somebody scratches me, I feel a tickle, and it’s totally mysterious, in my opinion, at the moment, how that happens so if you say there’s no paranormal, in a way this is the very edge or beyond the edge of the understanding of the normal phenomena that we experience every single day of our lives all the time. And I think there’s a lesson there. It’s all very well to look at phenomena and cast them adrift because they are so weird but, in fact, our day to day experience is weird and I think incapable of understanding, and why I liked Sue is that she actually looked at the phenomena, then came to the conclusion that there’s nothing in those at all but then went on to look at consciousness which we all have and now puzzles and writes very nice books on what that final mystery is. Now, I regard that as a success and I’m incredibly pleased that I supported her in the early days when she was just a pretty nice girl, you know. That occasionally happened but basically I don’t like administration. I get bored by it. Occasionally, when you make a decision to take somebody on and so on, it works and you feel pleased but generally the minutiae, you know, of decision making and one person wanting a bigger room and somebody else wanting something else, and having to think about all that, I really very much dislike.
					
						We did quite a bit on a whole load of visual phenomena, including illusions, one might sound amazingly trivial, it was a café wall down the road which is tiled, it’s Victorian, and neatly done in rows, each parallel, and it’s sort of black and white, it’s like a chess board with alternate rows displaced by a half square, that is an exact description of it, and it’s got lines between the rows like grey lines, and we were puzzled by this because when you look at it, they don’t look parallel, they look  like wedges, long, long wedges, alternate wedges, so that the first row might be shorter, apparently, to the right, the next one to the left, the next one to the right alternately. This was amazingly puzzling and because it actually appears to violate the principle of physics which is Curie’s principle, that’s Pierre Curie, the husband of Madame Curie, radium and all that, and his principle states that if you’ve got something symmetrical, that can’t produce or generate or create asymmetry, but here is a symmetrical pattern, this chess board thing, but it’s asymmetrical because you’ve got these great, long wedges in it, which are not symmetrical so how can a symmetrical pattern produce an asymmetrical illusion? The fact that it’s an illusion still means it should not violate the law of physics, one would think. So I spent quite a lot of time on that, we made models of it and played about with it and we could change the brightnesses, the thicknesses of the lines, and we developed about ten laws of the Café wall illusion, which briefly are these. If you make the lines between the rows darker or lighter than the squares, the illusion disappears. If you make the tile red and green, or any other colours of the same brightness, then the illusion disappears. By the way, there’s a lesson here. If you’ve got any phenomenon and you can make it disappear, you learn an awful lot about that phenomenon. It’s what switches something off which can be crucially important in physics or in psychology or perception. This is really important and this a major reason for the science centre, by the way, where children and real people can play about because they realise after a time that the phenomena only work under certain conditions, what are those conditions, why are those conditions critically important? And it’s understanding all of that that leads you to the answer to the original problem, in this case, why do these things look like wedges and it was by looking at when the phenomenon, the illusion, disappears, that we got to what I think is the answer, why it happens. You have to look at when something doesn’t happen in order to understand why it does happen.

Why does it work?

Well, it’s slightly complicated but imagine these half squares, you’ve got a black square and then below that a white square displaced by half a square so you’ve got a black edge, a neutral line and then a light edge but what I think is happening is, this is quite a subtle idea really, the brain doesn’t know, the simple minded bit of the brain doing the original analysis, that this is actually a grey line between them. It could be an error in its own processing and it’s really a question of exactly where edges are because it’s not precisely signalled visually so the brain has to sort of guess where a line is. Now, what happens is that the narrow line, what we call a mortar line, between the squares, get pulled together to avoid what the brain would see as an error in its signalling so actually the distortion is due to an error correcting system which, in that situation, produces an error and often when you’ve got a system for avoiding, reducing or removing error, that itself in certain situations produces an error. There’s no infallible way of avoiding errors. So what you could so is to tease out the error correction systems in the brain by looking at illusions, paradoxically. I’m not saying for all illusions but it’s true of many and it’s true of this one.
					
						Well, I’ve been trying to classify them. Actually, that’s what I do in my old age, I’ve been trying to look at all the illusions I can find or discover or know about, and then I put them into classes and I think in biology it’s immensely important, you think of evolution and classifying species, I mean chemistry and all of that, periodic table, incredibly important for revealing the ultimately structure of atoms. Now, I think the same is true with illusions. I think classifying them is really important but to classify them you have to relate the things to some sort of theory to get the criterion for the classes so that the classification is not empty, it actually relates to the theory and can modify the theory. If a theory predicts that one phenomenon should be different from another or in some way similar, you know, in order words is will modify the classification, that’s the power of the theory but then the power of the classification is it can modify the theory and, of course, when you’ve got a classification and you’ve got a gap, you’ve got something missing, then you might say, oh, golly, there’s got to be something in that gap for the whole story to work, that then suggests either you look for more data or you look at the theory again. And so that interplay between phenomena and classifying them and then the theory, I think is what science is all about and I’m trying to do that with illusions.

What about illusions in art?

Well, art, of course, is amazingly interesting because you’re representing the world of three dimensional, solid objects with pigments which effectively are not solid on a flat screen and how do you compress the world of three dimensions into a flat screen? This, of course, is something that Leonardo thought about, I mean it goes back certainly 400 years in the history of art and I’m very, very interested in that. How the brain works when you cut the information from three to two dimensions but you’re representing three dimensions. What happens is you get ambiguity. In other words, you get many possibilities from the same pattern as to what the object might be and ambiguity is an important class of illusions. Now, what is interesting is that ambiguities can be dynamic. The brain will guess one thing, change its mind, and say, no, no, it’s not that, it’s another, and it’ll flip from one possibility to another spontaneously and you see the thing flipping. Turner actually used this sort of thing in a very subtle way in his paintings, which gave his paintings life. As you go on looking at them, there are subtle changes in the sky, in the clouds, because of this ambiguity generated by the observer but given by Turner’s painting which is deliberately vague and misty, indeterminate, so that the viewer’s brain can take off, be creative, and entertain various possibilities. That’s why Turner is such an amazing painter; he controlled the viewer’s brain, allowing it freedom to entertain alternative possibilities.
					
						I’ve never written a proper book on art actually. I did a book, it’s edited, with a series of chapters in it called, what’s it called? I’ve forgotten what it’s called, that thing, yeah.

"Illusion in Nature and Art"


We did "Illusion in Nature and Art", which I did with Sir Ernst Gombrich and Sir Roland Penrose, and we set out a big, big exhibition at the ICA, the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London, a long time ago now, and I worked very closely with Ernst Gombrich for whom I’ve got enormous regard. Unfortunately he’s no longer with us and neither is Roland, but the three of us did this exhibition and we did a book with that name, which is rather fun. That explored really the relationship between art and illusion and it was a big exhibition. It filled the whole of the ICA, went to New York and also to San Francisco and we had various artists represented in it. I had invented a 3-D drawing machine which is rather fun but not much use, where you could doodle away actually in three dimensions, stereoscopically, which is great fun. We had that there and I don’t know but thousands and thousands of people visited the thing. It was obviously, you know, very popular. But I think this is right and I think the relationship of art to illusion and to reality, you know, is one of the really exciting things to spend one’s life thinking about.
					
						David Hockney had this idea about Western paintings suddenly taking off in a big way with the use of optical devices as aids to perspective and painting and his claim was that this sort of realism in painting really came from the artist being able to see optical images on screen and they didn’t necessarily copy that screen but the idea that you could get an optical image representing reality was enough to make them think more fully about what it is to represent on a canvas with paint. I think the jury is out actually. It seems to work at about the right time. I think the evidence is that sitters in portraits weren’t actually surrounded by these curved mirrors, they are actually mirrors and not lens as he suggested, because they would have reported it. I mean nobody reported the, you know, the surrounded with apparatus and whatnot, but on the other hand I think he was more certainly right that art is learnt from looking at optical images projected by curved mirrors or lenses. I think this is almost certainly right and it may be that Vermeer actually used what’s called a camera obscura directly. My own guess is it wasn’t so much used directly tracing the image and this sort of thing which is difficult to do. I mean it would have been upside down, it would have been very faint and things like this but what you saw in the optical image gave him an idea of what it is possible to do on a piece of paper or canvas. I personally think that’s it, so I agree with half his thesis but perhaps not the other half.

And what about Canalettos with the amazing details of Venice and so on?

Yes. Well, this is a difficult question, isn’t it? You either have to say that some painters are amazingly good at painting or you have to say they use a technique which some people might call cheating. And when do you call it cheating and when you don’t is a bit arbitrary, I mean, heavens, there’s nothing wrong with having a rest for one’s wrist when you’re using the brush in a delicate bit of work on the painting but some people think you shouldn’t use a lens. Okay. Why could you use a rest for your arms to stop it wiggling about and not be allowed to use a lens, you know? It’s very arbitrary, I think. I don’t think it’s cheating, I think it’s using your intelligence to help things along a bit.
					
						I’m not an expert on this at all but I think that IQ is an extremely dodgy topic. It’s dodgy socially and I think, this is not original, I mean Sir Peter Medawar said this before I did years ago, that it’s really wrong to think of IQ as one dimension that you can get, say, a child at school, you give a number, and that rates him for the rest of his life, you know. Now, one reason, I think, against it and I think Peter Medawar said the same thing, is that there are many, many different kinds of abilities. One might be amazingly good at cooking, arithmetic, philosophy, doing a television interview, even being in that interview possibly, some people look better than others, I don’t claim to be very good myself, but you really need a sort of a sub-IQ point for these different dimensions. We’re not one dimensional, we’re multi-dimensional creatures with an enormous range of abilities. Now, it’s very important because if you’ve got, say, a child at school who rated with low IQ because he’s no good at history or Latin or mathematics or something, it doesn’t mean he’s not going to be amazing at cooking or making a home or making damn funny jokes, becoming a millionaire on the radio, you know, with jokes or something. Indeed, this can happen, so I think the trick is to show children the variety of possibilities, find out what they would really like to develop in themselves and have the freedom and the opportunities and the rewards to develop for themselves what they want to do and not in a very rigid framework. I don’t believe in a rigid framework and then I think they will get the sense of self worth if they’re good at making meringues or they’re good at doing differential equations. The trick is not exactly to say it’s as good to be able to do differential equations as it is to make a meringue but at least say both things are worth doing, let’s reward and in a way feel that people who do either are worthy and worthwhile.

So what would your ideal school be like?

Well, it would be a like the slightly mad school I went to, King Alfred’s. I’ve got to be careful about this because it’s still there, lots of very bright and good people go to it and I think it’s a jolly good school but I would have more discipline. I would decide which subject you really have to learn, nitty gritty, and get people to learn it even if it’s boring and make sure they’ve got the basics, I really would do that. But I think the trick is one can and should run before one can walk. I don’t believe necessarily in doing this sequentially. What I actually think is this. I think that if one is trying to do something and you realise you’re hopeless at it, then there are two things you can do. You can give it up or you can say, golly, I’ve really got to learn such and such in order to be able to do it, and 10% of those children are going to say to themselves, I would really like to speak Latin or write Latin at least, you know, I’ve got to learn these verbs or whatever, and then you do because you’ve run enough and fallen over to know that it’s worth while and it comes from yourself not from the word of a teacher. You have to discover for yourself what you want to do, discover what you’re inadequate at in order to achieve it, then you’ve got the incentive, if you go that way, to get the nitty gritty groundwork done, then you can achieve. I think you need this flexibility.
					
						Among the most amusing, I think, phenomena of perception are not in oneself but they’re outside oneself, namely, the ordinary mirror, like a bathroom mirror, a flat mirror. I’m not talking about curved mirrors, that’s very important, flat ones are amazing enough. Now, all sorts of things about this. First of all, you look in the glass and you see yourself through the glass and you know and, indeed, you can see yourself in front of it so you’re split into two. So instead of just being you looking out at the world, here is you looking at you in a different space in front of you and that itself is pretty amazing, it really is. The fact that they reverse in and out is interesting but easily explainable with a ray-diagram bioptics, that reversal in depth is not a problem but then you get the ancient problem, it goes back 2,000 years or more, when you look in the looking glass, you hold a book, let’s say, in front of it, the letters look the wrong way round such that the rights and the lefts get reversed but the top and the bottom don’t. In other words, an E looks crazy, an M looks perfectly normal in a mirror, a capital M. Now, why is it asymmetrical that you get sideways, apparently, reversal and not up and down although the mirror itself is completely symmetrical? Now, what is fun about this is that you can’t explain that by physics in any simple way. You can’t explain it by ray-diagram because you can always turn the diagram around. It’s like a map, where is north? You can’t do it from the map itself, you have to have the map oriented. You have to know where north is from beyond the map, not within the map, then you turn the map around and there you set it to where north is, the map can’t tell you where north is. And neither can the ray-diagram tell you right and left and up and down. You can always twiddle it, and the answer is, in my opinion, that when you hold a book in front of a mirror, it’s easiest to think about with a book, you’re reading the book, looking at it, but you have to turn the book around for it to face the mirror and when you turn a book around, its vertical axis, then it gets left and right reversed because you’ve turned it so the right and left gets reversed, but if you turn a book the other way round, around its horizontal axis, what happens? It isn’t right left reversed, it’s up and down and it’s actually up and down and it looks up and down so that you see what you’ve done. And what people forget is what they’ve done to make the object face the mirror, how they’ve rotated it. Ditto with yourself. If you stand on your head in a mirror, you’re not right and left reversed, you’re simply upside down. It’s a very interesting thing but one is so used, certainly if you’re in physics, to think of a ray-diagram as giving all the answers in optics that the ray-diagram is irrelevant for this but it is relevant for in and out reversal so it’s quite a funny business.

Can you go on a bit about in and our reversal?

In out reversal?

Yes.

Well, in out reversal is simply that the length, the path length of the light changes. You walk away from a mirror, then the path length from your eye to the mirror and back again to your eye or to a book that you’re looking in the mirror, increases as you or the book get further away from the mirror and that’s as simple as that, and that produces the reversal in depth which is a change in the increase in path length, and as you move it towards you, it goes through the mirror, opposite to you, because its path length has changed, increased. And that’s straightforward physics whereas the right left reversal thing is physics but it’s not obvious physics. You’ve got this rotation thing taking place which one forgets about and, again, this is so important in thinking about what is mysterious or what is difficult to think about so it’s a lesson in thinking and I think why this is so puzzling, lots and lots of very clever people have got this really absolutely wrong this business, is because one is normally thinking in terms of things like ray-diagrams or the fact that the eyes are asymmetrical because they’re horizontally separated like that, or that the words, right and left, are ambiguous or something, all these have come up with different theories because they’re tempting alternative theories and you’ve got to latch onto the right way of thinking about it which is this rotation thing which is a very unusual way to have to think, you know. Exactly the same really with visual illusions. Where you get these alternatives as ambiguity, it’s because there are viable possibilities which rival the truth and the brain will entertain them and so here the brain will entertain these various ways of thinking about it, only one of which is right, and that one is unlikely to be the path to follow. That’s why the mirror problem is tricky, I think, until you’ve seen it, of course, then it’s obvious.
					
						One of my most recent books is a great tome. It’s called "The Oxford Companion to the Mind" and it’s in the series of Oxford Companions. There are Companions to the Theatre, Companions to lots and lots of things, animals, I think, and so on. "Companion to Philosophy" is a very good book and what it is, it’s multi-authored. I edited it and got lots of people all over the world to write for it. It took ten years to do. It’s a lot of work actually, it’s nearly a million words long and it was quite a success really. It became a book club choice and it went into paperback, it's actually the only Companion in paperback, which I was very pleased with, so you could buy it at a reasonable price although it’s a huge, great book, and I got virtually no money for it after the initial payment, if you like, because it sold cheaply in book clubs and all the rest of it, which is fine by me, it’s absolutely fine. Then I did a second edition, I think that may be have been a bit mad actually, to have to go through that all again, it’s an awful lot of work, and the new edition I’m not so sure about but I’d like to say the following, you see. I changed the philosophy for the new edition. The first one had a tremendous amount about Freud, for example, and psychoanalytical ideas, the sorts of things that appeal to a vast public. I thought when I did the second edition; I’m going to change a bit. I’m going to base it more on what we know about the brain rather than the mind. It’s going to have stuff about brain imaging, what’s called FMRI, magnetic imaging of the brain, to find out which bits of the brain become active according to what you’re doing or seeing or thinking, which is amazingly exciting in research but, of course, it’s not exactly in the public domain. So, in a way I wanted to try to sort of arrogantly push the public along the path that the neuroscientists are now travelling and I don’t know whether that second edition’s going to work because it may be just too scientific quotes and not enough resonating with people’s initial interests. It’s a point about communication, isn’t it? It’s only if you communicate something that people have not already latched onto is probably interesting.
					
						Well, I think communicating is tricky because you’ve got to latch onto what people are already interested in. It’s extremely difficult to initiate an interest from scratch, first of all, but if you talk about or in any way exhibit what they’re already interested in, why don’t you bore them because they’ve already done it? There’s a fine line here. There’s a fine line between what people already know and what you can tell them. I think that a book can only give a small change in a knowledge base of the person. I don’t think you can go from nought to infinity. I don’t think you can go from nought to a reasonable understanding and that’s why, I think, in one’s life, one wants to read a lot of books on the same subject written by different authors, different points of view, some quite light hearted, every now and again a really deep book which goes into the thing in absolute detail. But if you only look at the detailed book, it’s just too much for the ordinary human being, too much of an effort and not rewarding enough. You need your imagination stirred and switched on and developed, which often happens by a light hearted book so I think that books should be accessible, have nice pictures in them, American textbooks are very good, and why not, you know, use colour, use jokes, use a lot and then you lead the reader into the difficult bit where they really have to focus, get their brain working and follow through the argument for themselves. It’s even true with this mirror reversal thing, you actually have to sit down and think about it, play with mirrors, try it out, and if you then go on to a really difficult question, why the brain has consciousness, well, if that mirror problem is difficult, how come that we’re likely to solve the problem of consciousness and can’t we learn a bit about the difficulties, the hazards, of thinking about this extremely difficult problem by analysing our difficulties with the allegedly simple problem? It seems to me we should calibrate ourselves and teach ourselves what we’re good at, where we trip up, the sort of mistakes we make, in order to hone our intellects, our understanding, our enthusiasm, to the hard problem? So I believe in a variety of trivial, fun books with loads of jokes to really deep philosophy, like Wittgenstein, for example. I think you want the range.
					
						I’d quite like to, you know, think a bit about, talk a bit about science itself and how science is related to perception and how we make decisions in science for our lives and how the brain makes decision which are sort of pre scientific. I mean the brain comes up with its own decisions and then it gets into science to be analysed, made explicit and then scientific method applied. All this, I think, is a hugely important issue; indeed, our survival might actually depend on doing it properly. It always has done, since primitive man, with agriculture. How do I plant this field so I’m likely to have grub next year, you know? It’s always been a probability issue. Now, I think an important character here is Ockham, William Ockham, who round about the 11th century, I can’t remember his exact date, approximately 11th century, who was a philosopher. I think he lived in Bath, actually, and he simply made the statement that you have a load of hypothesis and what you should not do is to have more assumptions for testing each hypothesis than are absolutely needed. You need the simplest possible account. You can always multiply excuses, if you like, or possible bits of new evidence or something which may be imaginary to support the hypothesis but he said, no, you should make it minimal, minimum number of hypothesis, minimum number of assumptions and then you’ve got the most powerful hypothesis. And I think he really had the idea that probabilities were involved here that the hypothesis is supported by the evidence or it can be thrown away but the thing is, it’s not black and white. You can very seldom be certain that a hypothesis is wrong or certain that it’s right. We’re pretty certain that the moon is not made of green cheese. In other words, that would be a waste of time even considering that as a scientific project, to see whether it’s made of green cheese. But where does this stop? If you want to ask is it possible to make a bomb out of uranium, 100 years ago this would have been like green cheese moon. It would have been regarded as ridiculous. Then it creeps up on you and, by golly, it isn’t only a possibility, it happens, and then you’ve got the thing, how to deal with it when you’ve got it and the probabilities keep changing. So I think that science and also the perceptual brain is always playing with probabilities and the trick is to minimise and simplify each hypothesis so that you can really say, well, this is probably right or it’s probably wrong and apply the evidence effectively, and you can only do that when it’s simple, when it’s defined. This is really from Ockham.
					
						In the 18th century, there was a very interesting non-conformist priest called Bayes, Thomas Bayes, B-A-Y-E-S, who was an amateur mathematician, and he came up with a formula for relating the probability of the evidence to the probability of the previous knowledge. So he called this priors, as previous knowledge, posteriori, the evidence added on by the particular observation and the formula relates to these in a mathematical way. This became important for, as I understand it, for decision-making in economics and economists have mathematical models for making decisions based on Bayesian statistics, which incidentally he never published in his own lifetime. A friend found this paper after he was dead, you know, put it to the Royal Society and then it was published and it’s now one of the most famous papers, I suppose, certainly in that area of science that there is. Incredibly important, actually, because it’s quantified what was a rather nebulous idea, I think, in a way, following on from Ockham, you could say. Anyway, what I find interesting is looking at the Bayesian formulation both for science, that is hypothesis in science, and then for perceptions because I’ve always thought that perceptions are hypothesis. I think the brain is making a guess at what is out there on essentially inadequate evidence, it’s doing the best it can, and it’s always got the probability of the available evidence in terms of the hypothesis to be tested, and, of course, the more unlikely the hypothesis, the more strong you need the probabilities of the evidence in order to modify it or change it or throw it out. And it may throw it out wrongly; it may pop back again later. So when you get these ambiguities in perception, like the duck rabbit, that is entertaining alternatives because there’s no clear Bayesian imbalance in the probabilities between different hypothesis so it oscillates, it modifies the system such that the duck is seen the rabbit is seen. Now, what I like about the hollow face illusion is this. This is a hollow mould of a face, so the nose is actually sticking in instead of out but, blow me down, you look at this thing from a bit of a distance and it absolutely looks like an ordinary face with the nose sticking it, convex. Why? Because of Bayesian probabilities. The brain says to itself, that’s ridiculous, this thing is clearly a face, it’s got eyes, it’s got a mouth, etc, how on earth can the thing be hollow when it’s a face because faces are not hollow things. So the prior probability dominates, throws out the evidence of the senses, the eye, and the illusion dominates. So it’s not like the duck rabbit, this could be either. The illusion, the false possibility, dominates over the truth because it is unlikely, from past experience, that the face is hollow. This is the point. Now, this is the sort of Bayesian strategy and what’s interesting about Bayes is that he actually quantified this, set up a really neat mathematical formulation and so you could put this into a computer, if you like, you can treat it objectively, explicitly, with the methods of science, and yet, looking at the other side of it, artists are playing about with this all the time, you know, presenting shapes which might be one thing, might be another, they sort of morph in the brain from one thing to another so the artist plays about with what in science you can define in terms of Bayesian statistics. To add just a little bit to this, the statistics here are subjective, the probabilities are subjective, they’re in your brain. The reality provides relative frequencies of events like how often it rains on a Thursday, or how often it rains in summer or winter, that’s objective, but the probability assigned to that is given by the creative, intelligent, or not so intelligent, brain. So you’ve got this wonderful interplay between objectivity of events, frequencies of events, and the subjective assessment of the probabilities which can be wildly different from the ratio of frequencies in the external world objectively so that the subject and the object can be way apart and artists and scientists, I think, are playing with opposite extremes of this.
					
						It’s a really interesting question, isn’t it? Why science is important. I think science is incredibly important not only for survival, to have efficient technology to be able to fly aeroplanes around the place, to solve problems like global warming and so on, but also culturally because I think if one’s mind can encompass questions of science one is encompassing questions that in a way have fascinated humanity presumably from long, long before history, like what is the origin of the universe, where do we come from, and so on, but we can now actually look at them more or less objectively. We can make explicit the hypothesis, the possibilities, assess the weight of evidence and use one’s cortex, one’s thinking brain, to tackle problems that always appeal to us emotionally and I think this juxtaposition of intellect and emotion you get in science, I think to think of science as cold is ridiculous, it’s not. It’s sort of incredible passions such that the scientist will spend 10, 20 years with half an idea trying to make a whole idea, live with this possibility of some amazing insight which he hasn’t quite got but thinks it might be there and he may never get it. Now, this evokes absolute passion and, of course, passion that disputes between alternative views between scientists so it’s a kind of intellectual battleground but it’s, I think, a subject, you know, a way of thinking, which covers everything. It’s got human discussion, human agreements and disagreements which are really dramatic. I mean just as much as anything in Shakespeare, these disagreements, then it illuminates what we see because in order to see anything, you’ve got to have some sort of understanding. The understanding gives us seeing and the seeing gives you understanding. Again, the Bayesian probabilities, it plays about between the two, and science makes all this explicit and much more powerful. It harnesses resources of technology so it can actually solve problems that you can only visualise as possible before you’ve got the technology to actually do it so that technology born from science actually pushes back the frontiers of metaphysics. What was metaphysical guesswork becomes hypothesis you can test because your technology provides the evidence to change those probabilities. It provides the priors for changing the, sorry, provides the apriorise for changing the probabilities of the priors in Bayesian terms so if you ask do our bodies come as dust from the stars, is it the higher elements in a periodic table that synthesise from supernovae only, instead of being a silly old guess, it may or may not be true, you can actually pretty well answer the questions like that, where do we come from? And I think this is emotionally wonderful as well as intellectually wonderful and that’s why I think we should have science centres which really don’t funk the issue but give difficult ideas, make them as understandable as possible and allow people to play with them, enter into this arena, at any level they like. They can just play with it for fun, like looking at an illusion is fun, or they can sit down and think what on earth does this really mean and have guidance and help in that journey and I think schools are fine for what they do but we want science centres interactive that people can play around for the rest of their lives so that you can go on into this journey which I think actually links art and science but science is crucial in my opinion.
					
						Sir Frederick Bartlett, who was the head of our Department of Psychology in Cambridge, and he was really a great man, fantastic man. He had a wonderful Oxfordshire brogue, he was brought up in a village in the Cotswolds near Oxford, and he was just an avuncular, lovely man, you know, I was fond of him, and he wrote a wonderful book called "Remembering" in 1932, which is still read today, and he’s a great authority really on rather informal kinds of experiments where he got, for example, people to read a story or listen to a story and then they’d try to remember it a week later and then a week later after that, see how good they were at remembering it, and then he’d study how the memories changed in time, and he found that they moved towards the normal situation in that society. He was also interested in anthropology and belief systems in different cultures and the idea is that memories sort of really get edited and distorted and changed and he thought of memory as the creative reconstruction of the past from only fragmentary bits and pieces actually stored in the brain, and there were sort of laws by which memories changed through time roughly so that they matched your previous conceptions of the world and the society that you were in. So he saw memory as pretty unreliable really but obeying laws of error and I think that had a big affect on me because I then thought of perception as dynamic constructing so it was really a sort of Bartlettian idea but put into perception.

And did that, do you see links between memory and perception then?

I think there’s a big connection. Actually, it’s a silly thing this in psychology that memory and perception are absolutely linked. I mean when you’re looking at something, you’re using distant and immediate memories, topping up what you’ve just been seeing, for example, and, of course, you use knowledge right from childhood or even inherited in order to see, and yet memory and perception are studied completely differently. They’re normally in different laboratories, completely different people, when you have an examination of the student and entirely different pieces of paper that you have to write the answers on, and yet they’re completely linked and I think there should be much more work relating memory to perception in experimental psychology.
					
						Ernst Gombrich was a great art historian, the greatest of several generations, and I was very fortunate to, to know Ernst. He was a grand old man, very, very formidable and we did this exhibition together at the ICA, Institute of Contemporary Art, and we did a book together, "Illusion in Nature and Art", and I knew him for, I suppose, the last ten years of his life, a bit more than that, 15 years perhaps, and I used to often pop in and see him. He was extraordinary because he was a tremendous expert, of course, in art itself and his books are widely, widely read, he also knew a lot about perception and he was one of the very few experts in art that I know of who actually bothered about what goes on in the mind or in the brain or how they work. Now, to my mind, not having any feel for that is like a violinist not knowing a violin has strings or a violin has resonances and surely what art is really doing is playing on the resonances of the mind through brain mechanisms so you need to know the strings and the resonances, the physiology in the software of the brain and the mind really to understand art and I would have thought to practice it explicitly. And that raises a very interesting question, that if an artists thinks too much, it may be they get put off, that they have to do it perhaps intuitively, implicitly and when it becomes explicit and they actually think what they’re doing, maybe the skill breaks down and this is true of many things. If you try and run upstairs fast thinking about each foot as you put it onto the treads of a staircase, you fall over or you go very slowly, consciousness gets in the way. And I really wonder, you know, whether consciousness gets in the way of art, whether it needs to be implicit, non-academic and it may be that the academic approach, which is certainly Gombrich’s, actually destroys creativity and art. It’s a very interesting question.

It is. And how did Gombrich inform you? I mean thinking about his knowledge of art, how did it inform your knowledge of perception?

Well, we worked very, very closely. I think in a way, I don’t what to be, you know, push it too far, but I think he was actually a little bit influenced by my views of perception but how far he’d already thought of them, you know, perhaps 30 years before because he’s older than me, and how far he was actually sort of following what I was trying to say, I never knew really, and, of course, he was an extremely urbane, civilised man. He would never sort of say, oh, I thought of that before, sort of thing, you know. He wasn’t like that at all but all I can say is talking about resonance, we resonated. I mean he was a much better scholar than me. I had infinite respect for him in every way, you know, and I felt like a sort of junior member of the tribe in many ways, but at the same time that exhibition was actually rather based on stuff that I’d written and done. So it was a jolly good collaboration. I always deferred to Ernst really as the senior partner.
					
						Frank Oppenheimer, I think is a very great man. He was the brother of Robert Oppenheimer who did the Alamos project for the atom bomb, incredibly dramatic stuff applying recent discoveries of physics, Einstein’s equation, potentially to blow up the world and he had to handle this amazing moral problem, warn the American president of the results of building the bomb, worrying that the Germans were in there also trying to build a bomb and in some ways their physics was ahead of everybody else in the world in this way, because they did fusion, I believe, for the first time. So, this is a sort of extraordinary episode in world history and Frank was involved in that with his brother, Robert, very much so. Then at the end of the war, I think the American government pilloried the Oppenheimer family, certainly Robert, thinking that he might even be a spy, as I understand it. They lost faith in him although he was a total genius and totally loyal, the thing was a nonsense really. So that Frank inherited all this and was appalled by the lack of understanding of science both by, I think, the government in America, but certainly by the military and by the public so he decided to set up a science centre which he call the Exploratorium in San Francisco, really to educate subliminally, if you like, the American public in what science is all about and both its potential rewards but also its dangers and, of course, any tool can be dangerous if you’ve got a screwdriver or a chisel, you can hurt yourself, any tool, anything that’s effective can be turned to ill. So I think his feeling was that if you got people to absorb notions of science, the standards of science, the way science works, that it would improve the moral understanding and ability to make the right decision as well as actually improving technology and efficiency and therefore wealth, if you like. It all came together, and I think he felt this could be a resource for schools, a resource for poor people as well as rich, and it was a wonderful dream and he set this thing going. I think it was in 1969 and it’s been an enormous success. It’s still there in San Francisco, it looks a bit like the back of an old garage, it’s not grand, it’s not posh, which I personally think adds enormously to it, a bit of controversy, of course, about the- but I think he was right, entirely right. His idea spread all over the world and changed, mutated, and in a way I think got diluted. I think that most of the science centres that have started since Frank are actually nothing like as good as they should be, in my humble opinion. It’s lost that back-of-a-garage feeling of improvisation, initiative, letting people do things for themselves, make mistakes, learn from their own mistakes without laughing at them, this sort of thing, and he had this wonderful spirit which I’m afraid hasn’t quite spread the way it might have done and I think this is true in this country, England. I actually was instrumental in starting Exploratory, a syllable drop from Exploritorium, I think ten years after he started his. We tried to do exactly the same thing, to make it informal, not terribly grand but it’s got much too grand, in my opinion.
					
						In the war, very end of the war, end of the, actually the German war had just finished, the Japanese war was still running, I was posted directly by the Air Ministry to join a big exhibition that the Air Force had organised. I had nothing to do with the organisation of that at all, but to explain radar and stuff like that to the British public and my memory is that we had four million people round it but I could be exaggerating, but it was a big exhibition. In was in the old bomb-site of John Lewis, it was just a sort of wreck in the middle of Oxford Street, and it ran for, I think, about six months and we had really an amazing variety and number of people come round. And it was absolutely fascinating because you got housewives coming round, say, and then they would see some little component, you know, oh, I made that washer, sort of thing, and we tried to explain what they were doing, why it was important and, of course, a lot of the stuff in the war was made by tiny firms, separate from each other, each not knowing what the other was doing for security reasons. So that this exhibition really tried to pull it together and show people the significance of what they were doing in the factories, and very often they were housewives who had no particular knowledge of anything, they just learned how to make that particular part and we explained what it was all about. We had the first jet plane there and, which, incidentally, I’m very fortunate, I actually saw the very first flight of this very first jet plane at Cranwell in 1944. I just happened to be there when this thing took off with no propeller. A wonderful thing to remember actually, and we had that in the exhibition. I think it was called the P1 Whittle jet plane, and stuff like that, and it really took off, this exhibition, and it had a big impact on me. I felt, golly, the public really can get excited by technology and science and they might really want to know how radar works, you know, this sort of thing. Yeah, I think that had a big affect, certainly when I met Frank Oppenheimer years later of course, this was in my mind and I sort of resonated with him with that background experience. I think that’s true.
					
						I’ve always liked gadgets. I can’t quite tell you why but really I think from when I was about four years old. I used to, I remember, just about remember, whether one actually remembers or whether one was told it, one never knows, that I invented a machine for electrocuting our maid at the time, and it was simply bits of wood with pieces of string pretending to be wires, you see, and of course she pretended that she was electrocuted, the whole bit, and that was a sort of game, I remember, you know, from when I was very, very small, probably about four. And I’ve always liked to try to invent things and make things and I think if one is interested in, you know, in sort of philosophy and abstract ideas, it’s a very good thing to try to be a bit practical and make things at the same time and I actually think, this is quite a deep point, that some knowledge of gadgets is really important in thinking about the brain because the brain is a gadget. In other words, it’s a physical mechanism with interacting parts and the logic of mechanisms and electronic system applies, I think, to thinking about the brain. Let me give you an example. If you’ve got a radio and you take part of it out, remove it, the radio might howl, it might go whooo like this but it doesn’t mean that that part in the radio was a suppressor for howling. A lot of neurologists think of when you remove something and then you get a symptom, that that part of the brain that had been removed was actually preventing that symptom, but I don’t think it’s like that. What happens is this, when you remove part of a machine or gadget, if you like, or the brain, you’ve then got a modified total system, simply a different system but it’s working with all those other parts without that one and each of the remaining parts work differently because they’re in a different internal environment. Now, this is very important when you think of functioning, localising the function of different parts of the brain, you can say that vision is here, if you like, and that memory is here, this sort of thing, and planning for the future is here, like old phrenology, very, very broadly this is correct, but to try to deduce what each bit of the brain is doing by ablating as it’s called, removing bits of it, has this logical problem, and I actually pointed this out. It’s my first paper, to a very early meeting on what became artificial intelligence. I think at that time it was called cybernetics at the National Physical Laboratory and I think this argument is a really important one, how do you localise function? And now we’ve got brain imaging, FMRI, magnetic imaging, where you’re thinking about something, seeing something, different bits of the brain become active, if you like, they light up, how do you relate the activity increased in that bit of the brain to what is really going on in the whole brain? You’ve got the same sort of problem. It’s not, as the old phrenologists thought, that you got each function localised in a specific way like sardines in a tin, if you like, because they interact with each other so I think experiencing electronics and gadgets and mechanical things, is very helpful for neurology and for thinking about the brain which is a machine, interacting machine, and if you can’t find out how a gadget works by removing bits of it, how is one going to understand how the brain works by removing bits of it? Or even by recording from bits of it or seeing bits of it light up. There’s the old joke that if you present an elephant to a load of blind people, they’ll feel different bits of it and they get completely different ideas about what an elephant is because one would experience a bit of a trunk, another a bit of the foot, completely different, but they have no idea what these bits actually mean added up and it’s true with a sighted person and it’s true in science or neurology. There’s a huge problem and I think, you know, playing with gadgets is a tremendous help for thinking about neurology and brain function.
					
						John Young, always called J.Z., and he was an absolutely wonderful man. He was professor of anatomy in University College in London and he was the only professor of anatomy who wasn’t actually a doctor. He wasn’t medically qualified. In a way this was an advantage, I think, because he ran his department in an extraordinary way. He got interested in cybernetics, the idea of, well the beginnings really of artificial intelligence. These were machines that could control themselves with feedback, very much inspired by the war, actually, war gadgets and devices, and then he realised that organisms have feedback control and groups of organisms also had feedback and control and sort of dynamic system. He also saw it as in a way mechanistic and he worked on nerve impulses, particularly in the squid. He worked on the octopus brain, he was a world authority on the octopus brain and he worked in Naples for many, many years every summer, and he was an absolutely inspiring character. I mean in the evenings he would drink gallons of beer with the boys sort of thing, but everybody respected him so that the discipline in his group was absolute and completely informal through respect for him as a leader. It was really a lovely thing. I had two summers working with him in Naples, not actually on octopuses, I never work on octopus, but on a unique eye in nature, I think, and it’s called capelia, Copilia quadrata, and it’s little teeny weenie creature called a cotapod which has an extraordinary eye which has big, well, two eyes, it has big lenses like headlamps in front of it and behind that there’s a little teeny weenie lens and one optic nerve into its brain in the middle. Now, the lenses inside the body of the animal is completely transparent, wiggle in and out scanning the image from the front lens so it works like a mechanical television set so instead of in the case of the human eye a million fibres from the eye into the brain, this only has one. It works by scanning, entirely different principle and he got quite excited by this, arranged that I could go there, a long time ago, and I spent the summer working on this eye and he’s that sort of chap. He’d get excited by something, support a younger person, help them to do it, and it all happened and it all worked out, and he’s a person I respect enormously, really do. And I think this is one of the things about science, I mean there’s a lot of warmth in it, there’s a tremendous amount of friendship in it but also always a rivalry, you know, and it’s a funny thing, a lot of people don’t understand but it’s the rivalry and therefore the standards that were set up by always a possibility of criticism that keeps a thing sharp but it’s also warm because when somebody does do something exciting, then people will follow that person, they become a sort of leader in a smaller or bigger way, and J.Z. Young was a fantastic leader in that regard. He was always having ideas, help other people have ideas and extremely high standard and he was just, I think, somebody to emulate where possible, you know. I can’t think of anybody else quite like J.Z. Young.
					
						Another person I greatly respected was George Porter. He became Lord Porter, who was the director of the Royal Institution in Albemarle Street, and he was really a great man too. He worked with lasers, very, very bright flashes, very short, and worked on brief chemical reactions, particularly photosynthesis, I mean how leaves get energy from the sun, use the sun’s energy to be converted into energy and he had the idea, you know, that you could solve the problems of energy on earth by having artificial photosynthesis so there was a sort of practical outcome to this and photosynthesis in plants is pretty inefficient, I believe it’s less than 10%, so his work was really aimed at increasing the efficiency of those processes in industry, if you like, for getting energy from the sun, but he was also a theoretician. I mean he understood chemistry, this kind of chemistry, in a way I just haven’t any grasp of at all but again he was a leader. He ran the Royal Institution, which is very much aimed also at the public, the lectures go on still, which was started by Faraday, a lovely little lecture theatre, and it’s a wonderful organisation and George was its head for, I suppose, at least 20 years and I did lectures there, a lot of lectures. I gave Christmas lectures and about seven discourses where you were locked into a room just before the lecture and having to gaze at a crystal ball while you get your ideas together. There were all sort of customs like that in the Royal Institution. That was a great thing. And I think it’s worth mentioning here, how far should life, particularly in science, be completely informal, not wearing a tie, not bothering about any sort of conventions, how far should it be constrained, you know, by conventions? If you were in a Cambridge or an Oxford college, you have to wear a gown and you have to be fairly formal, at the same time you have informal discussions mixed up with the formal ones, it’s a sort of mixture, and I think this is an interesting thing, that the customs and your sort of having to wear the right sort of tie at dinner and this sort of stuff, in a way, imposes discipline and links you to the past with its people that one can look back on and admire. At the same time it can be a bit irritating, oh, golly, have I really got to put a black tie on tonight? And I find that sort of mixture, particularly in English life, rather interesting. One the whole it works well and somebody like George Porter who ran the Royal Institution really had it right. I mean he could put on his dinner jacket or his white tie, which we used to have, and at the same time he could be informal and just have, you know, joke with the boys or go sailing in his boat with them, this sort of thing. And it’s that mixture, I think, which is really important.
					
						The psychology of science is quite subtle because it’s a question of rewarding and punishing all the time, of telling- getting somebody to think better, to challenge them, to criticise what they’ve done but also to give them enough reward so that they’re going to go on and then do something better. It’s a subtle, complicated business, bit like bringing up a child, I think. I think a laboratory actually is sort of nursery. It’s a place where you can play about with your experiments, some of them are dangerous, so that you’re protected and- from society and society is protected from you to some extent, but it’s really like being in a sort of nursery, in a family, I think, doing science actually, really.
					
						Something that of course interests anybody who’s taught in a school or in a university, is how to teach. And I haven’t a clue how to teach, as a matter of fact, although I’ve taught for years and years and years. I never had a lesson in my life on how to teach. I became a lecturer at Cambridge without one lesson on teaching, on how to teach, quite an extraordinary thing, you know, plunged into it and you’re supposed to do it, you know, which actually I did. I loved teaching, it was never a problem, and I used to give lectures, actually, I must admit, minimum of sort of previous work on it. I’d just sort of stand up there and give a lecture pretty well, which sometimes worked, sometimes didn’t. I now think one ought to be prepare an awful lot more than I did at that time. But now there’s a very tricky point here. Cambridge then and now, and Oxford, very much based on individual contact with the teacher to the student. You do have big lectures and so on but they also have about an hour a week where you discuss with one teacher or maybe two students together, maybe one, not more than two though, a particular topic and you write an essay and the essay is then read by that teacher, supervisor, as he’s called, and pulled to pieces. So you see the work that you’ve been doing for a week absolutely torn to pieces by somebody who’s taken the trouble to read it properly, knows the subject and also knows how to think and write. Now, I personally believe that this is really important, that at university level you need individual discussion with the teacher, individual criticism of your work, in detail. But, how on earth can you do that now when 50% of the population go to university, enormous number of teachers, limited finance into the universities, might be they’re completely under financed, so that, you know, the government tends to say education, education, education, and there’s no money given. Well, I say no money, I mean far too little. On the other hand, I don’t think it’s practical to have the ways of teaching in Oxford and Cambridge into all the universities even if the money was there, the people wouldn’t be there to do it. So I think this is a great problem. Now, I wonder you know whether one can really use modern technologies for replacing, if you like, the person to person relationship of supervision, how far IT, as I believe it’s called, can actually replace that intimate criticism and the opposite, every now and again a slap on back, you know, a little indication that you’ve done rather well. How can you do that mechanically? You’ve got mechanic or machines and whatnot in industry producing loads of goods whereas people used to do it by hand, can you do that for teaching? Can you actually have machines teach human beings interactively? And that, I think, ultimately depends on making machines intelligent. Will it ever be possible to have a machine that you can converse with, that you can not only get an amazing amount of information from, which you can from the web or net, whatever it’s called, now, which is wonderful, but even more intimately, perhaps by talking to the machine? And I think this will come actually. I think that the enormous memory of computers almost certainly can be harnessed for teaching in an interactive way once we develop artificial intelligence. That’s my guess. Then I think we can get universal education at a really high level, like in Oxford and Cambridge. That’s a sort of dream but I’d like to see that come about, I really would.
					
						There is a movement towards informal teaching and, in fact, science centres have informal teaching from the Exploratorium in San Francisco, where people are simply in an environment where they can play about, much as the scientist does actually with gadgets, with books, with ideas, and learn for themselves, but we have to be a little bit careful about this. I mean it would be ridiculous to expect anybody to recover the history of science in their own lifetime by their own endeavour, that in actual practice to do any sort of simple learning or science by self experimenting you need to have background knowledge, you need to know how to interpret the results of the phenomena that you see, and in my view phenomena do not speak for themselves. You can have, let’s say, a flash of lightening, it’s a wonderful phenomenon we can all agree it happens, you can then get the thunder a few seconds later, okay, why is it delayed, what is the thunder, how is it related to the flash? Now, unless you’ve got some sort of conceptual model, no way can you see how thunder is related to lightening. I mean is it the gods attacking us, which people used to think, or something naughty going on in a village and the village steeple gets struck by lightening in the middle of the night, or is it charges like an electric-static generator moving up through the air and stuff, you know, a completely different story? In other words, you need guidance for individual thinking, at the same time the individual thinking ultimately feeds into the system and changes the- what’s called the paradigm and the general way of thinking about the subject but the point I’m making is this, that the individual can do very little alone. You need the paradigm, the general way of thinking, the kind of phenomenon that this might be, you need to have understanding of how to test the ideas, it’s really a cooperative business, I think, learning. At the same time, it’s nice to provide a situation where people can do their own thing and I believe there’s a whole bunch of issues here that need much more thinking out than we’ve ever done and I think this is one reason why education is a mess. This relationship, you know, between individual endeavour in discovery and learning and then how far is it a shared activity, I think is something we need to think much more about in my view, really, for schools, universities, for living one’s life.
					
						I myself went to a slightly crazy school, which- King Alfred’s in Hampstead, which is an admirable school in many ways actually. A private school, and it has always been run and still is by really delightful people who’ve got a lovely view of the world. It’s got minimum restrains, minimum discipline, which has its pros and it has its cons. I personally think the real problem is that to be effective you absolutely need certain skills which take a lot of effort to learn, certainly for languages which I’m hopeless at. I mean I know these are difficult and time consuming and boring because I’m so bad at them myself because I didn’t have the energy to or the interest to learn these things. I now regret enormously that my French, my German, are hopeless. My mathematics could be an awful lot better if I had had the sort of discipline at an early age to- to learn the necessary nitty gritty facts and ideas and concepts and skills, you know. So somehow a school has to engender the basic skills that you need and also have the freedom to allow you to use them in the way you want to use them, develop them the way you want to go, and I don’t know how one combines these two. Somehow you need both, I think. Personally, I’ve never had enough sort of discipline really. I’ve had to develop that as I’ve gone along, I think, to discipline myself. I don’t know, it’s a tricky one, isn’t it, really? Again, you know, I just wonder whether machines are going to come in here. I’d like to plug in French into my brain so when I go to France I plug in there, when I go to Germany I plug in another bit. I mean how much could machines, you know, solve these silly problems?

Is that part of your AI work?

Yeah. I actually think we’ll be very intimate with AI devices which, you know, really augment our own limitations. I think we’ll deal very, very closely with more or less intelligent machines into the future, is what I think will happen. I think, hopefully, I think it will be great actually, why not? And after all, I mean if one does carpentry, one extends one’s hands using chisels and screwdrivers and saws, and they’re obviously different from our hands which is why we need them, your hands can do certain things, these can do others. And the same with mental abilities. I think we need similar sort of idea of technology extending our brain, extending our eyes as with telescopes and microscopes, but actually also for thinking itself and my belief is this is how technology will go, I think it will go into actual thinking. Then, of course, you’re going to be left with emotional psychology and emotional problems in life and to think of a machine solving emotional problems is, at the moment, I think beyond comprehension or understanding and may never happen, I don’t know.
					
I think I’ve been pretty lucky actually because I worked on lots of different little things, maybe just for a few months, you know, or even weeks, as they attracted my attention. Also, I’ve been very fortunate in having friends who are very bright, interesting, fun people. One who comes to mind is Rama, Ramachandran who’s a great man. He did the Reith lectures a couple of years ago and he’s a neurologist, lives in America actually, he’s Indian, wonderful person, I’ve published, I think, four or five or six papers with him and we’ve done experiments over the years both in my laboratory and also in his in America, and one little thing we did was playing around with flounders with flat fish and, as you know, some flat fish, and it is only some, if they’re on a background with pebbles, let’s say, or some sort of shapes or colours, the fish changes its colour and you get coloured patches on the skin of the fish and the same sort of shapes. It will even put it on a chess board and you get almost chess squares appearing on its back, and one interesting thing is how on earth the fish can see its surroundings when it’s only got one eye sticking out of the sand sort of thing and how on earth does it change its own colour and perform on its back and it’s rather an amusing thing. I mean could you actually have this fish looking at shapes that give off visual illusion, you get the illusion on the pattern on its back, I mean that’s quite an amusing thought, which we never really followed up. But anyway we did some experiments on this, how these fish actually changed colour, little patches of colour, from seeing. Now, it’s great fun actually, to just simply look at a thing like that and what we did, we actually went to a marine biology laboratory where we had the fish and did the studies using other people’s facilities, and in three or four weeks we could actually do some quite nice little experiments and I think this is great. Rama and I then did something which was apparently unrelated, maybe it was related, which is this, that the eye, the human eye, has a big blind region in it called the blind spot, it’s where the optic nerve comes out of the retina into the brain and if you put light onto that bit of the eye, nothing happens, there are no receptors in that part of the retina, but we see it continuously, you don’t see black hole where the black spot is, so we worked on how that- whether that gets filled in actively or whether the brain ignores the blind spot because it never gets information so is it like at a party, you’ve got somebody who’s really boring and dull and you ignore them after a time, you just don’t realise they’re there. Is it like that? Does the brain ignore the black region or does it actually fill it in actively? And this fish producing these shapes and colours on its back, well, clearly it was an active, physiological change from the pattern in the eye, can our brain, as it were, fill in the blank region of a similar kind of a way, filling in the gaps, creating what ought to be there, if you like, somewhat similar to the fish, and we came to the conclusion that, yes, that the brain actively fills in, it doesn’t simply ignore it. It was kind of fun. I mean it’s quite amusing sort of, I’ll just mention why we worked on the fish. We were doing a fish and nothing happened so we spent hours and hours and hours with these fish not changing colour, then we realised we’d got the wrong sort of fish a bit late in the day and it was while we were hanging around with nothing happening with these fish that we thought, well, golly, maybe this is kind of related to human vision, so then we did some experiments. With a computer screen on the humans. Of course the fish weren’t dong anything and I think this is another point about science, particularly when you have lively, fun friends who can have a wild idea, try it out quickly, see whether anything’s going to happen, and this is socially wonderful, and also scientifically crazy, or it can be. It can, of course, be a complete waste of time but occasionally you get a new idea that way. New ideas come not by plod, plod, plod, but by a joke very often or suddenly seeing, you know, a connection between things in a bizarre way. But it’s very important to have friends who have a sense of humour, who enjoy challenges, who can suddenly say, well, to hell with it, let’s try this and see if it works. Serendipity, I think that’s really important actually.

						My sister-in-law had a wonderful parrot called Seraphita, beautiful, beautiful green parrot, and one day we noticed that when the- it was a talking parrot, that when Seraphita said something, the pupils of its eyes would go in and out, like that, while it was talking, so if it said- Pretty Polly, like that, the pupils of its eyes went in and out. Then we noticed, this was amazing, that when we talked to it, when it was cocking its head and listening to us, its eyes would go in and out, so we said- Pretty Polly, the same thing happened, with a slight delay and so we photographed this with a cine camera, measured the delay, did some experiments on it, and we came to the conclusion that the pupils of its eyes would respond to sounds or words that it understood but not to other sounds or words, only in the, you know, the vocabulary that it appreciated or that it could itself make or speak, so we had the idea that this was a response to attention and that the pupils get smaller, really from manipulating nuts and things in its paws, in its claws, but this attention of affect was shown up by the pupils in the eye, you got the physiological change, it was a matter of attention, therefore you could measure attention in the parrot by looking at its pupils and there were similar physiological changes in us when we attend to something or when we’re stressed or, you know, when we’re suffering pain or anxiety and these things and this business of relating psychological states to physiological changes is jolly important and I think it’s really fun to look at that in us and also in animals and then relate animals to us physiologically and into psychology into their psychology. Incidentally, I have a sort of vague feeling that this parrot thing with the eyes, may mean that they’ve got what we call mirror cells, they recently discovered it in humans. When you’re watching somebody else performing an action, there are cells in your brain which become active as though you’re doing the action yourself and this gives a kind of empathy from oneself to other people and it’s just possible that in talking parrot, they’ve got mirror cells which at the moment are only known in primates so the next step would be to record from the parrot’s brain whether- discover whether it’s got mirror cells. It would be brilliant if it has.
					
						I’m very interested in the evolution of vision, how it is that we can become cognitive in the sense that we act by understanding from simple response to stimuli. And I think this is a very interesting thing. I think it goes from reception, if you like, to perception, then to conceptions where you can think explicitly. I think there are these three big stages and there are different parts to our brain which represent these three stages in evolution and I’m really quite interested to develop that further. I think it’s very interesting both evolutionarily and in thinking about how the brain is organised and the relationship of perceiving something to understanding is a very peculiar one. For example, you can have an illusion, say, a distortion illusion or any sort of these things you get in children’s books of weird things happening, you can know that you’ve got this illusion, you can explain it and you’ve still got the thing. In other words, your understanding of it, awareness of it, in-in terms- explicit understanding, does not destroy the illusion, the perception, so that perception, how we see and how we understand, are amazingly separate. It really is an amazing thing this, and of course this has relevance to teaching when you can show somebody the truth and in a way they can see it perhaps and not understand it and other occasions you can understand what’s going on but you can’t see it properly. For example, there are illusions called Impossible Objects or Impossible Figures, which you simply cannot make sense of them at all. They look impossible. You can understand why they look impossible conceptually but you still can’t process it in the visual system so the brain is in separate modules and one module doesn’t always talk to another. This, I think, has huge implications and moral implications really because one bit of your brain is giving a certain behaviour but another bit of the brain can’t assess that, can’t appraise it, can’t judge it, can’t criticise it, and of course we’re several people, we’re not really one person in our heads; we’re lots of people trying to talk to each other and often failing within the brain. I think these things are quite important really.
					
						I think that classifying the world, which we do as babies, we start doing it as babies. I mean what you can eat and what tastes rotten or hurts you or damages you, you know, goes right to the very beginning, doesn’t it, of experience, and then explaining, how is explaining linked to classifying? I mean a baby obviously won’t ask why is this particular food sweet and that sour or this upsets my tummy and that one’s all right, but as you go through adult life you gradually learn why certain things are good or bad, why they work the way they do. You classify them in many, many ways and the classification is generally related in some degree with explanation. For example, you’d say that something is part of physics, something is part of psychology or it’s God affecting things, or it’s spooky or something, you know, I mean you get the sort of primitive and then subtle kinds of explanation, classification, of phenomena, and I think one of the really interesting things is how- the way you classify the world of events and objects relates to the kinds of explanations that you adopt. How do you get the appropriate explanation to the phenomena? And I think this is very, very difficult in psychology, to relate the kind of explanation to the kind of problem the person has or the process going on in the brain or the mind. I think this is a really tricky business. Now, I’ve taken illusions because these are clear cut phenomena, some of them are due to the physiology going wrong, others to the strategies, cognitive strategies, cognition of the brain, the mind being inappropriate, and this is very, very different if it’s working inappropriately to the problem, or if the mechanism’s not working correctly, these are quite different, like a hardware fault or a software fault in a computer, it’s an initial classification. So what I’ve been trying to do is to develop a sort of detailed classification, a visual phenomena. Now, that’s relatively easy because the phenomena clear cut, for example, there are illusions where you get lines which get bent like that, distortion illusion, or something that looks too big or it looks too small. You get other illusions where you see something that simply isn’t there, you can make ghosts, visual ghosts very, very easily. You can have other illusions which flit from one thing to another, they’re ambiguous like a wire cube or flip inside out or duck and a rabbit will interchange and the same shape or even the same object will suddenly become a duck, suddenly a rabbit. Now, the question is, since one can classify these phenomena fairly easily, for example, you’ve got distortions, you’ve got ambiguities, you’ve also got paradoxes, some objects look absolutely impossible, which is interesting. Why can’t one use the clear cut cases of perception to find out how to classify mental phenomena on the grounds that these are easy, simple, easy to study, we can all see them, we can pretty well agree on the classes. Then you think of the explanations and it then becomes a scientific question, whether the explanations are adequate or not or appropriate, you do experiments for that but I think to get that straight, then to move into difficulties of the mind, abnormal problems, mental disease, if you like, continue the classification, develop it, develop the discipline of studying each one and testing whether it’s the right way of thinking about it or not, could be a way to do psychology, starting really with perception because it has rich phenomena which is clear cut which we can all agree about and one can quite easily do experiments on them. One can relate them to brain physiology with FMRI, brain imaging and so on, and then from there move in to the really difficult stuff that people like Freud were talking about, which is much, much harder for real science to penetrate. My feeling is this might be the way to do it, by classifying, explaining each class of phenomenon in its own way, relating the classification to the kind of explanation as in astronomy with stars, if you like, and then move into the mind that way. I think this is perhaps how the science of psychology might work, might continue into the future. So what I’m trying to do in my humble way is to develop this classification of phenomena of illusions and explain them, that’s what I’m trying to do.
					
						Yeah, I'd quite like to talk about, if it wouldn’t be a bore, you know, sort of the central theme that I’ve worked on really, really thought about, really all my academic life and that is what can be called bottom up and top down. This is a shorthand phrase but it’s quite simple. What it really means is, say, in vision, it applies to all the senses, but in vision you’ve got signals coming into the brain from the eye down the million fibres of the optic nerve, if you like, into the brain, from the real world outside you, and some theories of perception say that’s it, that’s all there is. It’s just a whole load of inputs from the senses, touch, vision, hearing, the brain analyses, responds to these sensations represented by what are called action potentials, that is, signals in the nerve, rather like Morse code, dots and dashes of Morse code, and then somehow the brain reads these dots and dashes, if you like, these little signals, but the thing is, how does it read the signals and make sense of them unless it’s got knowledge of what the signals might mean? For example, if you get a telegram and it says my- your aunt, arriving Thursday. You’ve got to know what an aunt is, you’ve got to know what arriving is, you’ve got to know what Thursday is, otherwise it’s just a load of dots and dashes of Morse code and completely meaningless. You always have to relate the information received to a load of knowledge in store, if you like. Now, I think the same is true in vision and you can call this bottom up, well, you can call this signals coming in and then also knowledge interpreting the signals so you’ve really got top down processing from knowledge, if you like, bottom up signals, coming in from the eyes. The real question is, the ratio of how much do we see things in terms of the available information from the world at the present moment? How much is it dependent on information from the past to interpret those signals and then when the knowledge is wrong or not applicable or might be out of date, how far do you see things wrongly? How far are illusions and errors due not to the signalling going wrong in the eye, if you like, but to the knowledge not being appropriate or not being used correctly? Now, ophthalmologists are really concerned, you know, with getting glasses, spectacles, for your eyes to correct the image so that you get good images but actually, you know, if the knowledge is just as important or even more important, you need to consult somebody who knows about the brain, somebody who knows about the mind, just as much as an ophthalmologist when you’ve got problems of seeing. So I’ve really spent most of my life actually on just this and when I started, and this is really quite amazing, there was no physiological knowledge that knowledge that- that top down existed in the brain. We’ve guessed that it must but there were no known fibres from the known parts of the brain which handle knowledge, rules, cognition, into the visual system. It was all thought to come from the eye into the brain directly, and then years later, only about 12 years ago, it was discovered there were actually more nerve fibres coming down into the visual system actually to relay stations just behind the eyes called lateral geniculate bodies, there are more fibres coming down from the knowledge parts of the brain, than there are from the eyes into the visual system. So it’s quite incredible, so it moved from everything is from the eyes to, golly, there’s actually more from the higher levels of the brain, the cortex, than from the eyes, the vision. Well, in a way, do you know, we guessed that from our experiments on illusions years, years before the anatomy was discovered, but there was a bit of a sort of tension here between the psychologists working on the stuff with illusions and so on, and the physiologists or anatomists looking at the brain structures and suddenly the two have come together and we now know that actually the experiments on illusions and things were actually right. They showed that there’s a huge contribution from knowledge into interpreting the signal for seeing and we now know that the anatomical pathways actually do exist for this influence. It’s really quite a nice case, and you often get this in science. You get different disciplines developing their bit and it doesn’t fit what other disciplines are saying, and then get this sort of conflict and you go to a conference and you can really get a lot of angst about this, it takes a lot of beers to sort it out, and then suddenly somebody gets a breakthrough and they find the missing link and then it reconciles apparently different views. It’s very much how science works actually. So you often get sort of competing camps, you get schools of thought, and the case for vision, there’s a very famous American psychologist called J.J. Gibson, who thought that perception is simply direct, that you just got information coming in and that’s it and I never agreed with that through having worked with illusions, and I always thought it was highly indirect, that perceptions about hypothesis just as indirect as hypothesis in science to the world outside and this sort of indirect view and the direct view have been a great controversy for years and years in thinking about perception. And, well, I think I was right, actually I still do.
					
						Years ago, it’s over 40 years ago now, I studied the case of SB, Sidney Bradford, who was blind, almost certainly from birth, and then he got his sight back actually when he was 52 with operations on his eyes, actually it was only one eye that worked, so one eye really, and he gradually, or, no, sorry, he had immediate vision for things he knew about already from touch. He could really see an amazing amount actually the day after the operation. It was quite extraordinary. But what happened, he was terribly excited because he got his vision of course and he thought he’d be able to do everything, drive a car and all the rest of it, but he was actually quite constrained in what he could do and what was very, very sad, and I think we need to know more about this, is that instead of it opening up a whole new life for him as he’d dreamed of, it actually made him sad, made him depressed, and he went into a real depression. First of all, he often wouldn’t bother to see. He’d wake up in the morning and he wouldn’t bother to put the light on. He’d shave in the dark, he continued to live really as a blind man, but the really sad thing was he got depressed. He felt that the world as he could now see it to some degree, was a lot less perfect than he’d thought. For example, he got really upset if he saw peeling paint, if he saw blemishes on things, and I really think that he believed the world would be a sort of heaven, you know, when he opened his eyes, he’d be in heaven and he found it wasn’t heaven. When the sun set, he got really sad by it becoming dark but then when it rose and everything was illuminated, he saw the imperfections in the world shown up by light and he got a clinical depression in actual fact. Now, there’s a new case called Mike May living in California, he’s completely different. He’s younger, but not all that much younger. He was, I think, 46 when he had the operation and he’s a very, very active, highly intelligent man, much more educated than SB but highly educated man, and an incredible chap. He is a world champion skier, blind skiing, and he could ski at 60 miles an hour down a mountain with his wife shouting right, left, right, left, and this sort of thing, you know, and he really had a full grasp of life in every way, and is he getting depressed? No. The wonderful thing is that I think he’s the only known case actually, recovery from blindness, who’s making a real success of it and is not at all depressed. He enjoys every minute of his life, and I think this is because the people who’ve been handling him, particularly his wife and family perhaps, have understood, helped him tremendously, and it’s successful. But I think that in these cases, it shouldn’t just be handled by scientists interested in the scientific aspects of it. It needs people who are really aware of the clinical problems, the emotional problems associated with both recovery of function and also with loss of function, you know. I think a lot more needs to be thought about the emotional side of these things and very sad with SB, and a great triumph, I think, for Mike May. It’s really great that he’s making a go of it, I think.
					
						Over 30 years ago actually now, I started a journal which is called "Perception". We were quite lucky actually capturing the name, I mean just a simple word like that for the name of a new journal is quite something but anyway we did and I was actually approached, very peculiar this, by two publishers within a month, one very grand publisher and one completely unknown, very, very small publisher, both suggesting that I start a journal on perception. We hadn’t thought of a name but on the subject of perception so I had about two or three weeks thinking about this and I went for the unknown, small man, and he’s called Adam Gelbtuch and I’ve never regretted this choice actually. He’s a small London publisher and it’s been a sort of close relationship with no problems and it’s the one thing I’ve ever done in my life that’s had no major problems and as I’ve got older I have to confess I’ve hived off all the boring bits to other people so I remain editor in chief, according to the front page, actually I sit back and everybody else does all the work. But actually doing this has been really nice because one’s kept in touch with people all over the world, one, you know, has a little bit of a say in what gets a boost. Every now and again we do a special edition to support some particular new way of thinking of some such thing, and it’s been a total pleasure. So I think, in life, a funny decision, when to take on a commitment like that, I mean it is a huge commitment. I write an editorial essay for it every month which is actually quite a lot of work really. I read quite a lot of the papers, not all of them, I have to confess, and when a problem arises, you know, I often have to look into it so it’s a bit of a responsibility and a journal is important and it’s survived for centuries in libraries. I mean it’s going to be there for scholars to look at centuries ahead whereas books are ephemeral, very few books actually continue for any length of time. Journals continue forever. But this is something I’m glad I took on actually. It’s fun, it’s nice, and it’s good when you can pick up a young person, particularly if they make a mess of writing the thing up, instead of somebody rejecting, we often actually rewrite it. If it’s somebody from another language, the Japanese, for example, do excellent work in perception but of course they have linguistic problems many times, instead of simply rejecting the paper because it looks like a muddle, we sometimes take a lot of trouble and really rewrite it, work out exactly what they wanted to say, and then publish it, you know, in what we would call good English sort of thing, so that I’ve enjoyed doing very, very much.
					
						I’ve recently written an essay, I love writing essays, ever since being at Cambridge when one wrote one’s essay to one’s supervisor. I’ve gone on writing essays and have just written one which is not yet published actually on Sherlock Holmes whom I like very much, really suggesting that the brain is Sherlock Holmes, that the brain is the super-detective. The analogy works like this, that when you’re looking at something and you’re seeing an object, let’s say a person or a pillar-box or anything, that object is not directly represented in the brain. There’s no direct representation, there’s a pattern in the retina on the eye, like a photograph, but the perception of the object is not given all in one go of the whole object at once. It is at the brain accepts bits of movement, bits of colour, bits of shape, puts all these things together and then creates the object in your mind from brain activity which is spread around in all sorts of different parts of the brain. So it’s quite different actually from a photograph or put it another way, when you look at a photograph and you see an object, your brain is doing an amazing amount of work, as it were, creating what the object probably is from that photograph and you see it as a person or, again, a pillar box because you know about people, you know about pillar boxes, you recognise this bit of shape as an eyebrow, that bit of shape is the bit where you put the letter in and so on, and then you construct the object actively in the brain. That is what perception does. Now, I think that’s exactly, in a way, what was going on with Sherlock Holmes. He had these clues, you know, he’d see the thing, it might be a horseshoe in the mud, in the shape of it, sees a little curved bit and he realises, oh, that must be Silver Blaze’s hoof marks, sort of thing, from a little twiddle in the mud, sort of thing, so I think this use of clues, actively creating the hypothesis that it’s the villain, let’s say, or that it’s a horse that was stolen, is exactly what’s happening in perception. I see the brain as the great detective, using clues, developing hypothesis and sometimes there’s not enough information either available to the eye or from one’s background knowledge, you need both, to create the hypothesis and then you either can’t see, you’re blind, or you see the wrong thing, your hypothesis is not appropriate or correct. And I think it’s exactly the same with Sherlock Holmes and how we see the world.
					
						40 years ago I got really excited by artificial intelligence and I thought, incredibly naively, that we could put intelligence and we could put perception and so on into machines but, do you know what, although we failed signally to do that actually, we really did, we learned something. We learned how damn clever the brain is because the brain does things that no way can our technology do at the moment, but having said that, I think now, 40 years later, that computers have developed, we’ve all learned a great deal more in physiology and in psychology, that that dream was actually a good one and I think we should still aim at relating technology to the mind to make mindful machines, to use machines even more for teaching and thinking, tools for thinking and seeing. I think that’s going to be the answer, to live very, very much more closely with intelligent technology, if you like, and I think artificial intelligence really is part of the future. I think it's terribly important, and I think how it should go is that we need to develop computer programmes which don’t simply go through what are called algorithms, little steps of reasoning, but should assess probabilities and I think they should be created so that from past experience it’ll generalise past experience, produce generalisations which are sort of chunks of knowledge really, use these to interpret information, photo-electric cells and so on as in, you know, technologies, and then make the machine think, make it intelligent by, again, relating the available information to its background knowledge to create hypothesis and using what we now call Bayesian strategies which is really the mathematics of inferring with probabilities. And I think instead of little algorithms, this needs to be done, which is a much more ambitious project but I think if we can make that work we’re going to have really intelligent machines and then we can live with them and I think this is how it’s going to go. We’re going to have Bayesian intelligence in machines.
					