robert.venturi.and.denise.scott.brown

Internationally renowned architects Robert Venturi (1925-2018) and Denise Scott Brown (b.1931) have helped transform contemporary design through their innovative architecture and planning.  Winners of numerous prestigious awards, their designs have championed multiculturalism, social activism, symbolism, pop culture, history and evolving technologies.

[RV] As you mentioned earlier this morning Denise, probably one interesting irrelevant subject would be our attitude towards… the… of architecture as loft, as flexibility, and when we talk about that we are reacting against a… an approach that’s popular today and fashionable among architects, is to design buildings which are highly dramatic in terms of their form, that are kind of almost sculptural, abstract sculptural form, and that derived possibly in a perverse way, out of the idea, the early modern idea, which was good then, of form follows function. And… but usually, it isn’t really form following function, in this case it is again the desire for dramatic architectural expression, a kind of abstract expressionism. We like to say that it is appropriate now that you say form accommodates functions, plural, rather that form follows function.
Now, it’s interesting that we pointed out that two of the, you know, famous and maybe best architects of the 20th century who were kind of enemies, both said form follows function. It’s down in writing.  Le Corbusier and Frank Lloyd Wright.  We like to say that that approach kind of parallels the idea of the building as a glove that follows the function in a very precise way.  There’s a finger that’s longer here than there is one that’s longer here. We like to say that for now, the tradition of the architecture as a mitten, form accommodates functions, and then there can be change, wiggle room, as it were, inside; and there’s a long tradition of that, which perhaps Modernism was reacting against. You find it in… all of the Modernists liked American… American industrial factories, but the American, the loft building was that, where a lot of things can happen flexibility inside, the industrial loft. The academic loft building, Nassau Hall, Princeton or William and Mary Hall, in that college where many things could happen within that building, and it could accommodate time and… change in time. Or the Italian Palazzo, which started out as a noble residence, but could then easily become a library, a museum, and other kinds of… accommodate other kinds of uses over time.  Where you had a series of rooms en suite, they weren’t exactly physically flexible inside, but because of the general approach, they were right. So that’s the opposite of form follows function.
The trouble with form follows function, also, is that it does kind of forget the important quality of architecture as shelter, and that… that is very important in another context, where the idea of the element of space has been not so important in the 20th century – architecture as space.  Well, architecture is space, but it is also shelter.
And then, not to go on too long about this, but we are now saying, among other things, that architecture very much connects with the function, the element let’s say, not the function, the element of iconography of architecture as sign. Our latest book is called Architecture as Signs and Systems, and again, we refer to a long history of that, of architecture where there are hieroglyphics all over the… all kinds of buildings, columns, walls. In Egyptian architecture, there are pediments in classical architecture where yes, there is art in the pediment via the sculpture, but that sculpture was instructing you concerning the religion of the era.  Or you go to the Christian, early Christian basilica, where you look down, and along the walls are… are mosaics and, that… that instruct in form as well as ornament.  And it is interesting that maybe we should look at such element and art, not so much as art, such an element in architecture is not so much art but as signage, that is done in such an effective way that it incidentally becomes art. 
And then we, of course, go to the idea of the significance today, of learning from the American commercial vernacular, where… which depends enormously on signs, signage, billboards and things like that, and that… could parallel the significance of the American, mostly American, industrial vernacular that was so important as a basis for modern architecture. At the beginning of the century all the buildings were made to look like elegant factories, now, should it not be that perhaps buildings should look like the commercial, or learn from, at least connect with, the commercial, industrial, pop, ordinary kind of architecture that exists today, should that be a basis for the architecture now?
So, the importance of the flexible loft, and the importance of the building at the same time as iconographic, as an element of signage, we like to think of as important. We’ve written a lot about… no one is connecting with it much. They’re beginning to a little, and of course, we are at the same time saying that by forgetting the industrial factory, we are also going from the last part of this century which, where we are no longer in the industrial age, we are in the electronic age – we call it also the iconographic age – and that our technology is no longer industrial, although, no, it’s no longer essentially industrial in its architectural expression, it is iconographic dash electronic.  And there’s lots of opportunity there for that kind of glitter, that would parallel the glitter, let’s say… from the inside of Gothic churches, where you have the glitter, the art of the stained glass windows, but they also, of course, have content, and if you were a person in the Middle Ages, you are admiring them, and looking at them to learn from and read from.

[DSB] Bob has made a stream of consciousness through everything we stand for, all in one ball, and maybe…
[RV] Maybe we don’t have to talk anymore.
[DSB] Maybe, maybe I won’t manage to talk very much. We… the question is, whether we de-construct it. I’m sure that’s what we will do here, because he’s moved from a view of functionalism, and form follows function through to our ideas of symbolism and all of that, and there’s many ways to step back to illuminate. My role is often… having the same philosophy, and we developed it together… to set it in a broader context. I say that Bob is a profound person, who’s surprisingly broad, and I am a broad person who is surprisingly profound. I’m not intending to boast for either of us, in saying that I think that that’s the way our minds work.
Having said that, there are some other ways of thinking, and some other takes I have on that subject matter, and if we start with the first, I think if you heard him say the name of our book, our most recent book, Architecture as Signs and Systems.  And then we could add, ‘For a Mannerist Time’, that’s in the title too.  But what do the systems mean? Some people take it to mean it’s a system of signs, but in fact, I put that in there because we are so identified now with Las Vegas, and neon.  And, as if the whole of what we talk about is communication at that level of putting a sign on a building, and that is something we’re thrilled by, and we love it, and we think that the way we thought about that, has led to things for us, and for other architects too, to many, many ideas. It’s funny to see those ideas in China and Japan at a scale that huge corporations do, but we don’t much do ourselves, because we don’t get the opportunity.
But Bob once pointed out that 90% of what we do in the office doesn’t have to do with slapping signs on buildings. And so I set out in this book to write a piece on that other 90%.  Well, I really couldn’t write about the other 90%, that would have been many volumes, but the piece I did write about was how my second career in urbanism has brought us subject matter that I think has affected us as designers, and this is very typical of the way I think.  But it’s hard for architects to understand that these subjects aren’t boring and really can make you a better designer. One of my students once said, studying transportation is like taking a bad medicine, it tastes awful, but you get better. He meant you get to be a better designer. So, I try to show ways in which broadening an architect’s palette of subjects – we architects are used to studying history, and we study structures, and we have theories about how you teach history to architecture students who don’t want to read anything – so how do you get them interested in history or structures? Well, how do you teach them social sciences, and transportation, and some of these other fields that have made us really, better designers and so I talked a lot about all of that. So one of my chapters talked about systems and the patterns they make, and a system could be all the structures on a campus, and you could analyse them by age, for example, and by type.  But they could be all the types of academic subjects taught, and how they relate to each other, and where they sit on campus and where they belong, given today’s patterns of learning and research. That’s another system you could study. The open space system, the rainwater management system; these are all ones, and then the interlocking of all these systems, and how this can lead to really beautiful design.  How you can use the flow of water in a design to give you interesting ideas about form, for example, and about communication too, because you… the pathways that people take as they move about, and the opportunities it gives them for serendipitous meetings… very much tied into philosophies of education today. And then, another… and then the overlap of patterns as I said, is very important.

[DSB] If we don’t believe form follows function, or if that’s one of the ways of looking at the relationship, but there are others – the way Bob brought up form accommodates function. I have said we are functionalists. The present Neo-Modern architects use forms that come from early Modernism. I call them swoop – the building swoops this way, it swoops that way, it swoops the other way, it costs too much because they put too much atrium space in, and steel and glass and it’s very impressive, but in the end what does it do for the patterns of association which are needed by people, and the ways people live? And so, from that point of view, I said we have many ways of redefining function in architecture, and we should think about that. One is to say form accommodates function, the mitten can take wiggle space, it can take different sizes of hands, it can take many things.  A lab building or a loft building, which has a very simple geometrical box shape, and an even row of windows on the outside and also column spacing that is ample…
[RV] It can accommodate evolution over time.
[DSB] Yes, so in other words, that form of space is a generic, adaptable space, and we’re very interested in those and how they might change.  So you accommodate, you deal with function in a different way. You might think of the activity spaces and the service spaces, that’s what Lou Kahn did, that’s the different way of thinking of function. Mies van der Rohe talked just about generalised space, and I think that too was from reacting to some loft buildings and campus buildings and factory buildings, which had that ability. Another way is to make a difference between public and private space, and to think about the relationship between them, and the different kinds of forms public and private space might take.
And the interesting thing then becomes, that the space that Lou thought of as dull, the service space, if you think of it as corridor space – which is a big public space in many academic buildings for example, and of course, a processional, movement space is important in churches, and some other buildings too – so suddenly the service space becomes the unique and civic space, and then offered are the rectangular spaces for use, like classrooms in an academic building.  And the flow of that civic movement space with its eddy’s for sitting and drinking our coffee or meeting someone or something like that, is a very interesting architecture within the architecture of the building, and we call that the street through the building. We also say then, bringing back the planning analogy, we do land use and transportation planning inside buildings, showing how the streets, i.e. the corridors, relate to the activities, and how the one generates from the other.

[RV] I think another… another quality that connects with this idea of flexibility and the relevance of the loft building rather than the… geometrically complex building where form follows particular function, where evolution is accommodated. Another quality that really is important in our thinking is Mannerism, and the book Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture which I wrote, evidently it was published 40 years ago, someone mentioned this – and they celebrated this at Columbia University a few weeks ago – that essentially it's a book about Mannerism, and that is where you acknowledge in life and in art, inconsistency.  You acknowledge systems, you acknowledge convention, but then you say, ah, it must give in here and there, it must acknowledge and accommodate exceptions, variations.  And it is well known that this is an idea, the idea of Mannerism which was recognised and developed in the mid and late 19th century, by… evidently by German art historians who applied this to late Renaissance architecture, before it evolved into Baroque. Where architects like Michelangelo, Palladio and others acknowledged and very much accepted the very precise qualities, conventions, of Classical Architecture deriving from Roman architecture, but then said, ah, there must be some modifications, some exceptions, some contradictions that are acknowledged. And this was very likeable to me, and when I wrote the book Complexity and Contradiction, I was really reacting, among other things, I was reacting to the kind of purity of Modernism, that had developed by the late… by the late 20th century, where Modernism was a very, kind of, strict and precise way of doing things in architecture.  And therefore I could go back and learn from the historical Mannerist tradition where you were acknowledging the ordinary, you were acknowledging the generic, you’re… but at the same time, you were making changes.  And out of that came wonderful tensions, and I learned a lot… a lot from a lot of sources to acknowledge that. So I think Mannerism is something we might talk about some more, Denise and I, in relation to this.
[DSB] Mannerism was also a… well it, not also… the Mannerists were people who had studied the orders. Architects learnt the orders, and in my terms, the orders are a system, a fascinating system, because they could adapt and evolve from Ancient Rome through the Renaissance and ever since.  Because people still design using the… specifically the… the classical orders. Even now there are people who are Classical architects, classicists who do that. But also, you establish other orders in most other systems of architecture, so that, I’d say we have orders in our modern buildings too, the orders of structure, and mechanical systems, etc.

[DSB] These Renaissance architects knew the orders very, very well. They started as children and they… it was part of their bones and then they got bored, so what do you do when you get bored?  You start breaking the rules. And the sly, clever, breaking of the rules in painting and art was looked upon as decadence by the early historians, as neurosis. And the notion that Mannerism is something effete is one that we’ve contested, and precisely because our societies are complex today. We say, ‘We too live with the orders, the “order” of transportation, social order, the systems whose patterns we are studying’. But when they overlap, they are in conflict; inevitably they’re in conflict, because of the complexity of our society. So how the one gives for the other is fascinating to us.
If you think of the outskirts of New York, and there is marsh ways and waterways and fields and then roadways, and that whole… and expressways, and then pylons and electrical ways and old factories, and the whole thing jams up, and it’s like a playground of the Gods. I say, ‘It’s Mount Olympus on a Saturday night’. Well, that’s a very interesting architecture. It has, you could say, no order or many conflicting orders. And building in the middle of this… I have a picture of Rem Koolhaas swinging on a trapeze over Mount Olympus you see… and the buildings that he does… well, that coping with that disorder of the complexity of systems is a very nice, present-day Mannerist task, which is not in the least decadent. The question is to draw an agonised beauty out of all of that, and that’s I think, a lot of the challenge for us, to do that. So, I think Mannerism’s been a very creative field for us, in that sense, to think about those conflicts and how we can work cleverly. The Modernism felt that the architect as an Urbanist had to produce order, and of course, we suffered from that view in urban renewal in America, and I’ve reacted and so did Bob, in the 1960s, through the whole social revolution here, to that way of thinking, and this has caused us to have a great many different views.
I have used various metaphors for my role. I first, in the 60s, trying to relate social planning, which I was very much involved with in the 60s, and still am, to physical planning, I said I was… and to architecture, because I maintain I am an architect, an architect and a planner, not an architect-planner. And I say I’m a circus horse rider, and my two horses – architecture and planning – are going like this, and I try to bring them this way. But more recently I’ve seen myself in another role. Modern architects saw the architect as a master planner, and the mastery of environment is something that the social planners reacted against.
Do you see it as a mistress planner?
[DSB] No, I don’t see it as any sort of mistress or master planner. I see it as a role that has to be involved with intervention and reaction. Particularly the public sector planner makes an intervention, hoping the private sector will react to continue the pattern, because no public sector architect or planner in America can do much. So the theory of intervention and reaction seems a much more kinetic one, a much more open one, and in that respect, there was a very wonderful poem by a Belgian poet, Verhaeren, about the sailor who goes down in the ship, and he’s trying to master… he actually says, ‘master’ the waves… but he can’t, but he has consciousness even though the waves don’t, and that’s his only glory. And he goes down in the waves. Well, I said, ‘That’s what the architect planner does, goes down trying to be a master planner’. But if you could think of yourself, instead of a sailor, as a surfer, now you’re managing the waves, and with a little bit of luck you might even hit a cool spot and build a building. But don’t try to do it at the World Trade Center, keep away from that kind of project, where the waves will just inundate you and kill you, unless you happen to be very, very powerful and well-connected and able to push your way through. And then what do you get as a result? Maybe not the greatest architecture. But the notion of being a surfer, and a strategist, and clever, and finding beauty in unexpected places, and laughing a little as you do it in order not to cry, this has been, I think, part of understanding what your roles are in a Mannerist situation.

[RV] I think another element that’s important to mention is that of symbol, and it’s hard to recognise this now, but just a few decades ago, symbolism was completely out and, at least as a conscious element, was out in architecture. As I mentioned, there was abstract expressionism in the other arts and in architecture.  And there really was an employment of symbolism when architecture adapted the vocabulary of the factory, of the steel frame, of the… of the… what are those little dot things on the steel frame we’re talking about?
[DSB] Rivets.
[RV] Rivets and all that stuff, but a… but a symbol was officially out.  And it was somewhat a reaction against… to the early reaction… it was related to the early reaction of Modernism… as a reaction against eclecticism of architecture… adapting styles that existed in the 19th century Gothic versus Classical and all that. They called it Beaux Arts classical.
Symbolism was out, and it was form.  And I think we got involved in symbolism again, and it was unusual at that time, and it was essentially when we went and, i.e. thought of iconography as significant within the loft context.  But also when we looked at the ordinary everyday architecture – which might be another element that we should emphasise, the pop, ordinary, generic architecture – I learned a lot about this from Denise Scott Brown.  She introduced me to this idea of the significance of the pop and the ordinary, she corrupted me by taking me to Las Vegas.  And our looking at there.  And at Las Vegas is where I kind of learned about ah, signage is there, signage is relevant, and therefore symbol is part of the architectural and urban vocabulary, that that must be brought back into the vocabulary, the idea of form and symbol – not just form, and form and symbol, and that led to iconography. I wrote a book called Iconography and Electronics Upon a Generic Architecture, that hardly anyone has read or has – it was about 10 years ago – or reviewed, but anyhow… So the idea of the symbolism and the idea of the pop symbolism, the pop culture, is something that we have found very, very stimulating, and that’s why we went to Las Vegas.
You know – by the way, we should mention, and remind people when we say Las Vegas, we are talking of the Las Vegas of 19… of let’s say, circa 1970, when we went there, circa 1970, and it’s not the Las Vegas of today. The Las Vegas of the Strip, when we were there essentially to learn the Urbanism that connected with strip architecture – again, a reaction against the Urbanism of the time, which was based on the Le Corbusier idea, to put it overly simply, of the Ville Radieuse, of the city, made up of a park with plops of high-rise slabs in them. We said, ah, let’s look at the wonderful stimulating city of Los Angeles. We go to Las Vegas to get a purer example of that time, of the strip and the form. So all of this comes into it, and there we were, at the same time connecting with the importance of the pop, of the ordinary, of the generic.

[DSB] There are reasons why I was… long before I came to America, I was taking pictures of signs, from being in England, and at some point we’ll go into that… but when I got to… I was in South Africa in the ‘40s during political turmoil, in England in the early ‘50s during political turmoil. I got to America in ‘58, and it was… how quiescent could you get? I’d never seen students – like the bobby socks – of quiet decorous students that were around at the University of Pennsylvania when I got there.  And within two years the place was in conflagration.  And so there I was in turmoil again, but it… by… it was very familiar to me.  It felt like what university students should be doing.
Well, the uproar in the School of Fine Arts at Penn was to do – it came out of the Planning School –, and my personal belief is that the New Left really started at the University of Pennsylvania Planning School in 1958. It came out of the Old Left there, and from various uprisings.  And, of course, it’s a centrist view, I’m seeing it from where I stood.  But there it was, before the 1960s, and there were many social scientists at Penn from the New Deal era, and from the University of Chicago, just after World War II, there was a planning program very much based on economics and sociology and very gadfly in its criticism of architecture and planning… very galvanising and brilliant people. They couldn’t plan to save their lives, they were critics, they were not builders.
But, so, then a young activist, Paul Davidoff, and a young sociologist Herbert Gans had a great influence on me, and they basically said you need to differentiate between ‘is’ and ‘ought’. You shouldn’t say things ‘are’, when what you mean they ‘ought to be’. Cities ‘are’ for people. Well, you mean, they ‘ought to be’ for people, they’re pretty well not very well for people right now.
And taking it further, architects proclaim what ought to be for everyone, without really knowing what people want. Now that’s called being a visionary. And there is a place in architecture for proclaiming and for being different and for putting your opinion in the mix of opinions, and valiantly fighting for it, but it isn’t when you’re pushing poor people out of their housing so that you can make a very beautiful set of high rise towers that you think of as housing the poor, but is in fact going to house the rich. And so these social scientists said, you architects have middle class values, upper middle class values, and that’s not a bad thing, those aren’t bad values, what’s bad is that you proclaim everyone ought to have them, and you tend to ignore the people who don’t have them, and when they’re very poor people, you cause their lives to go into chaos. You’re not the only part of the problem, but you are part of the problem when you do that, so you need to get wise. Well, one of the things they said was, watch how people don’t use your spaces. They stay away in droves from the architect-designed places. Where do they go? Well, just look, they go to Los Angeles; seem to like it there. They go to Las Vegas; whole lots of them go there. Granted, middle class people too, but not the same ones, and aren’t you going to look around you and learn from the places people actually go to?
And it was with that kind of thinking in mind, that I accepted an invitation to go teach at Berkeley for a semester, and then moved to Los Angeles, to UCLA, where they were starting a new program. And before ever I left though, Bob and I had known each other since 1960, and we had dated. About every two weeks we’d have dinner together and talk, and I was going around in Philadelphia, taking photographs of popular culture, basically. Ads and signs and buildings I liked, and mainly commercial retail, to go along with the industrial that other people had liked in the ‘30s.  And so Bob was very aware of all of this that I was doing. That was the time that Grands was designed, that’s when the signs happened, when he and I were dating, and talking, we eventually taught together.
[RV] Grands Restaurant.
[DSB] Yes. We both… we taught a class… I taught the first semester of the theories class – theories of architecture, landscape, architecture and planning – and ran the seminars and the papers and the work topics for that class. Bob taught the second semester, theories of architecture, and eventually I ran his seminars, theories and… seminar and work topics and reading lists and stuff like that as well, so I ran both sets of seminars. The seminars were to relate the lectures to studio, a very interesting set of combinations which is worth discussing in itself. I think it’s a wonderful way of teaching, and academe should know about it, but meanwhile, it’s the way architects teach. Well, doing that, we collaborated a lot, and then I would take him into studio at night when we had a date, and get him to crit the work of my students. So some urban design students were very happy that they met Bob Venturi in the very early '60s, before he was well known through this process. I think that, that has a lot to do with the last parts of the book, Contemporary and… Complexity and Contradiction and Architecture, because Bob’s reverberating to all of this primarily through me.  He was hearing about what was happening in social planning, and I should add that of all the architects in the school, he was really the only one who did reverberate in sympathy with all this. Lou Khan said you can’t trust social scientists, they believe in 2.5 people.  And the architects just said, how can you hang out with those churlish people who are so critical of us? But for me, it was a very life-giving criticism, even if it was threatening.

[RV] We did do signage in neon in the late 60s, in Grands Restaurant.  It was a renovation, very small job, where we put signage on the walls inside, very big signs, and on the outside we did a sign which was in the form of a cup, a café.  And because of the neighbours’ protests in this neighbourhood, which was not very upper, not at all upper middle class, because of their protests the owners had to remove that cup. We also used in the… in the renovation of a Catholic Church in West Philadelphia, very beautiful church in the Byzantine style, that was the period when the ritual was being changed, or the altar was being moved forward and things of that sort… we accommodated that and then we put – also to help express what we were doing – we put neon, some neon, very gentle touch of neon within the interior.
[DSB] In white, it wasn’t coloured.
[RV] In white, and that also had to be removed after a few months because of the protests of the neighbours.

[DSB] Social sciences said you have to… you have to know more, basically, to do architecture today, particularly urban architecture. And in tough fields for architects, because sociologists and architects don’t mix, it’s quite difficult on both sides. So, the notion of looking at what is – with open eyes – has, I think, been a very creative one in early Modern architecture.  It was called the New Objectivity, and early Modern architects said get away from the 19th century architecture of decoration and styles, and look at what’s happening across the tracks at the railroad stations – not the railroad stations – the factories. Railroad stations were very decorated, although they were a marvellous new building type. But learn from factory architecture, and it’s a question of stripping away, by being objective and looking at what really exists, at what’s real and what’s real for the future.  So that was called the Neue Sachlichkeit, and it was a creative philosophy that kind of went wrong. It led in the end to some rather stultifying, rather dull architecture, at least, Le Corbusier thought so, and it’s had a bad name ever since.
In the 1950s in England, the Brutalists revived it, and I got from them another notion, which says, if you look straight at things, you try to be newly objective.  And they called it the New Objectivity because why would Neue Sachlichkeit be pronounceable even, in England? So at… their new objectivity I suddenly realised was the Neue Sachlichkeit, but made more creative.  And they basically said, if you solve problems very directly according to their real functional needs – now there’s a big debate: who defines function? Every sociologist I know of would have said, you’re defining function architect, are you defining it right, should it be a political method of – should there be a political method of defining function, finding out what people want? But, if you take it that you follow function, well-defined function and you reach a design conclusion that you find incredibly ugly – how could I have designed something so awful?  Live with it a while, and you never know, if it’s the right solution, you may, in fact, find it’s beautiful. And Lou Khan said something similar, he said, ‘You hate it, and you hate it, and you hate it, until you love it because it’s the way it has to be’. Well, if you can live with those ugly messes that you’re producing to solve important problems, maybe you can find a new aesthetic in line with another age, in line with a new social reality. So I have looked at functionalism that way, that I want to be functional for moral reasons, but I also want to be functional for aesthetic reasons, because I think going beyond the ugliness of a good solution, might help you to be a better artist.

[RV] One thing I would like to talk about is the significance of clients in an architect’s work. Speaking of Louis Khan again, he said, ‘For a building to be good, there must be a good… there must be a good client as well as a good architect’, and clients have been so important to us. With some clients we have had difficulties – some we’ve had difficulties – but in the end it turned out okay, but clients have been very important. We have here with us today, a person who is not exactly a client, our dear, dear friend Tom, Thomas Hughes, distinguished historian of technology and science and sociology at the University of Pennsylvania and other places.  But he is also the inhabitant and owner of what’s called my mother’s house, which is a significant building in my life, and I think in architecture in the 20th century, to some extent. That he is the owner of that house, he and his then wife… she since died… Agatha, bought the house from my mother in 1970 it was…
‘73. 
[RV] ’73, that’s right, ‘73, thank you. And after it was sold I thought, oh my God, this is terrible, will this person respect the house and maintain it well?  And I realised then it was a little bit like when an architect turns over his house, or his building, to the client or to the owner, it is a little like turning over a child of yours, to be, oh, a child you don’t maintain, they seem to be adopted and brought up.  And there just could have been no one, no couple of people, who were so good to that house, so understanding over the years.  And something goes wrong, technically there’s a leak or with something like that – not only does Tom Hughes not get mad at the architect, but he also immediately goes to the architect and together we figure out the right way to deal with it. And when we modify the colour of the house on the outside of it, we get together and talk about that very much.  And just the way the house is maintained and used and furnished inside, it is accommodating, and friendly and appropriate.  So Tom we consider extremely important in our lives as architects, and as a friend, because besides architects we are people.

[RV] Well, originally, the exterior of the house which was, and is stucco, you apply a colour to it then, it’s not the natural colour of the material, and originally it was not white, which it probably would have been if I’d been a normal or typical architect of the time, in that Modernist, purist Modernist period.  And it was a kind of analogous, it wasn’t buff, it was kind of an analogous, warm grey, with maybe a touch of mauve in it, and I liked the colour and my mother liked it. I should get back to the part where my mother is client.  But I liked it, and then a couple of years later I was sitting in the library at Yale where I was teaching, and reading a magazine, and in it I saw a quote from the architect…
[DSB] Marcel Breuer.
[RV] Marcel Breuer, a proper Modernist who was then Head of the Department at Yale, who said, you never use green as a colour on the outside of the house. And my immediate reaction was, I’m going to change the house to green.
[DSB] So you see, Bob’s a contrarian from the get go.
[RV] You learn a lot from, sort of, these rules that tell you what you should not do. Sometimes the rules are right, of course. And so I went back and then over the years this green has varied as it gets repainted. There was one period where I didn’t like the green very much, but anyhow it’s back to a green, which I do like, although even now, you know, architects are never… they’re never completely satisfied with what they do. Even now, I would say, I like the green the way it is, but maybe it should be just a little lighter and a little more buffy; a little less explicitly green. But that’s all right, I’m happy. And I think in a way it was nice, because the house was relatively bold as you see it as form, and it’s rather nice to make it kind of analogous to its green-like setting, which is a lawn and trees in a suburb.

[RV] My mother was, and father, were both important to me in many ways, not only as giving birth, having me as a child, but they were just wonderful people. My mother was a – I’ve said that, told this many times – but my mother was the daughter of a poor immigrant Italian family, who could not afford to buy her a winter coat one year when she was in high school, so she had to drop out of high school.  But she was continuing… they did… a teacher who loved my mother continued to educate her on the side. Miss Carol, I know her as, who admired my mother, and my mother later became very educated, self-educated.  She was a… she became a socialist and voted for Norman Thomas every time he ran, the socialist candidate.
[DSB] That’s why Bob sympathised with the social planners.
[RV] That’s about right, undoubtedly. She was a pacifist and she thereby then became a member, a Quaker, a member of the Society of Friends. I was never sent to a public school, because in those days you had to pledge allegiance to the flag, she thought that was coercive patriotism, so I always went to a private school.  But on the other hand, despite all that, she had enormously good taste, she was very interested in dressing well, which usually you don’t think of a socialist woman as going that way.  And the furniture that I grew up with… with my mother and father… what they bought when they were married, was just, and is just fabulous furniture… that was… and I very much considered the house, when I designed it, as a setting for the existing furniture that they had, and there are pictures of that to acknowledge the way it was, and I think she was very happy living in the house, I think she was happy with it.  My father had died by then, and it soon became a place where lots of young architects came to… or architects came to… visit the place from all over.  And she was happy to show them through, and give them a lecture on me as a child, and other things, maybe about socialism.
[DSB] The architecture of the house and the babyhood of its architect.
[RV] God knows. But anyhow, but it was just a… it was a very nice experience to work with that client who was absolutely sympathetic and understanding.
[DSB] Tell them about your father.
[RV] My father, I learned a while back from a historian in Philadelphia who referred to the fruit store designed by Phineas Paste in '99, for Robert Venuri. My father was a fruit merchant, his family came here, he also was born in Italy, but came here.  They started a fruit store, and they were poor at the beginning, and in the end he became quite prosperous, and the fruit store became a, not…
[DSB] A wholesale.
[RV] Became wholesale.  He produced… you know… delivered fruit to restaurants, to hotels, to universities, to institutions, hospitals.  And anyhow, I said, oh, how could that be? In '99 my father was only something like 28 years old, and Phineas Paste would be a very famous and establishment architect, he was one of the architects to design the Belleview Stratford Hotel in Philadelphia. But then I said, ah, he was a friend, and he was… my father was a friend of all the architects in Philadelphia at that time, even though he was… never finished high school and was a fruit merchant.
[DSB] He wanted to be an architect.
[RV] He wanted to be an architect. The building was never built, that he designed for my father, but eventually there was a warehouse designed for my father in 1922, when it was a wholesale business, and that was designed by a well known… a local architect named Edwin Brumbaugh.  They both loved architecture, he wanted to be an architect, and they probably influenced me directly and indirectly, but from the very beginning I wanted to be an architect. I can never remember when I did not want to be an architect. I can still drive through streets that were on the way to kindergarten, when I went to kindergarten, and point out my favourite buildings along the way, houses that I… that I liked.

[RV] We lived then in a suburb called Upper Derby, to the South West of Philadelphia, and then after that they moved to… my father died… no, no, then they, while he was still alive they moved to German town, which is another suburb within Philadelphia.  And then after my father died I built the house for… oh then they, then they moved to the mainline, in Rosemont, Pennsylvania, where they lived in a very nice colonial revival house by a well known architect, and then eventually I built the house for my mother in Chestnut Hill, so the evolution of where they lived was interesting, and she was… as I said… always interested in that environment.
[DSB] It was a standing joke at Penn, that Bob Venturi was designing a house for his mother, because it went on for so long, so that the student skits in the architecture school would be Bob Venturi continually designing this house, and re-designing, and re-designing. Now you can see the models of those successive designs at MOMA, and it’s a very, very moving site, because he obviously starts from the sketches and models as a Khan groupie, and over those years he taught himself his trade in architecture as he does it.  And you see his full fledged ideas in the final house, and I maintain that just about everything we’ve ever done since, you’ll find in embryo in that house. The street through the building, the decoration on the shed, the civic façade on one side and the private on the other side, the mixture of, and love of, Le Corbusier and Palladio, with a shot of Michelangelo in there, all his heroes, everything is, a little bit of Alvar Aalto in the back too, exciting I think it’s… I think it’s a very Urbanistic house. Bob was looked upon as an architect’s architect at Penn, not an Urbanist. I felt he was more Urbanistic than most of the ones called Urbanist who, in my sense, were doing large-scale architecture. So it’s a very exciting small building with a huge shadow behind it, shadow of two important parents, and a shadow of its future. It’s a funny way to put it, but the shadow is what happened since.

[RV] The house, of course, itself is an interesting subject, and the house was enormously understood, it was considered Postmodern…
[DSB] Misunderstood.
[RV] Enormously misunderstood, and it was Postmodern, as being Postmodern. I love quoting, at Columbia last week, or two weeks ago where I… I referred to a cover of a magazine where I am… there’s a photograph of me and there’s a quote saying, ‘I am not a Postmodernist, and I have never been a Postmodernist’, or a communist.  But anyway.
[DSB] That was the famous statement that was made at the House Un-American Affairs Committee [sic] by all those people who were accused by McCarthy, and so Bob was quoting that statement.  That might not be known by an audience outside America.
[RV] That… but with the house, I just… it does contain many, many, many qualities that are contradictory in a way.  It has the idea of layers, the façade are layers, in a sense, that go in two… two directions. Not to be pretentious, but I learned a lot from the Villa Savoye, which is my favourite building of the 20th century… from that… which in a sense is a square, a layer that made a square building, so different from this one.  It’s just, it just has two parallel layers, and then, but it’s a layer where there’s one thing on the outside – quite consistent symbolism and form – and then inside you saw all the complexities of a house behind.  The juxtaposition of two things – that is where with your house, my mother’s house, where it has a rather consistent form on the outside, and then you see complexities on the inside, which is in a way the essence of a house.  So it’s designing not from the inside out, but only, it’s the inside out and the outside in, are both involved in that.
Were you writing Complexity and Contradiction, the book, when you were designing the house?
[RV] Yes, they were paralleling each other at that time, it was very funny that that was happening.
[DSB] And that was 1962, '63, '64.
[RV] Yes, we moved in… I moved in with my mother in April '64.  But the… also, the… there’s also the, the beautiful house that I love called the… in Bristol, Rhode Island… forget the name of the family of the house, but it’s by McKim Meade and White, which is again where the sloping roof is not on the side of the house, but on the front, and therefore it’s a very long sloping façade. It was a much more, much bigger house than my mother’s house. I learned from that. I wanted to get the idea of the house as shelter, and the idea as shelter had absolutely gone out, it was space and not shelter. So that indicates shelter.

[RV] Then there was also the building which I really adored, another different kind of building. I have a very kind of taste that is, very extended, and that’s the Castle…
[DSB] Drogo.
[RV] No.
[DSB] Not that one?
[RV] No, the one in… by… in England, by Hawksmoor and Sir… what’s his name… oh my God, what’s the name of that house, I’ll think of it later. When I went to Europe the first time I took a liner that arrived in Liverpool on a Sunday morning. I took the train to London, got there Sunday evening, on Saturday, I got there on a Saturday evening. I went to the hotel, woke up the next morning in the hotel, and it was Sunday in August, I said, London will not be interesting in August on a Sunday, so I’m going to go out to Oxford for the day.  So I took the train to Oxford, and just was flabbergasted by the beautiful combinations of buildings in Oxford, and then I realised, ah, I’m in Northern Europe, it will be still light at ten o clock at night, so I took a bus to this Castle, this very famous…
[DSB] Howard?
[RV] Baroque building. Is it the Castle Howard? God, I’ll think of it. Very famous Baroque building… and part of that building… so that was my first day in Europe, I went to that building, and that is a place it has a broken pediment, and that broken pediment inspired…
[DSB] Blenheim.
[RV] Blenheim Palace.
[DSB] Blenheim is what you’re thinking about, yes.
[RV] The broken, the broken pediment inspired the house where, through which you could look and see different things happening in your house, or in the mother’s house. So there was that influence, and very much the Villa Savoye… I went to the Villa Savoye later on that trip, so…
[DSB] There’s Mannerist also in it.
[RV] Also Mannerist, yes.
[DSB] In these juxtapositions.
[RV] That’s right, these are Mannerist buildings.
[DSB] Particularly the… that big roof which spans the wrong way, because usually you span a house across it’s shorter span, so the roof is suggesting you spanning it across the long span.
[RV] Your house and my mother’s house also has the first window of the mid 20th century, because windows went out of fashion. You, you either had an absence of wall in a modern building, or you had maybe a strip window. She’s never had a window like a window, and I even put that in it, and so that was the first window to come back. I knew I was being negative and wrong, and therefore right. The… so anyhow, and then I had this explicit ornament, just a touch of ornament on the façade where there’s a slight arch, that’s juxtaposed on the non-arch opening… of the opening. So, but I think to get back again to the trip, it does indicate how much I was influenced by and loved history of modern architecture, and that goes back, I don’t know where it begins, probably with my father and mother who loved history. 
And then I went to a university called Princeton, which was probably the only university at the time where architects studied history. History was out, you went to Harvard or MIT, you did not study history, unless you were some kind of pervert maybe, who would maybe take it on the side. So, I loved history, and of course, that trip was very important to me to look at historical architecture in England, France and Italy where I travelled, and which I learned very much from. So that first part of my life there as an architect, was… I was loving historical architecture, which at that, in that context, was naughty and wrong.  Then the second part was, I was learning, I was loving Las Vegas, and learning from Las Vegas, and the ordinary pop culture of the time. And those were two important influences, which affected me. There’s really not much pop in your house, I hadn’t really got to that yet, too much, but… but it is important that there’s… that that be acknowledged in the mother’s house which I still love.
[DSB] Did you mention the…
[RV] One thing I’m really mad about, was when I was designing the house, there’s the front façade, I used eight inch concrete block that was stuccoed over, and I said, ‘Oh, I really should make this 12inch block, but I’m going a little bit over the budget, and I don’t want to do that for my mother’s sake’, so I left it at eight inches, and every time I look at that as you go round the bend that should be a wider, more vital element of the house, and I made a mistake by not going over the budget to do that.  C’est la vie.
[DSB] Did you mention the influence of Furness in the nowhere stair?
[RV] Yes, in… in the house, in your house and my mother’s house I, for some reason, wanted very much to follow a New England tradition where in the center of the house you have the chimney, the fireplace and the chimney, and then the stairway goes around it. Very different from Pennsylvania in the 19th, in the 18th and 17th century, and so that’s… I did that in your house.  Then as the stair goes to the second storey, there is also a nowhere stair that goes up to a blank wall and that stair is there partly as perverse expression architecturally, but also as partly a way, maybe, to wash the windows, so the high clear storey windows.
[DSB] You never do that.
Never. I don’t think you did it in order to wash windows.
[RV] I thought I had to have a function, and that I think I really was influenced by having lived in it almost, or worked a lot, in the great Frank Furness Library. Frank Furness…
[DSB] At Penn.
[RV] At Penn, at which, which was… Frank Furness was a Victorian architect who was despised and hated until, until the '60s, where he came back into fashion, and a lot of his architecture has been removed in Philadelphia.  He did many banks there, he was very prosperous, a very successful architect. But he was an architect who brought us together… Denise, I tell the story a lot… where Denise’s first faculty meeting, when she has been just the year before a student, and was a member of the faculty.  I was a young faculty member, and I had naturally noticed her as a student but we had never met, and at that meeting the subject was, should the School of Architecture take a stand against the demolition of the Furness building, which was being considered by the university.  Imagine such a thing.
[DSB] Which, which building, which of Furness’?
[RV] The Great… the Great, the library at Penn, that the central… later it no longer… later it became the Art Library, it was then the Central Library. A great building of the 20th, 20th century. Denise… or the, of the 19th century. Denise made a great plea that the School of Architecture should take a stand and save this building because it had great quality. Afterwards I… and fortunately they voted to do that. Afterwards I went up and I said, I want to, I want to, I want to tell you how much I agreed with what you said about the Furness building, and I introduced myself, my name is Robert Venturi, and her first words were, why didn’t you say something? So, been like that ever since.

[RV] I should mention that part of the Library that my mother left to me was Bernard Shaw writing.  She loved Bernard Shaw as a… a socialist, what do you call a socialist who is a non…
[DSB] Fabian.
[RV] Fabian Socialists, and who are the other Fabian Socialists who wrote, I don’t know…
[DSB] The Webb’s.
[RV] The Webb’s, yes, so she had all these books that she was… had become an expert on. Mention rather quickly is… I… I, my life does not contain very many moments of… what do you call a moment of quick and um?
[DSB] Epiphany.
[RV] Epiphanies at all.  I don’t like epiphanies but there was one, where after I had lived in Rome for two years at the American Academy in the '50s, and I was about to leave Rome, suddenly it occurred to me in my studio at the academy, that I really was a Mannerist, that I really loved Mannerism.  It wasn’t the Baroque Rome, it was Mannerist Rome which was really, really a kind of – kind of tricky – which was… which was really fun.

[RV] Right after the Mother house or during the end of it, I did get a partner, at that time… was the firm of Cope and Lippincot who were also Quakers, going way back. We got a Quaker institution called Guild House, which is housing for the elderly, which is now considered a famous building. It’s now very nicely being restored, getting new windows that are appropriate for the environmental issues of today and things like that. Anyhow, that building was unusual… in that one… it was not a… in terms of how we designed it, and this was accepted by the wonderful client. And any other architect at that time would have done a kind of Le Corbusier slab, would’ve put it back from the street, sort of on a park. We made it not a slab; we… we said we want to give it a plan where a lot of the rooms inside could have double exposure, not just looking out one way, could have…
[DSB] Corner windows.
[RV] Corner windows.  And that gave it an unusual shape, with corner windows. On the other hand it was ordinary in that it was brick, which was related to the neighbourhood – analagous to it – and it went right up to the street. It had a big sign on it saying Guild House which was unheard of. It had a column right in the middle as you entered, which made for a duality which was unheard of, and maybe the most unheard of thing was that it had sculpture at the top, in the form of a TV antenna. And I said something that I wish I hadn’t said, it was a little – I feel a little like the Pope right now – was a little… not mistaken, not taken, it was tactless, I said that the TV antenna is kind of a symbol of old people who spend their time looking at TV.
[DSB] Not only old people look at TV.
[RV] But, anyhow, it was a lovely piece of sculpture and now it’s in… and it was taken down because people didn’t like it after a few months.  Okay, so it’s now going back up again, it’s now understood and it’s going back up again and it’s sculpture, it isn’t a real TV antenna. And it’s so good that the building is being appreciated and being restored and being brought up to date in terms of this – of the needs of today. It’s mostly the work of a Quaker organisation that I forget the name of, but it’s something like the Friend something, something, something; and they are paying for it and doing it and I am very grateful and I should know their name.
[DSB] Not the Friends Neighbourhood Guild?
[RV] No, not the Friends Neighbourhood Guild itself. And so, that was a terrific opportunity that was appreciated at the time, more or less, and it is now very much appreciated. At the same time also, we were working at New York University where we were restoring the famous mansion by the architect Horace Trumbauer, in the… it was built around 1912 for the Duke family, the tobacco family. And Doris Duke gave this building to NY University, to the Institute of Fine Arts, which is the Art History Department. And we got this job through a dear friend of mine whom I’d known at the American Academy in Rome; he was an art historian on the staff. And that building was not very spectacular in terms of what we did. We very carefully accommodated the existing architecture, changed it as little as possible, did apply appropriate Modernist things, such as book shelving that is… that is generic book shelving, book shelving for institutions but it is floating out from the panelling on the walls. And that was… they were nice clients and that was a help and that helped us to have… that was our first institutional client, back then. So, those were important to mention, especially the Guild House.  I also did the FDR Memorial Competition, which I did not win, but it’s so much like the… the… what is the war memorial?
[DSB] The Maya Lin?
[RV] The Maya Lin.
[DSB] The Vietnam…
[RV] The Vietnam War Memorial. Hers was like what I did earlier, but mine was bigger in scale and had a lot of iconography, but unfortunately it did not win. Anyhow, then I was teaching, teaching, teaching, to help me, you know, keep the practice going. And then at a certain point – Denise might have pointed out, but skipped over it – that around 1970 we decided to give up teaching, because we decided it was hard to do both at the same time, it was getting too complex. You either be a teacher or an architect, we decided to get into architecture, so we resigned from Yale, already had resigned from Penn.

[DSB] I left for Berkeley in 1965, January '65, and I went on my way, to Las Vegas. I knew it was something I should visit, and then when I started teaching at UCLA it was a new program and I was able to set up an inter-disciplinary faculty and teach studio the way I wanted, with transportation people and social scientists, and architects and lawyers and all of this around studio, and we also had a good budget for visitors.  So I had some of my colleagues to come out and talk to my students, and one of these was Bob Venturi, and he came and stayed in my cottage in Santa Monica.  And I had been all over, taking photographs of popular culture in… well in Las Vegas and in Los Angeles.  And I gave the students a four day sketch design and took Bob Venturi to Las Vegas, because I knew he’d want to see it.
[RV] We should mention of course that Pop Art existed in America at that time, in the early '60s, and I wasn’t… I didn’t particularly admire pop art, until later, when I was introduced to Denise, to the pop culture, and it was architectural, and then I went back loving Andy Warhol and those, those guys, and we have some of their work in our house now.
[DSB] It’s interesting…
[RV] Not the expensive work, the… the prints.
[DSB] When… when Bob and I first married we had a big argument, because I said, ‘The artists are at last catching up with the architects’, meaning the pop artists, and Bob said, ‘What do you mean?  They are leading the way’. And I said, ‘No they aren’t, they’re following what we had done’.
Well, I later realised, and he realised, that there was a whole phase of pop art going on in England, that Americans didn’t know about. Now they do, and now people talk to me about the Independent Group and my experience with the Brutalists, in 1953 or so in England.  But around that was a… a group of early pop artists, like Paolozzi and another one whose name I never remember, who were taking American popular culture and using it artistically in different ways, and then there were architects who followed, including the Archigram Group.  Although they didn’t use it the way any reputable social scientist would have liked, they did use its imagery in mega structures.  And so all of that was part of the culture I brought with me. You’ll find also my photographs of South Africa shows storefronts and neon and things like that, as well as photographs from Europe, before ever getting here. So, I was really prepared to look for and like popular culture in America, and Bob used to say about me, as we were driving around in Philadelphia, that I saw things that he who was born there, had never seen, had never noticed, had taken it as background. I, on the other hand, was very intrigued by what he knew about 19th century and early 20th century Philadelphia suburban residential architecture. I found that very fascinating. We had a lot to share, when we met, for reasons to do with my previous experience. I was contrarian in the same way he was about ‘is’ and ‘ought’ and about breaking the rules.
This wasn’t only teenage rebellion, it… I have other things that I’ll recount later in it. We also shared a great interest in Mannerism, which was a more organised interest in England and Europe. Bob discovered it for himself in Rome.  The architects and professors I had in England and then the people in… in Europe that I met, were very involved with Mannerism and were reading about it avidly.  And so we both likened Mannerism to breaking the rules in Modernism, and wanted to find ways to do it ourselves. And then we shared popular culture, and then we shared this other interesting fact that Bob brings out… that he is an Italian American who’s been made a Quaker by his upwardly mobile parents, and I say it wasn’t upward mobility, it was vertical take off with them, and he gets sent to prep schools and Princeton and all of that. I have a similar background for being Jewish in Africa, in… born in Zambia, but then I’m growing up in South Africa, and so we… I describe us both by the sociological term, marginal man, but I’m going to say marginal person because I’m also a feminist.  But a marginal person – the first one was Moses in the Bible – is born to one tribe, is adopted into another, is eventually turned down by the one he was adopted by, and goes back and leads his own people out of… through the exodus, out of Egypt and into a promised land. Well, the notion that the marginal person has a skew view of life, isn’t part of one culture or another, is part in each.  And this can be seen as an oppression, and I felt it as an oppression as a child, because of… basically persecution, one way or another. But I later got to realise that it’s a great advantage. I say, ‘If that conflict is in the sea of my being, if it’s the way I really, really am, how can I use it creatively?’ And that’s the leadership that we offer: the creative use of a conflict.  And I think Bob and I both have that thing.

[DSB] My mother’s family were born mainly in Latvia, and my father’s family in Lithuania, except his mother. Now, there may be 30 miles of difference between the places, but these differences were big, and I learnt in America the [Lithuan] Jews were known for their remarkable scholarship. I always saw them as more gross than the Latvian Jews. I was amused to hear Sydney Brenner speak, because he too used that word, Peruvian, and told me its origins. It didn’t mean from… gross people from Peru, it meant people who belonged to… it was a Yiddish acronym… of people from Eastern Europe who were looked upon as crude in general by all the German Jews, who were much more enlightened, and more educated and richer.  So Brenner describes in very moving terms, an experience which I find charming and familiar, except his family came later and were, by the time he was born, poorer than mine were when I was born. Mine were already more upwardly mobile than his, and I too was given private school educations and made to feel part in and part out of my group, and told…
In South Africa?
[DSB] In South Africa, and told to manage in both. Made to feel you must manage in both, and I think this is a demand that Jewish parents make on their children, and Italian parents some of them too, and it makes you unsettled, and it makes you, in the end, if you can escape the problems of it, or ride the hurdles carrying all your problems along, you can maybe have a pretty creative life with it. My grandmother on my mother’s side was born into a family where the father had already gone to Africa, and she had… the mother had many children, and the father died in Africa. That was the thing, they died of disease; two generations died of disease, so many of them. Being an immigrant is a terribly, terribly burdensome thing, and they put everything into their children. Get their children over their heads; you see Bob’s parents doing it, my grandparents doing it.  But my grandmother was therefore given for adoption to a rich family in Riga, so she grew up an elegant and beautiful, and for the time, well educated, but not in formal education, young woman. And…
[RV] In Riga?
[DSB] In Riga. Now this is the province of Kurland, in Latvia, and they were German speaking, although my grandmother spoke what she called Lettish, which is Latvian, and Russian. Not much Yiddish. They disdained Yiddish. The Lithuanians maybe didn’t disdain Yiddish. So then her husband to be, Willy… Willy Hepker, had already left Kurland for South West Africa, which was German speaking, and he was a great horseman, he was a very… you see in the pictures of him, oh, was he handsome! And standing in front of a mud hut, but looking like an American, in American kind of garb, very elegant. And, by the way, they spoke such beautiful English.  Where they learnt that… I really think, by the way, that Sidney Brenner is wrong in saying his father was uneducated and did not read. I’m sure he read Yiddish very, very well, he just didn’t read English. That’s not uneducated. Uneducated is having no books when you grow up, coming out of slavery having a huge problem to find an education, because there’s no one before you who had one. That’s uneducated. But this tradition that our people brought, and Bob’s people brought, there were books all round Bob as he grew up. Books of architecture in Italy, we’ve still got them. So, from that point of view, my grandmother was this elegant young lady, and Willy wrote from home and said, send me Ellie. Now, Ellie was not Becky, my grandmother, and Ellie was just engaged. So he said, ‘Oh well, I’ll take Becky’. And Becky said, ‘The hell he will, I won’t go’. And then she says, ‘I’m not going to Africa’. But anyway, they prevailed upon her, and she landed at Cape Town, and he went up from… living where he then was, Northern Rhodesia, now Zambia, to meet her, and saw her and fell in love. And then she was taken, this elegant young woman with the housewifely arts of Riga, to live in real primitive surroundings in a mine camp, which is… my grandfather was… well he was a mixture, he was a tobacco farmer, a cattle farmer, and then eventually a miner, and a ne’er do well in everything he did. Nothing ever succeeded. All his relatives did well and he did not. And there was Becky, this elegant young woman living in, in the veld, in a mud hut and making elegance around her, and in true fashion, if you’ve ever seen The Flame Trees of Thika, which is about British – the ‘right stuff’ people – in Kenya, that’s what my grandmother did in Northern Rhodesia. The grand piano came by ox wagon over the dry sluits as they call them, sluits which are dry-bedded rivers, the river runs dry.  They took the grand piano that way to the house. We had, in Switzerland where my mother and father lived the last 30 years of their life, the teapot that she had in Rhodesia, the Georgian teapot that is silver, made in Birmingham. And it was that kind of mixture, and she became, from an elegant young Latvian woman, she became very, very English, and she talked about going home to England, and I was a xenophobe from an African culture which said, the ‘ought’ of Europe, and the ‘ought’ of England in particular, does not apply to me in Africa.
So here was my grandmother saying, ‘Going home in England’, and I’d say, ‘She’s never even, she wasn’t even born in England’.  But she did live there, and so, she, from… she used to say, ‘When I first got to Rhodesia, I used to serve wine when guests came, and then I later changed to serving tea the way the English did’. And then my mother and her brothers – there were five of them, though one died very young and another died later – they grew up in this wilderness on this farm, where my grandfather tried to be a cattle merchant and a tobacco farmer.
And they were known as the wild children, and they didn’t have schools nearby, so my grandparents imported governesses from Europe, and my mother in fact learned to speak French in Northern Rhodesia from an English governess who’d lived many years in Switzerland, and then later from a governess from France. So when she went to live the rest of her life in Switzerland in 1961, which she did, surrounded by the sepia photographs pinned up on the walls, of her life in Africa – she just died in 2003, surrounded by all of this – an amazing life.  But she spoke the French she’d learnt as a child for the rest of her life.

[DSB] My father’s two… his father and his uncle left and went to what was called the… you see, in Yiddish the word was Medina, for the kind of place you were going from Eastern Europe… well, they went to the wilderness one in Africa, and his two other brothers went to the golden one in America.  So we have brothers and second cousins in America from that divergence of the two.  And they would arrive on the docks in Cape Town with a few shillings in their hands, having worked to earn the fine… so that their family, when they left and didn’t… didn’t have to be pressed into the Russian army for 15 years – conscription was 15 years and more. So they escaped that, and they left the money to pay the fine. My grandfather had already been a timber merchant at the age of 12 in Eastern Europe. This was normal, and one uncle arrived at the age of nine, in Africa. He was met by an English lady in… wherever, at Liverpool, they went via Hamburg to Liverpool, and then Liverpool to Africa or America, depending what you could afford sometimes. So he was… because he was so young, someone met him and put him on the boat, and then he arrived and he travelled through lion country, apparently alone, till he got to Johannesburg, and my grandfather arrived with a few shillings in his pocket. They lived, they went steerage and they got food from some first class passengers, and sometimes not so much, and then they… he worked on the docks to get enough money to go inland, and he got to Johannesburg just as the Boer War was starting. And he seems to have lived in a boarding house there, run by Jews who’d got there earlier, and the daughter in the boarding house was the woman he married.  And there’s a beautiful photograph, he had a pretty nice wedding in Johannesburg at that point. He was, by that time, doing rather well, my grandfather. There’s even a building in Johannesburg that I saw in the Indian market area, it was called Lakofski's Building, that’s my grandfather’s building.

[DSB] I was well educated in Johannesburg; I have to be very grateful for the school they sent me to, mainly ‘personned’ by English ex-pats, not manned, because they were all women – and these great teachers, some of them I thank in the preface of our book, Architecture, Signs and Systems – and the school was a model of liberalism, but the culture was very English. And South Africa had Afrikaans culture, English speaking culture, and Jewish culture, but then also the textbooks and the kind of… what prevailed was English, and then we had also American – Hollywood movies, and American ex-pats – but the English were more prevalent, and so that affected me, because there’s a feeling of patriotism in South Africa, shared by a lot of people. Even if you don’t agree with the country, it’s not my country right or wrong, it’s my country wrong, but I love it. And I am going to protect it, and defend it, and help it to be what it should be. Put right, if you want to say, but, so there was that sort of feeling, and it ended up with a real love of the landscape, for one thing. And also, the sense that, we’re being told how we ought to be by these English, they tell us our children are less well-educated, we don’t know manners. My grandmother kept saying, ‘The poor little children in England wish they had your spinach’. I’d say, ‘They can have it’. And so, in the middle of all of that, I noticed particularly, English people who would say, ‘Well, it’s better in England and you should buy British’, and during the war you wanted to, to help the English, but what’s wrong with the things we make? And look how different they are. And then what’s wrong with our landscape? I remember someone pointing out my beautiful bushveld landscape, and she found a piece of it, about this big, and she said, ‘That could be a little bit of Surrey’ – and I’ve taken that, not trying to produce Surrey in South Africa, why would you? It’s ecologically not a good idea. We were into ecology long before this culture was taught how to think about architecture that orients correctly for the sun, and also of questions of passive sustainability, you know, by the use of masonry materials and, you know, etc, etc. So, thinking, there’s an African way to be, there’s an African way to build, let’s look around us and see what that is, and learn from it. So I say, ‘My view of Las Vegas is an African view of Las Vegas’, because I brought just that same attitude.

[DSB] So as an African xenophobe, I say that my view of Las Vegas is an African view. I take that same outlook that I developed as a child. I was really eight or nine years old and I was fighting my grandmother you see, amongst other things. Oh, I should add one other point, we had a… growing up in Johannesburg in the ‘40s there were lots of German refugees and these were fascinating people. I had music lessons from three different refugees – we had an art teacher who was a Jewish refugee and many others. They brought a fascinating cosmopolitan sophistication to artistic life in Johannesburg and their paintings are interesting as painters and architecture was interesting; some of them who were there as well. But this Rosa Van Gelderen, I later saw her name, or a Van Gelderen listed in the lists of people who had Swiss bank accounts that were appropriated by the Swiss banks, when they published the names there was a Van Gelderen… obviously that same family. Well Rosa Van Gelderen used to say… she used to run a painting class outside of school where you could paint anything you wanted. And she gave poster paints and big thick brushes and large pieces of paper and little kids were just told paint what you want, express yourself. But of course she did direct you inconspicuously so you painted sort of socialist themes and things about Africans. And she said, you won’t be creative artists if you don’t paint what’s around you. And that was the theme, a really important theme for me. And so for her, painting what’s around you, was street life of Africans in Johannesburg looking very picturesque, selling flowers and things like that. For me it became… I have a marvellous slide of a store in Zululand in Natal and it’s a country store and it’s made of wood and iron and it has a big English sign on its roof, ‘Five Roses Tea’, a big American sign on its roof ‘Coca-Cola’ and then a big Zulu sign telling you here you will get these things and these other things. And then it has blankets from Manchester and bicycles all around it and there’s a real mixed message, mixed metaphor, multicultural communication system going right on there in this bedraggled old store. Redolent of African way of life. Well that was my thing I wanted to paint. In fact, I photographed it.

[RV] We moved into the house… we moved in… my mother and I moved together into the house, I was still a bachelor, on April 1st 1940 and… no, 1964, I’m sorry. In 1964, and in 1964 I was… I was born in 1925 so that meant I was…
[DSB] 29.
[RV] 39.
[DSB] 39, that’s right.
[RV] 39, when I moved in. So yeah, architects get… you know, architects… it’s an old man’s profession, you get to start… you get to do your work late in life. If you’re a painter you can paint, you might be starving but you can still paint. When you’re an architect and you get the building built you have to do it… you have to… you get to do it late.
 

[RV] When I moved in with my mother at that age of 39, I had been living not with my parents or my mother, off and on for a long time. I lived for two and a half years in Detroit when I was working for Eero Saarinen. I lived in two years in Rome. I was in Princeton when I was teaching for a while. So, I wasn’t totally living with my parents all that time. But when it made sense to do so for the sake of economy and otherwise, I did it.
But did you choose to live with your mother or did you choose to live with the house? It must have been both.
[RV] It was both I think, you’re right.
[DSB] And in fact, when we were first married, we had an apartment but it took us a time to get it fixed and we lived up in that room above the…
That’s what, in the studio room.
[DSB] Yes.  And for me, of course, it was very strange because I’d been living away from home since I was 20. And having someone to send us off in the morning and say, ‘Have a good day at work, dear’, was a strange sensation for me. But living under that roof was like living under a tent. I’d go out on the back porch in the morning and comb my hair. That was just a wonderful experience.
And how long did… how long did you live in the house? I never quite… I never quite understood how long you were in the house.
[RV] Well if I moved in, in the year ’60… ‘64, I moved out…
[DSB] ’68.
[RV] ’68. I guess I lived there four years.
[DSB] And then your mother left in ’73.
 [RV] She left in ’73, yeah.
 [DSB] And did you welcome many visitors to the house, people coming to see the house? Architects?
[RV] Yes, there were… there were from the beginning lots of architects that came to visit the house. As Denise pointed out, my mother loved to show them through and give them lectures on architecture, and me and all that. I remember once when we were in Europe visiting the Villa Savoye. This was around, I don’t know when it was.
[DSB] About three years ago.
[RV] No, it was many more years. It was about 10 years ago. But the Villa Savoye and we were walking around. It was in a kind of public building, like a museum and we… there were some architects who happened to be Japanese who were also visiting the Villa Savoye and they came up and said, ‘Are you Robert Venturi?’ And I said, ‘Yes’. And they said, ‘Oh, well we were visiting your mother’s house last week’. That made me happy. They go from my mother’s house to the Villa Savoye.

[DSB] It became an icon almost immediately. You see there was something happening in Philadelphia and journalists called it The Philadelphia School. And they ballyhooed it and everyone denied belonging to it but there it was. And it was in Progressive Architecture and they shared…
You mean the house?
[DSB] Not the house. The Philadelphia School. And they had pictures of Bob and Tim Vreeland and Lou Kahn and, etc., etc. So he was looked upon as a comer already just like that, because of those articles.
This is in the ‘60s?
[DSB] ‘60s, yes. And then, I remember when I was at UCLA and I met an architect there and he was showing me some buildings. He didn’t know I knew Bob and this was 1965. And he said, ‘I’m just sick of seeing that house in print everywhere’.
Yes. That early? In ‘65?
[DSB] Yes, yes. I was probably even before that.
I believe that there was a two-page spread in the New York Times of the house at one point, on one occasion.
[DSB] Yes.
[RV] I’ve carefully kept a… a track of… what’s the word? A…
[DSB] Publicity?
[RV] Well a track of all the articles. Bill Whitaker is dealing with that. And so, it’s a huge list of all the publications.  
In the ‘60s?
[RV] All over. It’s still… but mostly then, I guess. But, but at the same time, Philadelphia didn’t have money. I didn’t get any work in Philadelphia as a result of becoming a famous architect of a famous building in Philadelphia.
 

[DSB] Sydney Brenner was at Wits when I was there and it’s touching to hear he was even younger when he got there than I was because I had just turned 16 and therefore was one or two years younger than most. But he was 15. And that’s pretty impressive. By the time I got there, he was already a medical student. And he was getting to be interested in palaeontology. And I was quite involved also. We used to go up to Makapan, the same place the medical students went to dig for fossils. And I knew many of the people he knew, but I didn’t actually meet him. A friend… a slight acquaintance at that time was Phillip Tobias who became a famous anatomy professor following Dr Dart whom he mentioned, and also a great political leader. He deserves to be better known. He is also the medical person who persuaded the South African doctors to admit that Stephen Biko had indeed been killed. When he was here at Penn, it’s a great pity, no one knew that. They should have had him talking to their medical ethics program rather than only to their palaeontology people at the museum. But, so that’s the interesting connections of this sort. Another person who probably had a rather similar childhood to Brenner was Slovo, Joe Slovo. And his experience of being very, very poor and Jewish and living in a multiracial area, unusual in South Africa and reserved for poor people, probably is another parallel. It’s interesting the numbers of South Africans who move out and up and into fascinating places in the rest of the world.

[DSB] In your fourth year in Architecture School you were required to work in an architect’s office. It had been that you could go study the antiquities of Rome and Greece or work in an architect’s office. And then, with the war, both those options became just the one option and straight after the war people started to go overseas again. But this time, not to study in Greece and Rome but to work in architect’s offices. So in 1952, I left South Africa to spend my fourth year in an architect’s office in London. Little did I think I would never go back. I had left a fellow architecture student, Robert Scott Brown in South Africa and I was in love with him and he with me so we were going back. And I got to London, and there was still rationing in London. And it was that time when the socialist government was in… in London and the plan of London was being executed to put a green belt round the whole city and then move the bombed people from East End particularly, out into new towns in the country. And there were also many socialist-type expenditures on human needs. Huge amount of housing was being rebuilt in and out of London, and scholarships and education in general and, etc. I got myself a place to live and I got myself a job with Frederick Gibberd. And I also couldn’t start the job for about three weeks so I went to Paris for two weeks. I had a wonderful time roaming around in Paris by myself. And then came back and went to the office but also visited the Architectural Association in London. That was a very famous school and I knew about it when I lived in South Africa and I’d seen some of its publications in South Africa. And I’d been told by the man I was working for that it was the place that produced two pantomimes a year and a great deal of hot air. So I didn’t have much to say for the AA. But I thought, well I’d go visit them anyway, and then when I was visiting, I said to them, ‘Well, I had thought maybe of coming here but I think not’, I was saying. And she said, ‘There’s an entrance exam on Wednesday, take the test’. So, sight unseen, I took a test and got in. Then it seemed as if fate was pushing me and so I decided I’d stay. And Robert would finish Architecture School in South Africa and try to join me after that.
So I lost nine months because of changing from an academic year that starts in February to one that starts in September. And I could also go travelling in Europe, which I did again on my own. Joined up with some AA students in Sweden at the end of that time. And came back ready to start school in London but in a considerable swirl, I had a crisis of confidence. And so I entered the AA and in a way, it made my way of thinking about architecture again. Now there was social crisis going on in England too. The play Look back in Anger opened in the West End and a group of us students went to see it. And when the curtain opened and we looked out on our lives, and everyone in that audience more or less burst out laughing because it was a typical student’s apartment of that day and age. Huge mess and then of course the character, I forget his name now, he is one of these people who because of the socialist government’s liberal education policy got to go to university. As he said, ‘My university was not red brick, it was yellow brick’. Now red brick were looked upon as the socialist universities, yellow brick was beneath the pale. And his… his outcry against the world was part of our lives.
And at the AA where I was, the place was in two: the scholarship students who were very, very bright and if you got a scholarship to the AA not your local art school, that was because you were very, very bright indeed. But then those people had a chip on their shoulders because they moved in among the rich and the privileged and they weren’t all that respected. So the other ones, the ones who went to English public schools kind of didn’t talk to them. And there were a few rebels from the public schools in amongst the brilliant scholarship students. And we colonials – they once said the English have very lax rules for gardeners and colonials. Everyone else has to meet another standard. So I could move between these different groups and note their… the sadness of it all and not only that, one-upmanship was part of the society. The book had recently come out whose name I don’t remember about… what did they call it? It was a way of looking at the world where you tried to one up other people particularly in a social sphere. And, I forget the name of the book, but it was a bestseller at that time. And I had thought that he had invented it, the whole system, but I found at the AA, he had merely codified it. It was in juries, it was between students, it was even within the groups that were meant to be friends with each other. They’d still get on top of each other in that way and push each other down. And we found it really very dissatisfying.

[DSB] Well, in the middle of all this I was trying be an architecture student and worried about my talents… and did I have any talents?  And a few things happened: I went into a blue fit for my first design, which was for a… it was landscape design for Primrose Hill, a very beautiful park north of Regent’s Park. And people liked what I did and that helped a great deal. They thought it was imaginative. And I found the history lectures very interesting and useful from that point of view. And I started attending all the lectures of John Summerson who was… I attended his lectures at the AA twice. Again that gave Bob and me a lot in common when we met. And then, I did not too badly on some other designs.  And I was one girl to 12 men. Every school I had been in to date… until the very end at Penn, after I’d already left Penn… that the, the ratio started to change. But otherwise it was one in 12. One woman to every 12 men. And that ratio got me a lot of attention. I liked it. I used to say, ‘I don’t like the company of women, I prefer the company of men’. ‘I won’t share a room unless I can share one with a man’, I used to say. And then, I discovered that there were a lot of… there was a group of tomboy girls like me. And I liked them plenty. And one thing I found coming from South Africa to England, there were people in England who were really like me. I’d been really a… a sore thumb. I’d been a blue stocking in South Africa. How could she be sexy? Look how she doesn’t wear make-up or… in fact I did wear make-up – some – there, because everyone else did… and look how she dresses. And I got to England, lots of people were like that and in America even more. So it took me successive stages to find I, in fact, have spheres where I’m not weird. Well we're rather weird still, but not that much. And so that was nice about the AA… I could find some of that.  But meanwhile I began again worrying and feeling homesick. And I remember hearing one of my professors saying, ‘As a professor you have to watch carefully, you might spot a good person slipping’. And I thought that’s what I am, a good person slipping. And then I started slipping even more. And then Arthur Korn found me.
Now Arthur Korn was a German Jewish Communist refugee from Berlin. And he was a much-loved teacher but also… now he was old-fashioned and fuddy-duddy. And the youngest, brightest felt he was, sort of, out of date. But he kind of semi-adopted me and we used to have coffee together once a week at a little restaurant called Debry. And I would talk about a need for structure and framework in my life, and he would talk about the November Group. And we had parallel conversations where he more or less told me what it was like to be young in Berlin, and he was trying to reassure me and give me confidence and help me with my work. He was my student advisor at the time. And I remember once he… he told me to do something. ‘Do this, do that and do the other.’ I said, ‘No, no. I don’t want to do that’. I was getting more confidence. ‘I think I want to do this and this.’ He said, ‘Stick to your guns, madam. Stick to your guns’. And he went to the next desk and there was a guy he’d been helping, a student he’d been trying to coach into doing something. And he’d done it and he put his arm around him, ‘God bless you, my boy’. Well that was the nurturing that I needed at that point. But then I was noticed by a group of people, amongst that group of bright scholarship people. And one of them left a message: Would you like to work on a thesis project with me? So he and I began working together. And that was a real education for me. His background, and his knowledge and his interests. And he said to me, ‘The trouble with you is you’re so uneducated’. Well, I’d come from another country and I didn’t know English things in certain respects and other respects, Edwardian English I knew rather well. It was alive and well in South Africa. But I learned a lot from him and we worked very hard together. And we got our thesis done. And it was in a kind of a New Brutalist vein. It was a Welsh mining village, and adding, I think, about 750 housing units to this hilly… hillside, outside the town itself where the mine tip was and where the mine head was and where the main buildings were. And we added to that. And we added to it something, which I later realised looked a whole lot like the plans of Hilberseimer, the German Urbanist.
And I hadn’t known that at the time, although I should have because I had a relative in Israel where I’d visited, who was a great fan of Hilberseimer. And he’d given me a book on him and he’d more or less built the city of Gedera or the town of Gedera as it then was. And his name was Ari Ben Geffen. I mention that because I think he’s well known in Israel.

[DSB] The other thing that happened then was that this group were thinking in a parallel way to the way Peter and Alison Smithson were, who were of the New Brutalist group, and who’d recently moved to London from the North and were beginning to be noticed and important. They were not yet teaching at the AA. That came later. It was lucky it came at all, given that Alison Smithson said, ‘We did not go to the AA. That’s why we’re good’. So they were contrarians and they became friends of mine, and important influences on me. And the issue here was… and the issue that involved a group of social scientists and the independent group was another ‘is’ and ‘ought’ issue. But the ‘is’ was not colonial and the ‘ought’ was not mother country. The ‘is’ was working class and the ‘ought’ was upper-middle class. So here were upper-middle class architects and professionals moving poor people from the East End out of London and to the new towns causing them enormous social hardship. And a group called Young & Willmott wrote a book called Kinship in the East End of London or something like that. And they made the case that the life of the street in the East End had many social skeins of support for poor people. You took them away from their mums and their neighbours and moved them to a place that was purely middle class and surrounded by green. Most of the rest of England may envy them but they would suffer there enormously.
And I think 40, 60 years later the people in the new towns are probably every bit as happy as the people in Levittown and that’s not too very different. But at that stage, you could not say that. And so there was a movement among architects, learning from the social scientists. And that was the time when Peter Smithson talked about active socio-plastics and really tried hard to work with social scientists. Later he said you couldn’t, it didn’t work. I disagreed with him and I still do.
But so, they were thinking in the same way that we were thinking about that Welsh miner’s village. A life of the street, a life on the ground, etc. And so that was very inspiring and interesting for me. And again I was involved with ‘is’ and ‘ought’. With what we architects think is right and with what other people perceive and have the right to see happen to them because values cannot really be argued with. If it doesn’t harm everyone else then they should be able to have what they need to conduct their lives.

[DSB] At this point I then knew the Smithsons very well and also Robert Scott Brown had arrived in England. And we were both of us having finished…my finished the AA and he finished at Wits University. We were taking a course in tropical architecture with the snow falling all around us in London, and thinking how naïve these English are about hot climates. I think we were right. But we did that little course together and then Peter Smithson said to me – you see, we all of us were going to study Urbanism next. If you were in England at that time and it was a time of social investment because of the cities having been bombed, and a great rebuilding. And government was the place that was doing all the building. Unlike America where the ex-servicemen went into Levittown or Levittown-like places and their interest rate was subsidised so the private sector could build. In England you got council housing. And it wasn’t the poorest who went into council housing, but the deserving poor as Shaw would have called them.
And so, if you were an architect you were going to work in the public sector and you were going to be very tied into Urbanism. And if you were a good architect all the more you were going to study town planning. And you didn’t want to study that in England because it was very pedestrian there. Not pedestrian in planning for pedestrians but pedestrian in the sense of conservative. So Peter Smithson said the only place to go to study in America is the University of Pennsylvania, because that is where Lou Kahn is.
Now it’s very interesting that Lou Kahn and Team 10 had met at that point. And the penny only dropped recently to me as how that happened. How Lou Kahn came to be able to do that and want to do that. But… so we decided we were going to go to America but that first we were going to go back to South Africa and see our parents and work there a while. And then go to America by the time Robert turned 26 when he wouldn’t be subject to the draft because we understood the draft was totally capricious. If we went as would-be citizens, as immigrants he could be subject to the draft. So we decided to spend that time in South Africa, which is what we did and it’s a blessing we did because otherwise his parents would never have seen him again. Shortly after we started at Penn, Robert was killed in a car accident. But meanwhile, in South Africa we both worked. We travelled and saw our parents. We travelled a lot, we looked around. We were full of questions.
I should have said something else. Before we went to South Africa, we also spent a year in Europe and that was a very formative year for us. We had a very small three-wheeler Morgan, we camped and travelled. And camped in farmer’s fields, not in camping grounds. And travelled through France and Germany. And no… through France to Italy and then to Venice and to a summer school in Venice. And spent two months in Venice and then went to Rome. And then worked for an architect called Giuseppe Vaccaro in Rome for six weeks. Travelled some more and then went to South Africa. So we had most of the year in Europe and almost six months in Italy. Also saw Germany and Holland at the same time. And I have my photographs from then. And I should also have said that we had our honeymoon in… I almost said Las Vegas. No, it wasn’t Las Vegas, it was in Yugoslavia. And it had just come out from behind the Iron Curtain and we hitchhiked through Yugoslavia, taking boats and mule or donkey wagons. And the cars of communists and the cars of French tourists. And getting in a large loop through places that I have since seen on the television, bombed and destroyed in the saddest of ways. So now, there we are in South Africa taking photographs of popular culture and early modern architecture like crazy as we had been doing all through Europe. And Mannerist architecture in Europe but of course not in South Africa. And eventually got to America in 1958.

[DSB] Now here the ‘is’ and ‘ought’ are again social and they’re again class based. And it’s 10 years later and it’s America so it’s a very different situation but we were well prepared aesthetically and in many other ways for this. And also now we were able to back up our educations because we had had undergraduate architecture educations with… through the city planning program at Penn, which is what we entered. We thought Lou Kahn would be in that program but to our amazement he wasn’t. We couldn’t understand that coming from Europe. How could Lou Kahn not be teaching in city planning? But of course it was a very different discipline. It was… it was a social science based discipline as much as a physical one at that stage. The important people to me there… many of them were important in different ways. David Crane was my student advisor and I’ve written recently quite a lot about his way of looking at Urbanism that helped it to relate to architecture. And in fact, when we first heard that there was no Kahn in city planning, we said to Crane we wanted to move to architecture. And he said, ‘Because you are going back to Africa’, which we were, ‘you really, really need what this planning department will teach you. And I’ll make sure you get enough of Lou Kahn as well’. And so Kahn was… well Crane was our mentor as long as he was there and also through the death of Robert. Britton Harris, an urban planner economist based. I must not say he was an economist; he got furious when I said that once. He’s an urban planner but his discipline within that was economics and regional science. And also, through Dave Crane I took a course with Walter Isard, the regional economist. These have influenced everything I’ve said about activity patterns enormously. Crane was a great influence and seeing how these would tie into movement systems and understanding all of that. We were all critics of the systems planners as they began and it was a very interesting debate at that time. And then Herbert Gans, the sociologist enormously important in setting out a whole different way to think. Again, looking at the ‘is’ with creative eyes. And Paul Davidoff as a social activist and also a lawyer teaching planning law and many others. William Wheaton, another person, taught me a lot how to teach. So I finished at planning school as a widow. And immediately started teaching at Penn. And I was a sorrowing young widow from 1959 till 1967 basically. And in that time, I knew Bob. I met him as you can hear in 1960 and we started collaborating. But neither of us were ready to think other than platonically of each other, until we both left the University of Pennsylvania.

[RV] To compare with you, my background involved and has always involved very little if not at all, movements and schools. I’ve always been just, sort of, an individual whose kind of connected with the past and the present. But I’ve never been kind of ah, I’m a member of a movement or a school. Which I think is very different from the English stuff that was going on at that time that you were describing Denise. It was, kind of, individuals who influenced me in my education. And the fact that I was at Princeton, where again there was no school. There was just an approach. The main and most famous architectural critic there on the Faculty was Frenchman Jean Labatut, who had gone to the École des Beaux-Arts but he was not an École des Beaux-Arts person. We studied… we studied and designed modern architecture. But probably for that reason he was a guy who had a wider historical range than the other people in the Modern movement. There were two other people and all… none of these is famous. There were two other people, Donald Drew Egbert, who was a historian of modern architecture, who liked me and I liked him very much. And I took his course I think five times. I sat in on it, then I worked the slides for it, then I took it and then I became a… what do you call the young instructors?
[DSB] TA.
[RV] Yeah, kind of helps with the…
[DSB] Teaching assistant.
[RV] Teaching assistant in that. And he had a wonderful view point concerning I think Modernism where he went all the way back to the 18th century where Modernism started perhaps in English landscape architecture and the Picturesque movement and all that stuff. So it was… he was just absolutely wonderful and every… anytime I’d ever go back to Princeton, I would go visit Donald Drew Egbert in his office. Then there was another person who was really not famous, who was the head of the department, named Sherley W Morgan  – S-H-E-R-L-E-Y – who was completely… who was the head of the department. It didn’t have a Dean; it had a head of the department, who kind of let Labatut and other people take over completely. He just sort of ran it. But it was years later that I began to realize, and often this happens you kind of look back on things. And I began to realise that he from the very beginning, I think, particularly liked me and had confidence in me as a potential good architect and as a good student at the time. And he was… Labatut was kind of mean to me and a few other people. And this guy was always there behind me. Not, not in an obvious way but now that I look back he was there. And I had a wonderful time about five years ago sending… he, of course, he’d died quite a few years earlier than that… sending a letter to his sons who were younger than I and telling them how important he was in my life and how much I appreciated and they wrote me back letters and I wrote a second letter and thought of other things. I just realised that this guy, looking back on it, was tremendously important to me and not in terms of steering me in an aesthetic direction but just sort of encouraging me and backing me. And he got me my first job as an architect, and things like that. But it’s interesting that none of these people was famous. They were individuals, I was really not part of a school or a movement and I think that is significant and really very different from what you were talking about.

[RV] Speaking of that guy named Louis Kahn, it was no question about it, unambiguously it was Anne Tyng and me who first discovered Lou Kahn as an important, unusual and good person. I was working for a summer job for an architect named Robert Montgomery Brown in Philadelphia and also… he was also at that time… he was a partner of the famous George Howe. He wasn’t really in the office much; but in the same building there was an architect who had a small office. And one of his… one of his people working… young people was Anne Tyng and me. And he was very nice to me as we’d go up and down the elevator. And I got to know him and I got to appreciate his work. And I recommended to Princeton that when they needed a new head of a department, they should get this guy, take my advice. Later, of course, he went to Yale and became well known… so of course. But it is interesting. It was really Ann Tyng and Bob Venturi who first discovered or appreciated Louis Kahn as a potential and important person.

[DSB] Well, when Bob and I married and I came back to Philadelphia, I didn’t think I would join this firm and yet it seemed as if our marriage brought bad luck. And it started to have emergency after emergency, and one way or another I got drawn in and found myself working for no money, full time and finally went to them and said, look this needs to be regularised. And they made me a partner but didn’t give me my name on the firm for the next 11 years or so, in fact more, no, it was about 11 years. And then at that point, we had done for example, we were looked upon as that wonderful little dressmaker down the road – don’t you tell your friends about her, she’s so cheap and so good – and by various clients like Pennsylvania General Hospital, or was it called Philadelphia General Hospital that large old city hospital that was demolished? And so… and lots of small jobs and some rather larger jobs like Friends Neighbourhood Guild had been built. And I came into the office and at the same time or, you know, a year later we were doing in parallel the Yale study of Las Vegas and also working as advocate planners and architects for a very low income community in south Philadelphia.
[RV] South Street?
[DSB] South Street, for no money and helping them stop an expressway. That project has become very famous and I still feel very happy when I go down South Street and see what we saved. So, we were doing those two in parallel, very socially concerned and the other one people think of was not socially concerned, but of course it was; Las Vegas was a very socially concerned project in many ways. But also, then slowly the work came in. We found ourselves doing a new city in California in the desert, which was fascinating and we got work at New York University, New York State University and two buildings there. And we… Bob had the interest of Philip Johnson and he was helping to promote us partly through that work and partly through some housing, until we began to get beyond Philip’s control and then we were kind of dropped by Philip. I’ve often thought this was difficult for us but good, because it kept us independent. Maybe being outside of New York was a good thing, not a bad thing.
And slowly we got more urban planning work of a certain kind. Small main streets like the one we’re living on but in Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania and Galveston, Texas and in Miami Beach, Washington Avenue, what a wonderful project. And we slowly built up an expertise in working with very small community groups, to produce rehabilitated main streets from the point of view of the interests mainly of the small storekeepers, but dealing with the parking and all sorts of other problems together, a wonderful preparation in many respects for other work.
But it was touch and go with us for a long time. Bob at the same time was running… or not running but being the owner of his father’s fruit and produce business which was there to keep his mother supported and that too began to have difficulties. So now we had within a couple of blocks of each other, Venturi Incorporated the fruit and produce business and Venturi and Rauch the architecture business, both of them not doing so very well, thank you. And then when the architecture business began supporting the fruit and produce business instead of vice versa after some hair raising and picturesque experiences with the unions, we closed it. Now we were in the practice of architecture and we were not teaching any more, but times were still very hard on us.
 

[DSB] In 1979 we got our first work with Princeton and that was the Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval. We’d already been given an important building by Oberlin College. And at that time we were also doing an exhibition on Signs… Signs of Life and that was an exhibition on symbolism and we were thinking about taste cultures and the way in which different taste groups relate to architecture.
Where was the Signs of Life exhibit?
[DSB] In Washington, at the Smithsonian.
Yes.
[DSB] For the Bicentennial. We also had another important building for the Bicentennial but it began to make us self-aware of the fact that we had certain kinds of clients; they’re called tea-and-sympathy clients, or the very, very highest taste culture clients. And they… the projects they can give out would sit on the head of a pin and are wanted by all the signature architects in the country, at least that was the situation in the 1970s, during the Depression. So, when we got our Princeton work we… we had this Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval which meant the next client group, the upper middle class group, the upper middle taste culture– I’m using the words that Gans used in his book, Popular Culture and High Culture – they were now interested in us so that was a very, very much bigger market, but also more difficult for us. So let me take it to that point, where we might just have arrived courtesy of Princeton University.
What was this upper middle class, what kind of client would that have been?
[DSB] The big universities, the Ivy League universities, the big State universities, corporations are often that group of people, but they weren’t hiring us and still haven’t. Harvard University’s upper middle culture.
Corporations?
[DSB] Oberlin is upper culture, high culture.
[RV] Okay. The… William Bowen had a lot to do helping with – the President of Princeton – to get us the work. I now refer to Bill Bowen as… as our great patron, as Lorenzo de’ Medici.  So I write letters to him and I say, ‘Dear Lorenzo El Magnifico e Contessa de’ Medici’ – his wife.

[RV] The Benjamin Franklin Memorial Building was what era about?
[DSB] 1976, I think.
[RV] 1976, that’s right, it was built for the ’76 celebration in Philadelphia. Another wonderful immediate client, where the… where the site of Benjamin Franklin’s house which was sitting within the city block, was known and understood.  But his house… there were no illustrations of it but as we could find out via… via digging up… what do you call historical…
[DSB] Archaeology?
[RV] Archaeology… archaeology, we could find out the exact size of the house via the foundations that were there. And we did something that became rather famous which was what we called a ghost structure, which was an approximation of what the house looked like via a steel frame and it was well received. The architect, the land… the firm that did the structural engineering was Keast and Hood, and there were a lot of other aspects to it, where we used a lot of iconography, we used a lot of Ben Franklin’s phrases all over, all over the place. It was an important element, which was the landscape architecture.

[DSB] There’s a further brilliant concept in that project. And when the National Park Service gave us the brief and the mandate to do the work, they showed us a museum on the site and where the house had been and they said there’s no use trying to reproduce the house because we have zero records for the house, so here’s a museum we put instead. And we looked at the site and its surroundings and its access patterns, and there had been a road going right through and indeed and there still was a road going right through and we said…
[RV] It built after his time.
[DSB] Well, the road was underneath Benjamin Franklin’s house at the front, because it was built originally with an archway under it, so that people could go through and something happened to it in the middle, we don’t really know what and it came out the other end.
[RV] Well, there was a house there.
[DSB] Yes, there was a house and the road probably went round the house and then it came out the other end because there was an alley at the back. The point being that it had become – or it could be because it was all opened up and there was nothing there – it could be a way through as it had once been when they removed Benjamin Franklin’s house and put other housing there. And I suggested that it still be maintained as a road, because they had already said that the museum didn’t… shouldn’t have windows, at all. So then I said, why shouldn’t you put the museum underground? And to our great joy every time we go there, we see it being used as a shortcut. We see people coming in and sitting in the beautiful Neo-Colonial furniture that Bob has put in there. In fact, he made the furniture bigger than Colonial and it looks a bit Edwardian, but it’s for the scale of a public rather than a private use. This has always influenced us, the notion of what you do for public that needs to be sturdier and in this case more civic than something that’s private. And therefore for that purpose, we put not only benches but parapets and ledges and things people could sit on and indeed, you see people sitting there. School kids sit there as they wait for things to happen. People eat their sandwiches there and in general it’s made an extra little city park, a very small one, in an area which doesn’t have enough open space.

[RV] Another thing in the same neighbourhood I should mention, go back to… Guild House… is that in Guild House the second time, we’ve made… we’ve included windows. Again, you would not have included windows in those days.  It was after mother’s house… that was right after mother’s house and we included openings that were windows of several scales, but they were generally pretty big scale windows.
[DSB] What about the white stripe?
[RV] And then we also applied, you’re right, explicit ornament on the building. I should have mentioned that, explicit ornament on the building which was absolutely unheard of at the time, by having a white stripe and some… a white brick base to it. That using explicit ornament, I literally at the time thought, can I really do this? Am I a pervert? Am I just absolutely immoral to apply ornament on a building? You did not do that in those days, in the early… in the Modernist period, but it made… it was not frivolous ornament, it made sense. It gave the building two scales, it had the five stories indicated by the windows as they went up, but then it also had a top, a middle and a base which was three elements that were not identical as they went up. And that again was, kind of historically what you would have done with a Palazzo or something like that. And so there was a juxtaposition then of two scales, of it being a human residential scale indicated by the windows as you went up, but also hey, it was a quasi civic building in a sense as well. So a lot of- that building looks kind of ordinary now. I remember passing it many years later, where someone who was sitting next to me looked at it and said, ‘Oh my goodness, I don’t know what all the business was about that building, when you pass it, it’s not that…’, and I took that as a compliment. I mean you know, why was all that folderol going on? But anyhow so it was a building… it also was a building that had a fence in front of it, it was… what’s the name of that kind of fence?  Very ordinary…
[DSB] Chicken link?
[RV] Well. there was another name.  Anyhow that ordinary fence that you would not put in front of a building, you would put it in the back of a factory or something like that.
[DSB] That was a little bit of a possibility that Frank Gehry learned from that.
[RV] Yeah, I think that Frank Gehry learned from that because he used that fence in front of his house a little bit later, his own house in Santa Monica.
[DSB] Chicken wire, chicken wire.
[RV] So, we had fun, we had fun in those days.

[DSB] The two buildings for State University of New York and I can’t remember where it is, I can’t remember the name of the…
Purchase?
[DSB] Purchase, New York, yes. That’s the first time we really did a street through a building. I maintain there’s a street through your mother’s house, a fascinating street that’s public and private. The public part is in marble and it winds all the way up the nowhere stair – that’s a street going right through. But the next really noticeable street was the two buildings at Purchase, New York and in particular the second one.
The street goes all the way through, it makes eddies and flurries of movement and stopping at places along the way. It gets wider to take the large crowds coming from big lecture halls and then gets narrower and it ends up with a coffee machine at the end. And you can open a door and go out into an outdoor amphitheatre, which can be just a sitting out place and there someone stands at a certain point which becomes… in case it becomes a performance place. And that pattern of a movement system, that allows the telephones and the coffee machines and places to sit out on the steps and rails and things rather than benches. And goes from outdoors and indoors and ties in with the public outdoor pathways and links them to the interior spaces, became a theme with the rest of our work from the rest of the time on. And it was also much influenced by our analysis of transportation, by our thinking about the role of the street outdoors and indoors, and by our learning from Las Vegas and by the Nolli maps of Rome. That plan of this public processional, which is- which doesn’t have the shape of rooms, which allows informal congregation without cutting you off from the public sector, has been a theme with us whenever we can do it.

[RV] Another important project of the middle late ‘60s was a competition entry for the Football Hall of Fame. And of course, we did not win it, but it was one where we made the building… as a building it was rather like a nave in a Catholic church, and you have the central part and then you have the smaller spaces along the side to make it a kind of… what do you call it?
[DSB] Nave?
[RV] Well, no… the traditional Roman atrium, not Roman…
[DSB] Basilica?
[RV] Basilica.  But we made it a basilica that had a nave and then just had one side and in the inside we had… in the main part we had just sort of a wonderful way through and then in the curved ceiling we had a great big, kind of murals with football players playing in the top. It was a little like a Baroque church with angels and saints flapping around on the top. I’m not sure what the medium was to be. And then in the lower part where the… where the lower part was on the side, we had the equivalent of the chapels that you find, series of chapels in churches. And in those chapels in Italy, usually each chapel is dedicated to a different saint or else a different family that built the chapel and where the family, the counts or countesses or princes or whatever, are buried. Well, in this case, we didn’t have princes, or counts, or saints, we had a famous football player dedicated. Each chapel was dedicated to a famous football player. And then of course, in the Catholic church you also have what are called relics, which would be the toenail of a saint or something like that, that was there and in this case the relic would be the sweatshirt of the player or something like that, the real… the real thing.
So, we had fun doing that, making those analogies. And so you had the combination of the central idea and then of the individual players that would be there. Then on the outside we had a great big… and then on the side which did not have the lower part, we had a great big wall going way high, it was like a billboard. We called it a building board and then in front of that was a big parking lot where people could park to go into the museum, where they could park. And on the façade they could look at different messages that would come via LED, or the equivalent of LED, I hope LED existed then, I think it was beginning.
[DSB] No, it didn’t exist, you invented it.
[RV] Anyhow, that would be a place where there would be changing information over time. So, again, it was the beginning with us of the information age, or architecture as a… as iconographic and as relating to signs…
[DSB] And moving.
[RV] Rather than space, and moving. Naturally, we did not win the competition, but actually, no one won it; they never built it.
 

[DSB]I was involved a little bit… I’m trying to think how, because I think I was… I was not around at that time… I was in California then. So, I’m trying to think how it was that I really was involved in the thinking about the routes up to it on the outside, you know, those two kind of stairways which you see as diagonals on the façade. For some reason I had something to do with those, but I don’t know why or how. But I think I was well out of Philadelphia most of the time while that was being planned.

[RV] We had fun in, kind of, reading when we were, kind of, learning about the project and reading the program, that we made – we very easily made an analogy that this was going to be a kind of religious building.  It was almost making these football players were the equivalent of saints.
[DSB] By the way they wrote about it.
[RV] And it was a religion. It was a, kind of, religious, holy thing beyond that and so that’s how we kind of… I think, that led us to the analogies we make of the building not as just a civic museum but as having a, kind of, qualities of a Christian church. And so these were, kind of, the equivalent of religious figures where a saint, where the… these guys were beyond just individuals, they were saints in the religion of sports.
What did they say in the program?
[RV] I don’t remember the details of the program. I’m sure we have it somewhere, but it was definitely a…
[DSB] It was about improving the moral fiber of the country through these, and things like that and it was very pretentiously written too.
[RV] But it was very much, I think, indicating the way Americans did think at the time and still do, of sports figures as being almost holy and exceedingly important figures.

[RV] Probably, the project that is one of the most well known projects is our project for the National Gallery extension in London, in a very important site, Trafalgar Square.  It’s known as the Sainsbury wing. And that is very, very complex in terms of how we did it. It’s a competition that we won. Very often if you’re good you don’t win a competition, but we miraculously did win the competition. And there’re a lot of ways we can approach… talk about how we approached it, but essentially on the outside, the façade is somewhat… well, it’s very important to look about the context. And the main aspects of the context are, it’s in Trafalgar Square so it’s a building which is helping form the exterior square or place in central London, probably that’s the biggest square in London. Then also, it does connect with an important building which is the National Gallery of Art, which is a symmetrical building, classical building of the 1830s. So, we were doing two main things when we were designing that building, from the stand point of the front and from the stand point of the outside. One was that it was to be a continuation of the existing building, although not a copy of it. And then the other was that it was to be a building that helped, that acknowledged its position on the piazza, on the square and helped the… improved… enhanced the quality of the square.
And so, essentially what we did when we analysed the existing National Gallery building, it’s a building that has a classical vocabulary. And its main aesthetic element is that of rhythm that the vertical columns and pilasters on the building make for a kind of complex rhythm, that’s a little different in the front and then it extends beyond and varies as it goes, but it’s generally pretty consistent. So, the rhythm of our building is such that we actually copied, which horrified Modernists, we actually… on this one façade not on the rest of the building… we copied the vocabulary, the elements of the 1830s building. But we made the pilasters not have an even rhythm, but a rhythm which was uneven and which inflected toward the building next to it. So, therefore, it was a building separate from the other building by a space, but also inflecting toward the other building. So, it’s saying, we are part of the other building, we’re not just an addition, we are a continuation of it. And so this varied rhythm which is sort of jazzy, jazzy; with a sort of a jazz rhythm as opposed to the rhythm of the old building which was a sort of correct rhythm of maybe you’d find of a gavotte or a minuet.
And then we had to have a very big entrance at the bottom to accommodate anticipated four million – I think it’s more than four million a year now – where the other building was built originally for a few thousand gentlemen a year. And so, it’s like the old building but it has this huge zoom entrance in it, which is contradictory to classical requirements and which has this indirect rhythm. And then, when you look at… from the side, you see the side of the building along that narrow space between the new and the old building and it is essentially a Meis van der Rohe, a Modern building with lots of glass and steel construction and then when you go in the back it’s different too. So, it’s a building that… whose façades all accommodate context. And then when you go in that’s another whole story, but essentially the outside was that.
So, the building was easily misunderstood. I think a lot of people did love it. We have copies of good quotes and negative quotes from the writers. The negative quotes are wonderful: ‘It’s a piece of vulgar American’, blah, blah, and all that, and then there are other quotes that are very nice. But it is essentially a building where the pure Modernists said, ‘Oh it’s not Modern because it has a… because it has a… you know, these adapted Classical elements’. That’s what the Modernists said and then the Classicalists said, ‘Hey it’s not correctly historical because it has this jazzy rhythm, instead of a correct Classical rhythm’. Then the inside is another story which is interesting. But it is so nice that the client liked it and in general the… the family of the donors who gave all the money, a lot of money, more or less went along with it. We had some problems with dealing with the client, involving some details, but in general in the end it turned out – turned out on the outside – the way we wanted it. And it’s a building I love and it really does connect with us, which is Mannerism, it’s hard to… it’s hard to… it didn’t find one ideology, it didn’t find a consistent system and it does accommodate – because it’s accommodating to all these different, kinds of, symbolism styles and contextual requirements.

[DSB] The National Gallery had been a famous competition for years and it had been an old furniture store that was bombed. And so, it was kept for the National Gallery for an extension after the bombed store was removed.  A big open site, and one of the last bomb sites left in London, I would imagine. So, I’d been reading in the architectural press of England, this long debate. I think, there was something like 74 different competition entries. And at one point I think Skidmore, Owings and Merrill won a competition; many other people made entries. Ahrends Burton and Koralek produced a winning competition and it was in design and we gathered from the press, that there were still lots of questions about it. And the curators, in a way that we got familiar with later, ourselves, said, well, we agree with your basic access pattern, but you really need to do this, and could you do that and could you please take away your circulation from the edge and put it in the middle, you can leave one on the edge as well. So, now they had two circulation systems for one and a half buildings, you could say. And one way and another, they… they said, ‘Would you do such and such?’ And the architect said, ‘Yes sir’, because you must serve your client, mustn’t you, so you say, ‘Yes sir’ and you do what it takes to do.
And then eventually they said, ‘We need a coffee shop and could you please put it at the top of a very tall tower over the building?’ and they said, ‘Yes sir, steel and glass coffee shop and a tall tower’. Then Prince Charles looked at that and said, it looks like a carbuncle on the face of a beloved friend. And the same client, I believe, who asked them to do all that, fired them. And I made that deduction from seeing the embarrassment on the looks of the people I went to talk to at the National Gallery, when on the basis of seeing everyone they mentioned and whom they spoofed and whom they thought would… whom they caricatured as making certain competition entries, they… I decided that these people hadn’t heard of us. And they may have heard of us, but they didn’t know we were doing museums. And so, I called one of the Trustees there and said, ‘I’d like to come and talk to you’. And he said, ‘Well, I’ll be away but you could talk with the Keeper of the Museum’, as he’s called, ‘and his assistant’. So, I had tea with these two gentlemen and talked to them about America and England, and about architecture and about Sir John Soane whom we loved, and about the fact that we were doing another museum and showed them something of that. And they said, ‘We didn’t know you did museums’. And at one point they said, ‘What would you do?’ And I said, ‘Well, without having faced it, I think we would probably maintain the corner’s height that exists on Trafalgar Square and we’d probably use Portland Stone, which is the famous London’s stone’.
[RV] Of the existing building.
[DSB] Of the existing and of much of London, it’s a limestone. And they said, ‘Would you use classical columns?’ and I said… they said… no… they didn’t say that, they said, ‘Would you do a classical building?’ And I said, ‘I don’t think so’, and they said, ‘Well, why not?’ and I said, ‘Well, because we’ve never done one. But’, I said, ‘something about the rhythm of the pilasters would be important to us’. And it was quite prescient to have done all that because that’s in fact, what did happen. The rhythm of the columns and it isn’t really Classical it’s more like a billboard referring to a Classical building. But all of that came out and we did accept the basic plan of the one that they had approved. It was basically Skidmore, Owings and Merrill’s plan, which brought an L shape corridor from the existing building across Jubilee Walk and straight down the middle.
And then Bob solved something that I didn’t see anyone else ever solving and made the whole thing work, which is, you had to take the entrance right at the corner of Trafalgar Square. It was the only logical place for the entrance. But everyone had to end up together, coming from the main building and coming from this new entrance on the second floor, what we say the second floor, what the English would say the first floor, just outside gallery number nine and across Jubilee Walk.  Well he produced a very big stairway that led you up there slowly past another mezzanine floor, as well. And, it took you down into the basement two levels too. So, he had the stairway linking everything in a very understandable way and brought you in at the top floor to the new experience of the… some of the most precious paintings in the world and in that gallery, which are in the Sainsbury wing.

[RV] Just real quickly, about the interior, you could just… I’ve just rewritten something about this, I was asked to, about three elements on the inside: lighting, space and symbolism. And the… it is… if you’re an American doing a typical American museum, you assume that the space has to be flexible because the museum art elements are going to vary over time. In this case, this is a collection which is the greatest collection of Renaissance – Italian Renaissance – paintings in the world outside of Italy. And so you’re not going to change, it’s going to be the same.  You’re not going to buy a new Raphael every five years. So we made it, with the assumption was that it will more or less be the same forever on that. The second was that the lighting has to be very carefully done because they wanted, appropriately, some natural light, but the natural light has to be very carefully controlled for the sake of preservation of the paintings. So we have clere storeys at the top where we have very, very, very up-to-date, complex, sophisticated technical elements that control the light, as the light changes over time, a cloud goes by and things like that. And then, we made the symbolism inside connect with the architecture of Sir John Soane’s gallery called Dulwich. And that was one that we liked, Dulwich, also the client liked Dulwich. And so, we, kind of, made it in the historical style of Dulwich and not just plain Modern, because plain Modern didn’t work for other reasons as well. And that of course, irritated some people who were pure Modernists.

[RV] And then the last thing is that we put some windows in it, because we liked the idea that you should see paintings in the real world where you could actually look out of the window and see the real world. You had to be careful when the light comes in, it’s not going to hit any paintings, so we had to deal with that very carefully, but we didn’t want to have it like typical galleries which have no windows and have sky lights above. And so, we have clere stories above and then we have some windows so that you are in rooms in which you see these paintings that have the scale of Italian Renaissance architecture, which would be the kind of architecture that the painters were assuming the paintings would be displayed in. That’s a very complex thing. I’ve told it very quickly, but that was the approach and that seemed to work well with the clients too. So, it happened.
[DSB] In so many galleries which have lay lights, top lights, I say, ‘It feels as if it’s about to start raining in here’. And it’s sort of dark and gloomy, or like if you’ve dived into a swimming pool and you start coming up from underwater. And it’s that sort of atmosphere with the big… you see a circle of light ahead of you as your arms go up, well, it’s… and the sort of grey light of being underwater, it was like that, in some of the galleries we saw. And so, we said, we didn’t want that. But you still had to keep the paintings dark. So, we said, ‘We think we can bring light in, in such a way that it lights the people and you think the paintings are lit’. And then, we also had to control the acoustics, so we needed acoustical material up there, which could also reflect light in certain ways. And sure enough, we were, thank God, able to persuade them to do all the same colour grey wall, but a light upbeat grey. When people went into that gallery we… they said, ‘You’ve cleaned all the paintings’.  But, of course, we hadn’t cleaned the paintings we’d just lit them right. And yet, they maintained conservancy standards for lighting.
[RV] There is… was that, at least, very much, the tradition of the American museums where you spot-lit the paintings very dramatically and especially these… you have these great, horrible shadows under the lower frames… the lower part of the frames, and things like that. Whereas, the European historical tradition is more that you see the paintings in ambient light, a very special light. You don’t spot light. So, we worked very hard to get a combination, after all we are more than in the 20th century world, spot lighting is expected, but at the same time, we were making it accommodate the other tradition of ambient light as came from artificial lighting but also from the lighting above, as Denise points out, from the… in the central part of it, from the clere stories.

[DSB] Behind the clere stories is a very big technical system which lets in daylight and electrical light, both, and adapts because England is rain, showers and sun and then rain and sun again.  And clouds move over, and so you want an awareness of that and, at the same time, you don’t want it to affect the lighting in the gallery. So it does adapt to the changes in light but it adapts a little slowly.  And the windows in the gallery… you can see out into the stairwell, so nothing again will ever hurt a painting, but you really get the feeling of being part of the world.
There is one very sad aspect to the whole thing which is that, at the end of the concourse we had wanted a window– again a protected window that let light in and that let you see down into the street, but only at a certain closeness to the window. We felt there was no painting in their collection that was strong enough to have the scale to take the feeling of a concourse at the end.  Particularly when people…
[RV] With a long axis...
[DSB] Yes, are walking 15 abreast on a Sunday afternoon down there. There’s no painting could tower over that whole thing.
[RV] These are not Baroque paintings, these are Renaissance paintings and, therefore, Renaissance paintings were smaller in scale.
[DSB] So, from that point of view, we had planned a window there and they said absolutely no. One curator said, ‘No’, and he prevailed. He said, ‘It breaks the magic of the gallery’. We said, ‘It will add more magic’. Have you ever looked through from a plane window between clouds and seen the earth below between clouds? It looks like fairyland. It looks magic. We said that seeing the street outside could have that quality of being magic in the context.  And, with a special quality of light in that space, it would be what you needed to give you a relief.  But not a relief from magic. And also they wanted to put their major, most important painting there which was a… what’s his name?
[RV] Fra Angelico?
[DSB] No. Paolo… Francesco.
[RV] Piero della Francesca.
[DSB] Piero della Francesca. And that painting was too delicate for that; they said we managed to persuade them to have, what they called a studiola, just to one side. And in that we put the three most important Piero della Francesca paintings and they sit in this room and that’s magic too.  That is like a chapel.
[RV] But that is one we lost where we did not have the window at the end and that does make us very sad. And I should mention that we worked very hard on that job. I went to England over 50 round trip times and Denise went 50 times and that was because we were very dedicated to the project.

[DSB] It was Jacob Rothschild. And he said it in public and on a movie so I feel we have… there’s no client privacy we’re protecting if we say, ‘Yes, he did say that’. And, I think people… clients who are sympathetic and knowledgeable will know what to come to Bob for and what to come to me for. By the same token, if Bob has a way of explaining something and I see that the client hasn’t understood, I will explain from a different point of view. And that’s what made Jacob say that because he had no way out. If he couldn’t understand the one way, then he had to understand the other way. There was a time when Simon Sainsbury wanted much more decoration on the back of the building than we thought was right and then the City of Westminster also pushed them into doing that, so finally we had to do it. But we wanted it to be very plain at the back. So I said to Simon, ‘Look at your suit’; now Simon wore the most perfect suits from Huntsman, the great tailor nearby on Savile Row. I said, ‘Simon, look at your suit; it has lapels on the front and very beautiful detailing on the front and on the back it’s extremely plain, but well cut’. And Simon said, ‘Denise, I don’t want another analogy from you please’

[RV] At one point we acquired lawyers.  What are lawyers called?
[DSB] Advocates? Solicitors?
[RV] Solicitors. And the solicitors were very good solicitors and we spent, I think, three months with them arranging how we could do it so that it would be legal within the contract. And then when we said, ‘Look we cannot have the design changed in so many ways with our name on it – we are professionals’. And then they… ‘And so we will resign’,  and then they said, ‘Okay, you can do it’.
What was the process that led you to the point where you would call in a solicitor?
[DSB] I can explain that process. They had a great many trustees and the whole lot of them were on the design committee, if they wanted to be, and they would vote. Do you want the window in, do you want the window out? I vote for in, I vote for out. Nine want out, it’s out. Well, you really patently can’t design like that. And there were also too many people and all these meetings became tug-of-wars with agendas of self-promotion and all the things that happen with big committees. And also curators in museums are a natural enemy to architects and… I’m not saying this to denigrate either side… curators, probably correctly, feel oppressed by the people over them; they feel their opportunities are limited; they feel they’re the experts and no-one listens to them and things like that. And so they’re having a difficult time and if they have a difficult boss and the boss gives them a difficult time, the temptation is to dump on the architect. We are, after all, the running dogs of their imperialists. If the client is the imperialist, we are the client’s agent, ally, representative in this.  And so they then say to us the things they would like to say to the client, but don’t dare. And so there’s a collision course between the architect and the curator very often in a museum project. And that’s something of what happened in the National Gallery and the curators’ were tamped down in some of their less desirable aims until a new director came on board. And then everyone listened to him and he listened to the curators. Later, when he was replaced, some of the… a curator was removed and he said, ‘It had to be one boss in this place not two, and I’m the boss’. That is, the new director said that and we could… we knew very well why.

[RV] Competitions are usually judged by a jury of several people and, very often, Denise has pointed out, very often four people like one scheme very much and four people like another scheme very much and then they can’t come to a conclusion, so they take the scheme that the fifth person likes, which is sort of what neither of them likes or something. So competitions really can have… can be difficult.
[DSB] They chose their second choice.
[RV] Second choice, yes.
[DSB] Everyone’s second choice.
[RV] Because committees…  I think, judging art via a committee has real problems and is not generally a good idea. So that competitions can end up positively but they often cannot… can end up not positively. By some miracle this one, in a way, ended up positively. But then again the committee that represented the client while we were working, that did involve some problems that Denise has just described.
[DSB] There’s also another problem with competitions that you are forced to work away from your client…
[RV] Right, that’s very important.
[DSB] At the very time when you should…
[RV] Exactly.
[DSB] Be collaborating with them most closely…
[RV] Exactly.
[DSB] Before things are firmed up in your minds or theirs. And that’s the time to be… keep the design fluid, meet with them often and really tailor it to their growing realisation of what they need. Because, as you work together, their ideas of what they need change when they see how much… what they need costs for one thing. Then they begin to do trade-offs and the design might be different and the program might be different from the one you were given. In a competition you can’t do that. Well, this group simulated a more usual client relationship by coming and visiting us and we visiting them so that we had more opportunity to learn while we were designing what they wanted.
[RV] But that is… that is really the main reason why competitions can be bad because you want to have the opportunity to work together to make a good design. As I said earlier, Louis Kahn said, ‘A good piece of architecture derives from a good client’s role as a good architect’. I have a phrase which is a bit of an exaggeration, but not too much: We get our best ideas from our clients. We really do have to work with the client to come up with a good design and that is hard to do with a competition. But once you win the competition, then maybe you can begin to do that. But you might not win the competition and that’s a shame.
[DSB] Also…
[RV] So it’s very complex.
[DSB] Also, you build trust in that process. They see the way you work and they respect it. If they don’t see that process later on they think you didn’t listen to them, you didn’t hear them, you’ve had other ideas in your head. They get notions of being persecuted because they didn’t see that you were open and able to hear them.

I remember, Bob, you had a…  I think it may have been a sign on your desk that you phrased… paraphrase… ‘Thank God we won the revolutionary war’. Were there sort of… and you also had a phrase of the UK and America are two cultures separated by a common language.
[DSB] That’s George Bernard Shaw, that one.
[RV] That’s a quote from George Bernard Shaw. No, the other one is… the other…the other is sad, because I love… I love… I love English architecture, I love English culture. I love London and other cities there and so the difficulties that are raised from the enormous complexities of the program and the makeup of the way the work proceeded made it difficult but, on the other hand, I was loving England as a whole. And, as I say, and that’s why we… I went back 55 times to work on this job.
Did you feel treated as a tradesperson versus a professional?
[RV] It was a little bit of that. I think in America there is, I think, more of an approach where the architect is a professional.
[DSB] And a colleague.
[RV] And a colleague. It’s like when you go to the doctor, you don’t tell the doctor what to do exactly… normally. And I think that the architect has a less of a professional standing. And it is true that it’s a relatively new profession in England – architecture.
[DSB] But they thought we were treating them like tradespeople, so it went both ways in a sense. And, of course, we were all grocers – that’s the other funny thing. Mrs Thatcher’s father, the Sainsbury’s family and Bob’s father – all grocers, which wasn’t lost on any of us; we used to talk about that. Not with Mrs Thatcher, but…
[RV] Yeah, that’s fun.
[DSB] We were good friends with Simon Sainsbury and we still are.

[RV] I’ve written an essay or two on… and lecture about… on how Louis Kahn was influenced by a lot of the young people around him, which is perfectly all right. I think very often, teachers are influenced by their students, but, he never… he never recognised that, which I think was not nice at all. I remember once… I remember once attending with Denise Scott Brown, I think it was in the mid ‘60s, a lecture by Louis Kahn that he was giving in the Art Alliance and right in the middle of the lecture I realised, half the buildings he was showing were directly influenced by me, in many, in certain ways. And we went out and sat in the, sort of, springtime. We sat in Rittenhouse Square and I just sort of fell apart when I realised this… this was a guy that I had admired so much. But other people, it happened the same way to other people with Louis Kahn.  That’s another whole subject, which doesn’t really connect.
Could you be specific about what he took from you?
[RV] Well, I’m kind of forgetting details like that, but he took from me the idea of the enclosed space, he took from me the idea of… he influenced me too… the idea of the servant space. He took from me the idea of layering and I should go back to my article, since I wrote it as an article I’ve got it out of my system, so I haven’t thought about it much anymore. But I gave it as a lecture, I think, the first time in Japan and wrote… wrote a…
One story is that you put mother’s house where you did, so he’d have to look at it every morning.
[RV] No, the other, the other… there was… what reminded me of that influencing was that in that house up the street, that I forget the name of, you can look out of the window and see the chimney coming up behind the window, and that was my idea indirectly. That was one of the things that kind of… that kind of influenced me.  So he did do a lot of that.
You can see that house tomorrow too.
[RV] Yeah, yeah, it’s an interesting house actually. But then later, I just didn’t go along with what he was doing. He was… when I was going into the appropriateness of acknowledging the everyday, acknowledging the… the… what do you call the everyday, there’s another word for it?
[DSB] Conventional building?
[RV] The convention, let’s say convention. He was being… doing architecture that was very ‘original’, which it really wasn’t and ‘very, very monumental’, in a period where… where monumentality was not appropriate, I thought.  A lot of the work he did in Asia after that… So I’ve written all about this and it was sort of a sad evolution where I loved the guy, discovered the guy in a way, was with Anne Tang and eventually I became very disillusioned. And… but it is interesting that many, many, many years later he is still very fashionable and talked about a lot, and, and directly influences people. There were a couple of people who started… who started a practice a while back in Philadelphia who worked here, who said twice in a… in a Philadelphia paper, we worked for Venturi Scott Brown, but we are influenced in our work by Louis Kahn, which is all right.

[RV] So I… I really can’t say that much more that is interesting about my education, except that thank God I went to Princeton, it was an accident almost, thank God. I think it was rather good in my case that I wasn’t part of movements, part of a movement and part of a school of architecture, that I could be… I think therefore that I could be independent. I had wonderful teachers at Princeton University; it was a place also where they encouraged you as an undergraduate, even though you were going to major in architecture and did, the last two years, to take lots of varieties of Liberal Arts. So, I think I got a very good Liberal Arts background. I wasn’t entirely happy when I went there for my Masters degree, but it was… it was good, I think in the end. And then I… I… there’s not much more to say about my education before that – I've already spoken about my parents and their liberal ideas. I went to the Episcopal Academy which was a school where you got… which had a very sort of traditional idea, by no means liberal, you had a very sound education in the general parts of… general aspects of education. So, I got to… for that reason, at Princeton I could be very free and happy and confident when I got there, because I got such a good education at this conservative boys… boys school.
When you were at Princeton in graduate school, were there any architects whom you especially appreciated and felt that you were influenced by, while you were in graduate school?
[RV] I didn’t think that way too much, but it is interesting when a little later after that, when I was a young architect and working and so forth, this is an over-simplification but in those days, this is in the kind of ‘50s, you could be… you were either a… you were either a Mies van der Rohe guy or a Frank Lloyd Wright guy. When I was working for Saarinen it was a… and I was a Frank Lloyd Wright guy… I was a Frank Lloyd Wright – I think you’d say that was an influence. Later, I changed around completely and I became not Frank Lloyd Wright and became Mies van der Rohe, although I’ve written recently and lectured recently in Chicago about Mies van der Rohe and my kind of yes and no about Mies. Mies I thought was very good but Mies was very different from me, when I could say that less is a bore rather than less is more. And the reason that I could say that was that I was Mannerist and he was not Mannerist, he did not accept the contradictions that were so much part of the era.
What about the Finnish architects?
[RV] Well, Alvar Aalto.  Yes, I would have to say, he is my favourite architect of the 20th century, although I admire Le Corbusier very much.  But Alvar Aalto is my favourite and I… I also have written, wrote on him an essay, where… I make a terrible mistake at the end, where I say, ‘Ah, one good thing about him is that he’s never written about architecture’. Well, it turns out he’s never written about architecture that was translated into English at the time, but he had written about architecture. But no, the point is that… I consider him a kind of impure and Modernist, who was a… who was Mannerist, I would interpret him as, but I love him…
[Overtalking]
And I’ve gone to Finland to watch him. I interpret him as, incidentally he was a Mannerist but that isn’t… I don’t say I love him because he was a Mannerist. I’d say I love because I love him and his work, but oh by the way he was that way.
I was lucky when I was at Princeton in my senior year of ’47, it was the year of the 200th Anniversary of the founding of the University of Princeton and different departments in the school… in the university had kind of celebrations.  And the celebration in the School of Architecture was a week when all the great architects of the world – except Le Corbusier – all of the great architects of the world came and were there.  You name him, he was there, including Frank Lloyd Wright and all the foreigners and all that stuff. And it was just thrilling for me as a young architect. My dear teacher, Sherley W Morgan had Mr Wright to lunch at his club at Princeton, and he invited me.  I was the only one and I sat next to Wright at lunch and I could see all of these architects and hear them. One story I love was that at one of the informal meetings held at the Princeton Inn where the architects had, sort of, gathered and we students were there, to talk informally, and Frank Lloyd Wright got up and there was a sort of a… a small black board that was put up in the lobby there for him and he gave a little speech about the significance and the… of the Japanese-Asian philosophy and how it’s more superior to American. And he drew two dots on this… on this board, he drew a dot here and a dot here and he said, ‘When an Asian goes from here to here, he takes an indirect route’. And he drew a kind of S like that and then he said, disdainfully, ‘An American when he goes from there to there, is efficient and makes a straight route’. And this wonderful guy George Howell got up and he said, ‘Ah, but Frank, there is a third way, the American way which is combination of the both’, and he wrote an S with a line through it. It was just fab, I loved it and it was so quick and good. But that was a wonderful experience and I met… I didn’t talk to him. I did talk to, I did talk to… at a reception, I went up to the head of the school at Harvard, whose name I keep forgetting, you just mentioned him.  Who’s the head of the school at Harvard?
Walter Gropius.
[RV] Who?
Walter Gropius?
[RV] Walter Gropius, Walter Gropius, why do I keep forgetting it?  And I… I said, ‘Mr Gropius may I ask you a question?’
[DSB] What year were you in?
[RV] I was in my senior year and I was 22… 22, and I… 20, yeah 22, and I had had a martini so I felt kind of proud – not proud, but courageous. And I said, ‘Mr Gropius could you explain to me’, this is at a reception, I mean… ‘the difference between your philosophy and that of Frank Lloyd Wright’s?’  And Mr Gropius answered, ‘Young man, could you direct me to the rest room?’ And immediately, and I did, and then immediately afterwards, I said, ‘I deserve that answer’, that was stupid to ask such a question at this time.

[RV] I think it is significant that in a way we are constantly being educated.  We are constantly absorbing, we are constantly… partly because we like to look at the every day and learning from it. I am never bored. I take the train to New York and I decide, will I sit on the left side or the right side, which side do I want to see this time? And I look out of the window and I take route 95 up to New York in the car and I’m constantly thrilled by what I see. I find my favourite church to the left in north Philadelphia. I forget the name of it.  It’s a church where the façade has in it… its tower, but the tower is two dimensional, it’s part of the façade, the tower is a sign therefore, and I learn from that. And I learn, of course a lot from the industrial architecture, so the… that, that, the constant learning. Then we’ve done an enormous amount of travel throughout Europe, lots of continents, but of course mostly Europe, but also Asia, China, Japan where again we constantly, constantly learn. I remember the one, our first time in Japan was one week and I was just sort of ecstatic. I was like intoxicated the whole time I was there and that was from loving the current Tokyo which… what’s the name of the main street there, the…?
[DSB] The Ginza?
[RV] The Ginza, which is just teeming with signage, with neon, with lights with iconography of all sorts and with all kinds of architecture. And it’s a city where you have a hundred storey high rise here and right next to it is a, a religious shrine that’s very, very rural and so it’s enormous complexity and contradiction, and then of course you find that in other cities there. And again this combination of the… of the traditional and the… that are… and the current that are so vividly juxtaposed. But, but we’re just constantly learning from where we travel, either we go to new places or we go back to old places.  Most of our travel in the last 20 years has been related to working abroad, which is more fun even than leisurely travelling, I think.  But we could just write several volumes on, sort of, directly what we learn from looking at all kinds of architecture, including Hong Kong, Shanghai, Rome, Florence, what’s the capital of… anyhow, all sorts of places.  And I think that, that business of being constantly educated is important. And I think, it derives also from the fact that we are not… we do not have ideology, we do not have, sort of, this is the way, this is the right way and therefore you don’t have to look at anything else, and you just focus, and I think the fact that we don’t focus on a few things, we focus on lots of things is constantly stimulating to us, constantly, constantly thrilling. And I, kind of, enjoy making an analogy these days, and I think it really connects to our… to the complexity, I’m going to save that for a little later. So, that’s what I can say about the education part, that education for us is not only formal education. I think I did mention that I did have this combination of going to a liberal school when I was very, very young, a… a Friend’s School, where you were sort of allowed to do anything you wanted and I was jumping all over the place and I wasn’t learning much, what do you call it now?  There’s a name for it, Denise?
[DSB] Non-directive school.
[RV] No, a child who’s jumping around all the time.
[DSB] ADD.
[RV] AVD?
[DSB] ADD.
[RV] What’s it called?
[DSB] Well, it’s Attention Deficit Disorder if you want to…
[RV] Attention Deficit Disorder, I had…
[DSB] Or else dyslexia as well.
[RV] And on the other hand I was looking around, or maybe dyslexia and then they also…
[DSB] It’s not a disorder, it’s a difference and a pretty creative way to be and…
[RV] Yeah.
[DSB] Many creative people have that.
[RV] I remember at one time at the Friend’s School we went on a picnic or something, and they were worried about me, because the boys were over there playing baseball and different things like that, and the girls were over here doing other things and one of them was playing in a sandbox. Well, I was over with the girls playing in the sandbox because I was building buildings in the sandbox and so they decided that I better go to a school where there was more focus on the academic. And I’m really glad I did and at Episcopal I went to a place where we went to Episcopal chapel every morning, then on… then on Sunday, or first day as the Quakers call it, I went to Friend’s Meeting. And then I did learn all of these academic, conventional academic subjects of history, English, mathematics and so forth, science courses, which I wasn’t so good at. And I did pretty well there, because I focused a lot and I did very differently from how I had done in the Friend’s School. I just changed, became really focused. Then when I went back… when I went to Princeton I could become free again, the way I was at the beginning.

[RV] I would say there was Rome, where I learned a lot about space and urban design that accommodated the pedestrian and created architecture with enormous spatial and later symbolic effect, so Rome. Then there is Las Vegas – I combine Las Vegas with Los Angeles because the Las Vegas of then, which was a city of the automobile, a city of the… of the… of the automobile, with the signage, what’s the word, the strip city.
[DSB] And then Tokyo.
[RV] And then there was Tokyo, which is a city of the coming together of cultures and the coming together and creating in crazy ways of being extremely, deriving not from a kind of Parisian, let’s call it, urban design effect. Then there was Shanghai, which I just adore, again Shanghai, I always wanted to go to and eventually got to and have been back three or four times – where we do have a job now.  And in Shanghai there is the phenomenon, that I was aware of before I went there, of the coming together of cultures, which interests me very much. I mean way… going back 150 years of the English, the French, the German, Jewish also, that kind of migration there, and there are these areas within the city that go back. You visit the edge of the old city and you find, kind of, suburban houses that could be right on the main line or on Long Island, I mean, I just can’t believe it, that you’re in China, and then of course you have the other real Chinese influence too. So, the coming together of cultures fascinates me and again, it involves complexity, contradiction and having a wide range.  And of course we also love Hong Kong for that reason. We’re very delighted to be working in Shanghai.  Before that we, or Denise, was working in Tsinghua.
[DSB] Beijing.
[RV] At the University at Beijing, at the University of Tsinghua doing a campus study for them. I really wasn’t working then, on that… and then we have designed these two high rises. We always wanted to do high rises in America.  Somehow in America, developers don’t come to us, they consider us too highfaluting, they don’t realise we are… we are very practical and good at coming in on the budget, and on time.  Someone said, ‘Ah you’re arty and crafty, that means...’ But anyhow, and so this wonderful developer who loves what we’ve done and we’ve done these high rises that really do connect with our thoughts about doing a building which is a generic loft, although a high rise one, quite Mies van der Rohe looking, ironically, but then…
And this is in?
[RV] This is in… in Shanghai.  Unfortunately the Government has stopped all, about a year ago, stopped all building temporarily, because they thought that it was bad for the economy, too much development.  But it is going to start up again and that developer still loves the building and wants to go ahead. So we’ve had all sorts of weird experience when we were… a few weeks ago we went back on our vacation, to visit one of my most… one of my most favourite cities in the world, which is what in France?
[DSB] Toulouse.
[RV] Toulouse, Toulouse where we have done… where we did, and finished a very big project, for a… as a… it’s a state capital called…?  It’s a state – the equivalent of a state capital – a provincial capital, its call the Hôtel du Département de la Haute-Garonne. And we went back there and it was just heaven to go back because I love the city. I love the historical architecture but also they were maintaining our building very beautifully. The French were actually behaving themselves beautifully, maintaining our building and understanding it and appreciating it. So that was a happy, a happy experience. Unfortunately, we can’t go to Italy to look at any work, because we haven’t done any work there.
[DSB] We’ve done a small building…
[RV] Very, very modest work, don’t count.
[DSB] Some decorative arts.
[RV] Decorative arts we’ve done. But certainly that Toulouse experience was just fantastic, really there’s a great church of the Jacobean which I love, which is a conventional Gothic church that… in brick, because that town is in brick. But right up the nave are columns, columns going right up the middle of the nave, no one knows why, don’t know why and that’s a contradictory duality that I adore and I, and I went there. And then there’s this wonderful cathedral that’s Gothic that starts this way, and then moves over there and goes that way for some circumstantial reason – another complexity in contradiction which is really wonderful. And so anyhow, we’re just, we’re just thrilled all the time.  Of course we’re thrilled when we go to Venice but… and, so that’s it. But we particularly love Shanghai, we particularly love Rome, Hong Kong, I have my 21 favourite cities that…
[DSB] London.
[RV] London, I adore. I adore the capital of, of… what is it? One of the…? I’ll, sort of, come back to that one. But as we go and on, I adore, I adore and I went back 50 years later, a couple of years ago, to my first trip of the, of the city in Turkey, called…
[DSB] Istanbul.
[RV] Istanbul, and the main thing I love about Istanbul is Hagia Sofia, which is my favourite building in all history and I could go on for a half hour on that. I won’t, but I just… I worship that building and I’ve… when I visited it 50 years ago I said, ‘This is my favourite building’.  When I went back 50 years later, I said, ‘Yes, it’s still is my favourite, my favourite, my favourite building’. But I love Chicago, I love LA, I love Miami Beach so I have a… we have a wide range of cities that we particularly learn from.

[RV] Unfortunately, I’ve never done… we’ve never done a church except now we are designing, and I think it’s going to happen. It’s in… it’s in working drawings – a chapel for the Episcopal Academy where I went, where as I say I went to school and my Master’s thesis where you could choose your subject, I chose a chapel for the Episcopal Academy. That design is very different from the one that’s 50 some years later, but that shows you that I, I was very interested in doing a religious church and that you could use, especially iconography a lot. So I’ve done that. In this last trip, we went to Ravenna, which is just beyond Venice, where there’s just this great… great tradition of the…
Mosaics?
[RV] Of the mosaics, the iconography and also of the church as a…
[DSB[ Basilica.
[RV] Of a basilica. I adore basilicas. I adore basilicas because again there is a generic form that can then vary – you’re not being original you’re being generic. That’s when I go to Venice, I just adore San Giorgio Maggiore by Palladio and Il Redentore, which again have façades where there’re these contradictions like the dickens. The façades are at once Roman temples, but at the same time they reflect a basilica, which was a Roman law court so that they go, they go… they have to… the façade is more complex and the contradictions and complexities are just amazing by Palladio. Palladio is thought of as very pure, but actually he was one of the great, one of the great Mannerists in my opinion, as was Michelangelo. And so, anyway, I’m just, I’m just thrilled by historical architecture and I’m constantly learning directly from it. But of course, that doesn’t mean we are doing historical revival architecture at all and that does not mean we are Postmodernists.

[DSB] Informal learning, going back to that theme, I think that I learned a great deal from my mother, in particular… both parents. And luckily she was very broad, because any field that she had managed to learn about, or have an interest in, I felt could belong to me too. So, if she could be good at words, I could be good at words; if she could be good at learning languages I could do that.  And she drew all the time, my mother. And she had studied architecture, so, as a small child, I said, I’m going to be an architect like my mommy. Imagine my surprise, when I got to university and found it wasn’t women’s work! ‘But what are all these men doing here?’ It was a rather different story from Bob’s – being thought of as a girl.  Maybe it’s the same story... I thought architecture was women’s work.
[RV] That’s funny… weird.
[DSB] But anyway, going on from there my mother’s influence went also to having, what I call, swivel-tilted heads. She was always looking wherever she went and she would go driving in the countryside looking at buildings, and we would go with her in the back of the car. And so, long before Bob and I met, we shared many things, but one of them was having this swivel-tilted view of the world, you’re always looking – like this [swivels head]. I can’t now wear progressive lenses because they taper off – this way [nods vertically], I need to be able to look like this, not cross eyed but across that way, so I have to have bifocals or trifocals instead, and surveying the horizon, surveying the near landscape and everything in-between. So, then also my mother had friends at school and if you read one of the Oeuvres Complètes by Le Corbusier, there’s a letter written to some young architects and he says, ‘I love the way you react to my work and are learning from my work.  And have me… find a Croesus’, he says, ‘who will bring me out to Johannesburg and we can do a project together’. And it never happened, but that group of people were my mother’s friends at university, they were failing architecture school, because they were doing Modern. So, when she dropped out because she could no longer afford to be in school, she married after some years and we moved back to South Africa. And we built about the second, what Americans would call, international style house, what we called Modern house in Johannesburg, and it was a really very beautiful house.
[RV] A beautiful house.
[DSB] Bob and I went back there and saw it.  Unfortunately they’d put a roof on it.  They said, ‘You would have too – the roof leaked after this time’.
[RV] A sloping roof?
[DSB] Yes, a sloping roof, a real roof, not the one we used to play on. We used to climb up and get on the roof and play there. And so, the…
I was swivel-tilted at that time. And then in parallel with the interests in Modern there was, of course, African housing. And as an architecture student, I became very interested in some of that.  And then even more so, what Africans did with industrial waste, what Africans did by way of making sandals out of car tyres for example – which was standard rough country wear in large parts of Africa. And the whole thing of beadwork, which came from many places including Venice and Manchester… the beads Africans used.  The fabrics which came from Manchester and were made into wonderful clothes, which were African theme fabrics made for the African market.  And then the tin cans and the wire that they found to make toys with. And all of those thrilled me as a young Modernist and they were found objects.  That’s another phrase the Modernists used, you would discover found objects.  Sculptors discovered bits of driftwood or beach pebbles and it influenced the sculpture of people like Henry Moore. And architects following that had found objects.  And then some of the found objects were industrial grain silos of America that Gropius discovered and introduced to Le Corbusier. And I said later, our found objects were Las Vegas and Levittown.

[DSB] The school I went to taught on the Dalton system and it meant that you did a lot of work for yourself and you… you were kind of taught how to research.  And one of the ways they did it, was learning by doing. So, you had projects and I remember as very small children we made models of Egyptian primitive… Egyptian ancient housing, Greek ancient housing. And our teachers had a little difficulty doing that and we learned that much more, because the teachers were having to work out systems and we with them. They became like a player-coach to us, working together with us, which is again the way my mother had been. And sometimes I’d be ill and miss homework, and my mother and I would struggle through the homework together, and she couldn’t do it very well either and then my father would come home in the evening and we’d manage it together. That joint struggling and coming through, I thought was very important for my learning how to educate myself.
But then what I’m really saying is that the projects at Kingsmead taught me about studio and about how to run studios; in other words the whole theory of learning by doing and how you could take that into architecture school. And then, what I did later was, have a theory about how you can learn design by practise, the same way as you don’t learn to ride a bicycle by reading a book about it, you get on it and you fall off and you get back on and you fall off until eventually, there you are riding. And you just have to do that, and you do that in architecture about designing.
But in planning, they have another form of studio, which is teamwork and people share, and they come together in different phases to share their knowledge. And they think of the knowledge they’re finding as something they must share with others and they in fact themselves become teachers. Well, who is learning the most in a situation of teacher and student? Always the teacher. So, I began to realise, let them be the teacher and they’ll learn as much as I’m learning. So, I evolved a way of running studios out of making things with my mother, out of studio which was projects at Kingsmead through architecture and into the studios we ran for Las Vegas and Levittown which were a mixture of research and design with a preponderance of research. And I think that… that is a way of self-education along with a player-coach and along with a group that could be very interesting for academics.
In fact, when I taught at Berkeley and the people there were saying the problem for the students at Berkeley is they’re being taught how to be little academics but they are activists. And then we began to work out, if they were studying studio maybe they’d be happier people, they’d be making things, they’d be learning by doing, they’d be making recommendations, they’d be heading toward action. And, I think, one of the problems with a lot of academic learning is they don’t realise that indeed they are doing that and they do it unawares, so that economists think of themselves as analysts, they’re synthesists as well as analysts and profoundly so, when they do models and systems, but they still call all of that analysis. Once you do that, you’re not responsible to the whole.  You think all you have to do is research the variables you can measure, you don’t think about the ones that you can’t measure, which in real life might influence things more. So, a studio mentality, a designer’s mentality, might be useful in many fields, in many public policy fields, just for that reason it makes people responsible to a whole, whether they feel they can handle it or not, they know they must, then they evolve methods to do it.

[DSB] I taught courses which had projects.  In my planning course I gave as a term paper, that a client… a potential client had approached the student and wanted to design a new city on the outskirts of Arizona, which was very funny because later that happened to us. And I said, ‘Write a letter to this client and tell them all the things you would have to do, before you could reach a point where you would know what you would be doing as a designer, and all the issues that would come up’. And I gave it as a group project, two in a group. And I also said, because this was a highly political time, ‘Put… put your… make your group of a conservative and a liberal and argue through these issues from both those points of view as you’re working’. And so I gave them a project which was to do with making things. Although I didn’t tell them to design the city, I told them to do all the description of what you would have to do first, what your sources of information would be, etc.
Of course we, if we did that in real life, we’d also have to cost the whole thing out and build the team and all of that. I told them to tell us what kinds of consultants they would need, and I’d never ever written a proposal or even knew that that’s what you did in practise, but I feel that was an approach to that kind of a problem. And I also think that courses should have juries, the way studios do. And it means people from different fields should come and debate the issues as shown by the professor in that class, as shared by the students, with those students. So, a transportation expert should be attending the jury on… on urban sociology, saying, ‘It’s all very well for you to say this in this course.  And you’ve told them this and that, but there are these other aspects that must be considered’.  We are experts, we do know more than the public knows about transportation, even if you think that our expertise shouldn’t be, you know, shouldn’t prevail all the time, you can’t… you have to face the fact that it does exist, which never came up.  Or to ask a Herb Gans, ‘Why do you care nothing at all about technology?’  And he should ask the transportation engineer, ‘Why do you say…’ One transportation engineer once said to me, ‘You mean you’ve made up your mind, don’t bother you with the facts?’ I almost turfed him out, ‘You must be rational, do it my way’.
 

[DSB] Bob and I have set up this office so that it satisfies our needs as creative people to look at things, to design and to theorize, and to move between those three fields. So we look at Las Vegas, it gives us a feeling, we start researching and theorizing and we start designing. Or we design something and it gives us a new idea and we go out and look at Tokyo and then we… every time we write to show what we’ve learned, or to theorize or something like that. Now, we call that our mini university that’s right here in the office. It’s a very expensive way to run a practice but it makes life worth living.

[RV] You talk about your mother’s wonderful walks, or driving around and observing your mother’s absorption, as it were. And I remember taking wonderful walks with her through… through Geneva, where she just… it was just fun and also you learned a lot. I also remember this one example again, parallel, where… we were… I was in as a kid, maybe I was only seven or so and we were… I was in New York with my father driving down Seventh Avenue in a taxi, and… is it Seventh Avenue you go south, is that right? And it must have been that we drove to New York, because as the taxi was accidentally passing Penn Station, my father told the taxi driver, would you please pull aside here and let us off, we will be back in a moment. And my father took me through the… this is the old Penn Station, took me through the gallery that went to the Penn Station and there I saw this great baths of Caracalla. Do you remember Penn Station in those days, were you…?  Did you know it?
In the ‘50s.
[RV] Well, it was just, you know, one of the great spaces of the… in the United States, and that… I was just thrilled. I mean, I just was amazed and I never forgot it. And that is sort of typical again. My father would point out things, things in that way that were architectural and so that, I think, had a big influence on me and was… made my life rich.

[DSB] My mother living in the wilderness with this governess and these brothers – she grew up like a tomboy and dressed always like a boy, short hair. And they used to shoot to eat.  But this governess who had to teach them everything… and they learned well, she got them to… she was very, very young when she left school too… but after she eventually got there… but they used to have these nature walks, and the governess used to show them all the wildlife that was around on the ground, and the plants and things like that of Africa and I think her looking at the environment started out there.

[RV] I remember going there, I remember making a presentation, but I did not get any sense that we were… had made a particular, any faux pas in the presentation and these things are Kafkaesque; they really are; they’re very hard to judge – these kinds of interviews. So I have no answer to that. Obviously they liked the other guy better; he said the right things and I didn’t. But I was simpatico, I was trying my best, being honest – that’s all I can say. I don’t know what… and very often you don’t know. But very often you go into an interview and the decision has really already been made, no matter what you say or how you act you don’t get the job.
[DSB] And you can sometimes tell that. A recent situation… someone said of our project, ‘They’ve really done a marvellous project’.  And one of the interviewers there said, ‘Aren’t we lucky we have several very qualified candidates’, and he meant I’m not giving it to them. And I knew that as he said it.
[RV] There was another project we went to where we learnt afterwards that one of the interviewers said, ‘Venturi came and he… he brought his wife with him’. Misunderstandings are just amazing.
Who was that?
[DSB] No, you can’t say…
[RV] I can’t tell.
When was that?
[RV] A long time ago.
[DSB] Yes. Probably the early ‘70s.
Do you remember the presentation you gave to the Getty?
[RV] I don’t remember any details about it actually, Jim.
[DSB] But you know, you could say this. If they liked what they got they wouldn’t have got that from us and, therefore, they weren’t our clients and we weren’t their architects and sometimes, I’m sure that was a privilege to do that work… but sometimes the ones you don’t get… you should say, let our competition get it… be brought down by that project. Why should we suffer through that difficult situation?
[RV] There is, you know, the phrase of Oscar Wilde – the only thing worse than not getting what you want is getting what you want. Sometimes that applies with architectural projects.

[RV] One thing that’s very significant in the profession of architecture today and how you work in it, is how… the kind of, what I call, the Byzantine complexity has evolved. And I’m not referring to the complexity and contradiction that I wrote about in the book, many years ago, which was part of the programmatic quality of architecture and the appropriateness of acknowledging that complexity and contradiction in the… in the design expression of the architecture and the buildings. But here, you could refer to the Byzantine complexity that you’re involved in, in the process of designing architecture. And it has several… several kind of elements that are combined. Very often your client now is more a… a committee rather than an individual, no longer the bishop, or the duke or the millionaire donor, but the committee. And there’re certain advantages in committees, it’s a democratic process, but on the other hand, there is enormous complexities involved from the differences of opinion of people on the committee, which have to be accommodated. But perhaps the most frustrating aspect of that kind of complexity, Byzantine complexity of today, does derive from the need more and more – it’s growing – to accommodate governmental and neighbourhood, if you will, or community elements that connect and inform what you’re doing. You have to go through many more complex governmental problems involving… here I go again, what’s the word? Involving governmental…?
[DSB] Regulations?
[RV] Regulations. And that can be complex. You have to go through design review committees; design review boards. You have to go, in certain areas where you’re designing in historical contexts, neighbourhoods, you have to go through historical commissions. And all of that can be extremely consuming, concerning energy and time. And you find that a lot of your energy is going into, kind of, justifying or selling, so to speak, your design, rather than developing it, creating it and making it effective architecture in terms of program, structure and artistic expression. And that can be exceedingly frustrating and it does find a parallel, I think, in other aspects of life today where there just is enormous… enormous complexity.
I just wonder… I, I was analysing a while back, that when I worked in the office of a famous and prosperous architect… well acknowledged architect, Eero Saarinen, 55 years ago, there were about 45 people in the office. And when… and I figured out that there were only about four or five people out of those, who were not producing architecture, who were secretaries or administrators. Whereas today, if you have a 45 person office, you probably have about 15 people who are having to do a lot of… deal with a lot of the complexities, actually even involving… the people who are involving the… the, all sorts of things. But a lot of them are preparing for these kinds of presentations that you have to make before these Byzantine guys.
And I love Byzantine committees, if you were, boards. I love making the analogy. I love using the word Byzantine, by the way, the Byzantine period of architecture was one that I greatly admire, maybe  my favourite building in the whole history is a Byzantine building, that of Hagia Sofia in Constantinople. But it also does remind you that, not to oversimplify but to some extent, the fall of the Byzantine culture, civilisation, did derive from complexities of existence, in… especially in Constantinople. So, I think we are in a perverse Byzantine period, which can have negative effects on creating a great architecture, having the energy to do that and effective architecture. So, I feel rather grouchy about that. I found myself saying the other day, Beethoven possibly if he were… if he had been living in the early 21st century could not have written, could not have composed the Ninth Symphony. He would not have had time. He would have been too tired to make it so effective, and so long. And I do… I do think that’s an important issue today. I’ve written about it to some extent.

[RV] Another issue that I think, I would like… that I enjoy contemplating and acknowledging is that of the idea that we have referred to in the past of the building as the decorated shed and the building of the duck. We refer to the duck, of course, as that building in Long Island which was a… it was… it’s still there, but it was originally built as a building at the side of the road to sell… for the… to sell ducks to the people driving by, a commercial building. And in a way, it was a building therefore highly as symbol, itself as symbol. And then you can’t say… and then there’s the building as the decorated shed, where the actual building as shelter is not at all… does not contain any symbolic content, it is essentially shelter. But it is ornamented with, if you will, signage and the signage gives out the symbolic expressive architectural aesthetic quality. And we learned that from… from Las Vegas, where you go along the Las Vegas of 30 years ago, you go along the strip, you have… first you see the very big sign which informs you that beyond the parking lot to the left or the right, is the casino or the hotel or whatever. And you… that connects to the… to the scale of the automobile age Urbanism of then. And then, of course, there could be by the side of the road the building, which itself expresses, informs you about what’s going on and lures you to go inside and that would be the equivalent of the duck. And we were saying both are valid, but there is to some extent today, especially the validity that exists of the decorated shed. And I’ve made the analogy before of the building where form follows function, where the building is like a glove and derives its architectural quality from the characteristics, the original and varied characteristics of the- someone’s glove for me might be different from someone who had a longer third finger. It has to be accommodated.
There is also however the… today, very much the… because of the complexity of existence today and the evolutionary quality of uses of buildings, there is very much the validity of the building as the shed in which many different things can happen at the same time. And we’ve had great fun and we’ve learned a lot from studying the loft building. And I’ve mentioned before the great tradition of the loft building where you see that as, let’s say, the Italian Palazzo, which is a generic building that contains rooms that in terms of their ornament have a lot of individual character. They don’t really literally change over time but the uses within the Palazzo can change over time, as I’ve said, as they evolve from home of a noble family to museum, library, embassy and so forth.

[RV] The automobile has had the effect of making for signage which is much bigger and much bolder, as in the billboard and as in the sign that has to attract, has be effective as you are driving at 40 miles an hour. And you’re going past it much quicker than if you’re walking along a medieval or, let’s just say, Colonial Georgian street. There the detail can be much more small in scale and you can take it in, and the detail of either the architectural elements or of the symbolic elements. And you can make the example of Main Street, where the signs are relatively small because you’re walking at four miles an hour, as opposed to the… to the strip where they’re… where they’re greater.
[DSB] It’s an interesting thought, whether the introduction of the carriage, the horse and carriage, relates to the increasing size and scale of Baroque detail.
[RV] That is interesting. There is also then, of course, the decorated, well, there is the shed, which not only accommodates that quality on the outside but on the inside allows for flexibility, and there is no question that the tradition of the flexible loft which was in America, to a great extent in America, was very important because the industry… industrial uses inside could change. The machinery layout could change, and things of that sort, over time. And the different uses of the decorated shed like at Nassau Hall in Princeton, which originally contained classrooms and dormitory rooms and a chapel and lots of other things, and then could evolve over time.  So, the important thing of the evolving uses can be accommodated in the decorated shed, in the loft and that we consider extremely significant, where the building is a shelter for accommodating evolving uses.

[RV] We have found since around 1980 that we have designed many scientific laboratory buildings in universities. And we found from the very beginning that the decorated shed – or let’s not even say decorated, let’s emphasise the loft building – was extremely significant. That was not an original idea with us, although to some extent it was because, as I’ve mentioned, Louis Kahn designed a famous scientific research laboratory building at the University of Pennsylvania, which was a glove and not a mitten and which turned out to be not effective to the… for the users, because it did not… did not accommodate this opportunity for flexibility. So, we loved the idea that you could design the loft building for the laboratory in that it accommodated flexibility, but also it could accommodate very explicitly community, and I’ve written about this, where the users can communicate with each other. They can focus very much and not communicate but connect on their immediate job, they can work as a group and therefore focus, but also intercommunicate among each other as they’re working as a team. And then, there is the opportunity, we discovered and emphasize that at the end of the long, long…
[DSB] Corridor?
[RV] Shed, of the corridors…
[DSB] The street through the building.
[RV] The street through the building, there could be light at the end, that there would not be a laboratory at the end there would be light. And that made for amenity, but also you could go up there and sit around the window if you wanted to get a cup of coffee, or you could go up there to sit and communicate. And therefore the question of intercommunication among the academic scientific users was important. And that helped to create a sense of community, which should exist and it also gave variety at the end that was valid. It was not the variety of the Louis Kahn building, which was invalid, but at the end there were these… that was noticeable on the outside or is noticeable, where there’re different kinds of windows and there are window seats on the inside that make for that.  So, that became a kind of system that we found was workable in almost all of the laboratory buildings we did and that made for buildings that were on the outside quite consistent, they could easily be boring. I think, the first one we did of these was at the University of Pennsylvania – we also worked at Princeton a lot, and then on and on. The outside could be boring, but there is a long tradition of long buildings and they accommodate almost inevitably and automatically the architectural element of rhythm and just generally a kind of even rhythm and sometimes it’s A A A A, sometimes it’s A A B A A B, or whatever. You find that in a Palace like Versailles and many other places where… that exemplify good and effective architecture. And so, we have enjoyed working and emphasising that kind of architecture, where there was the danger of being boring but also to accommodate flexibility on the inside and the outside. But there were the opportunities to have variations within the system, slight variations but they could be very, very effective. It’s a little bit like a man wearing a conventional suit.  You make the… the tailor makes the suit so it fits him very well and is appropriate. It’s artful in that way, but then also he can wear a necktie that could be not conventional necessarily and it can, kind of, involve a, kind of, expressionistic element.

[RV] Mostly they have been biology, because…
[DSB] Life sciences labs.
[RV] Life sciences and biology.
Life sciences.
[DSB] Yes.
[RV] And biology because they’re the two, they’re the two programs that have been most significant in the last 25 years.
It is important to mention that the lab has become… was – it’s now calming down a bit – was a very, very active kind of work. There was a lot of Federal… Federal financing of it and that helped make it a, kind of, building that was very characteristic. And there were a lot of them… had been a lot of them. But it is important also – this is very important, I’m glad you mentioned that – to emphasize that we… that the interior of a lab, even with its flexibility, is very complex, and can be very specialised and that we could not connect with… we were not specialists concerning the interior program of the lab, so, in virtually all the labs we have done we have worked in co-operation with another… another architect… another architectural firm. Especially one in Boston, Payette Associates, where they have been responsible for the interior essentially and we have been responsible for the architectural exterior.
And that is not… that you… a functionalist might say, oh, that’s bad, that you’re just being decorators and all that. Well, that’s not so, because in many other aspects of architecture, you have many, many people co-operating and working together.
[DSB] Also it’s an oversimplification to say we do just the exterior. That whole theory of the street through the building that Bob has described and I want to describe in my terms, we evolved that. And so, the inner functioning of the public spaces of the labs we’re very much involved with, and their siting and their relation between the outside system of access and the inside system. And all the things that interest us that come from our mixture of architecture and urbanism. I’d like to also say that the way we describe the shed is really in terms of its system, its systems. We talk about its lighting system being very even, like this building we’re in, here, this loft building.  Therefore letting light fall very nicely on tasks and allowing you to do tasks in front of lots of different windows, works beautifully for a lab. And then we talk about the structural bays being the right size for labs.  And then we hope for development and lab design in the future. And all those buildings have a sequence where the highest tech labs become lower tech labs, and then teaching labs and eventually, we think architecture studios. And so, you think of the structural bay for all those purposes.
[RV] There’s also…
[DSB] And also, going on from there… so, it’s the decoration which has now to do with the rhythm and the entrances and things like that. But the patterns of community on the inside, the basic idea, comes from, you could say, urban economics  – that at a meeting place of two main streets, you put a market. It’s always like that; where most people pass is where you put the market and if you don’t, then the market dies. So, eventually, it will end up where it needs to be. So, if you take this street through the building of the access corridor, the next most important ‘street’ is the vertical circulation, the elevators and the stairs. So, we put our coffee lounges at that point where the stairs and the elevators meet the major corridor.  And looking out over a window. Now, lab workers can’t bring their coffee into their labs, it’s just bad for the machines. You spill it over a very expensive computer or some other piece of scientific equipment and see what happens. So, the principal researcher will go into her or his office and the secretary will make coffee there, for that person. But the post-docs need another place and so they gravitate… the principal researcher hopes not for too long… but they gravitate to a comfortable chair, to a change in the focal length. They’ve been sitting at their desk doing this experiment like this for hours and the junior researchers do that for hours and hours and hours, they save the senior researchers’ time. In the life sciences there’s a lot of that. So, they need a place where they can relax their tired bottoms and refocus their tired eyes. And if you give them, also, a blackboard, or it’s usually a white board, it’s very interesting to go into those labs and see what’s on the boards, because they get talking with each other. And someone from another lab comes by, on the stairs, or something like that. 
And if the lab is open in feeling, it’s a different kind of architecture. If the… rather the coffee lounge is open and a different kind of architecture from the lab, which is very organised like the grid of a city.  This is more free-flowing – like a flow of movement. And if you feel you can go in there but you don’t have to – there’s no door that will close after you… that’s difficult to arrange because the main circulation is also the main fire safety route and the door must close at a certain time.  But you can get hinges which let it stay open and then close automatically… if you don’t provide those hinges, your coffee shops won’t work. So, then the next thing… so I, as an Urbanist, must stay into the detailing of the hinges to make sure the relationships that I’ve planned, will actually happen. So, sitting there and meeting and talking, there is this serendipitous possibility of interdisciplinary interchange and the meeting of two minds. We say, those meeting places are market places, and market places for ideas and the meeting of minds. And in that situation, where will the next Nobel Prize be generated, at the lab bench or in the coffee lounge?
And then we build a system. In our Michigan project, you can say, after that, there’s an open space outside where people congregate – if we will leave them, not benches, but things they can make into seating, like semi amphitheatres or rostra or edges of flower beds. And they’ll sit about on those things. Or they can go walking past the commons, and then two of them coming from the academic sciences past the life sciences may meet a friend from the life sciences. And as they go past the common room, or the common’s building, there’s a café with glass along the route there and they may see Joe in there.  They join Joe and there’s another place where the next Nobel Prize could happen.
[RV] They might see their enemy, and then they can just take their coffee and go back out.
[DSB] Yes, that’s right. It’s open to them to do that. Then, the path goes on a bridge and this whole bridge is over what was once an old lake. So, underneath is 960 cars, I’m talking about Michigan. But you don’t think it’s a bridge, because it goes flat – and a still [sic] flat takes you across the major street that was the huge stumbling block to access between the main medical research people and the life sciences and the scientists. Well, this bridge has just linked the whole lot of them, and ends them up at the same level, except at the very end when they go down a little, with ramps that handicapped can manage, and there they are at medical research. So, we’ve linked, with this one bridge, the whole scientific endeavour of the campus and we’re very proud of that.
But we’ve made it also habitable and congenial in the way we’ve planned it. And the lovely thing when you do that kind of planning is to go there and see those things actually happening.

[RV] There is one frustration that should be mentioned with the lab as a decorated shed – the academic lab especially – and that is the decoration on the exterior. The decoration – we love using that word because it was a word that was terribly bad and out of fashion in the Modernist period. The Modernist period which we love, but we’re now beyond that. The decoration… because the decoration cannot be extremely whamo in its effect.  A building in a campus context has to be recessive on the outside. Very seldom can you have a building that is… that it can be aggressive and can distract you, let’s say, when you’re walking down the… in front of it and talking to a colleague about the importance of a particular scientific experiment you’re involved in, or whatever. So the… we never could… well except for with one exception, we never could use electronic iconography that probably we cannot. We are beginning that maybe able to do that in one particular project we now have in UC Santa Barbara. So, the… let’s call it the ornament – the decorated shed – the decoration part in these buildings has been recessive. We’ve not been able to, kind of, promote our idea in a grandiose way. It is interesting that the nanosciences building we have… we’re just completing in the University of California, Santa Barbara, the building is located right at the main entrance, the main automobile entrance, as you come in. So, the building not only has to be effective as a building, in terms of its interior uses, but on the exterior it has to have some, well, connection with the campus as a whole. And one end of the building is not a scientific lab, but a lab… an area of the building that is… where they study dramatic presentations, so, theatre and stuff. And so, that aspect, that one end of this long lab with the rhythmic windows…
[DSB] It’s a digital lab, isn’t it?
[RV] Yeah, it is largely that, but at the one end of it… that’s not on the outside. On the one end there is a wall without windows and on that wall we are now working on a… let’s call it a… let’s call it a sign board, a billboard which identifies the university, welcomes you as you come in. And one problem with this element of architecture is there can be a lot of arguments among the different users and different groups of people on the campus as to what the content should be as well as what the medium should be. And unfortunately, the medium of electronics is expensive and so we’re having some trouble with that. But, ideally we would like to have an electronic system there which can vary over time, make announcements – at four o’clock on Thursday afternoon there will be a lecture by so and so, in such a hall. But then it can also give philosophical ideas or whatever. Again, it’s for essentially moving cars, vehicular traffic so it can… has to be not too much involved in detail but it must also connect with appropriate scale. So, we love that project and we are now focusing on that issue and we hope there we can really do what we’re talking about in an academic building.

[DSB] Coming back to the idea of the generic quality of the lab and, by the way, of other generic basilica and the palazzo and various other… this generic lab and loft is a very important one in academe and I’ve said, it’s in a way like a city. It has a grid. It has a movement system through it. It has unique spaces, public spaces along the movement system. Analysing it in some of those terms is very interesting and talking about urban change is applicable.
There was an article written by Kevin Lynch in the 1960s; it appeared in Scientific American and it’s been a guide post for us too. He talks about the fact that, well, I talk about the fact that many engineers bemoan in transportation planning, for example, and in urban systems planning, bemoan the fact that it’s very, very difficult to forecast the future in urban areas. Sometimes, national forecasts are easier to make than urban ones, because the variables are so much less controllable. So, they will say isn’t it a shame we have no way of knowing between the span of our high projection and the span of our low projection, where the events will be. So, we’ll choose the middle. It’s terrible, but that’s what we have to do and they build for the middle. So, we know they’ll be 99% likely to be wrong, because there’s only one point they built for. The mitten allows wiggle room. If you plan for change, per se, you do a generic structure that can accept many different kinds of functions over its years. And you ask, what are the characteristics of such a structure? And that’s what Lynch asks about. He says, ‘How would you plan for change not for a false projection?’ And he says, ‘The first method is to allow lots of room’. And that’s an expensive method, so, are there other methods? And the ones he talks about are generosity in the systems, you could say, allowing wide bays; if you can’t allow a lot of space, allow little structure to impede the space. So, wide bays would be one, evenness of bays probably helps.
Thinking through a range of possible activities would make you make, for example, in a hospital the patient rooms for single beds, so that you can accommodate many disease patterns and many treatment plans, rather than for double beds. And you might make the size of the room consistent throughout, not planned to the specific needs of this program in this year, because even by the time the hospital is finished they’d have another program in there. So, you think of a space that’s not too wide and not too narrow, applies to office buildings, faculty offices, classrooms, hospital rooms, all of those mass repeated elements in a plan. And then, the window spacing, you think of it in relation to spacing of partitions and to the needs of light.
So, all of these are ways of thinking about what you do by way of a mitten rather than a glove, in all these different systems. Another way is allowing direction for change – in one direction only and not the other. In a lab building you might be able to add on to it at its end, but not widen it across its breadth and so on. So, I think, this has been important thought to us from the ‘60s starting with Urbanism and then it’s really come into its own as we’ve thought about these lab buildings.

[RV] When we began this, around 1980, this designing of lab buildings, series of lab buildings, we had great fun visiting our friend Phil Finkelpearl up in North Eastern Massachusetts and visiting Lawrence, Massachusetts and other industrial older, 19th century industrial cities. And learning from the great system of New England mills…
[DSB] Learning from lofts.
[RV] And learning from lofts. It was just fabulous. It was just fascinating. The buildings are so beautiful and fortunately not all of them have been demolished and they are being used for other uses. We also were working at that time up in Dartmouth and we’d take a train – a plane up to – what is the capital city of New Hampshire? God, but anyhow, that city is along a river and you drive past it as you drive up to Dartmouth. Oh my, you pass these beautiful, beautiful loft buildings that are still there.
Textile mills, or…?
[RV] Textile mills, I think, yeah. I forget the name of that city.
Is it Portsmouth?
[RV] No.
Hanover?
[DSB] Hanover, yes.
[RV] Is it Hanover? No, Hanover…
[DSB] Well…
[RV] No, Hanover is…
[DSB] Is where Dartmouth is.
Yes.
[RV] Where Dartmouth is, so it’s not that. But, anyhow, it is a city that is… well anyhow, we learned a lot specifically from visiting, or certainly looking at the exteriors of New England mills, which are just beautiful buildings. And then, of course, we have beautiful ones in North Eastern Pennsylvania in the city of Bethlehem, which again was a great city for steel production and which no longer is. And we’re advising that city, please acknowledge the beauty and the importance of these buildings and use them for other means as you can.
[DSB] The campus buildings of Dartmouth, once you’ve looked at the mills, they’re the same pattern, smaller in scale but they’re just, again, these very simple regular buildings which were mills and then, when they were academic buildings, they gave them a little decoration over – around – the main door, and a cupola. And that’s what differentiates them but not much more. That’s why College Hall on most campuses has had huge varieties of uses within it.
[RV] That’s right. And yet, very often they have on the symbolic side, elements which make them symbolically…
[DSB] Different.
[RV] Iconic, iconic buildings; Nassau Hall, William and Mary Hall. So, they’re both effective as symbols and effective as loft buildings, which are not articulated architecturally a lot, and all that stuff. They rely on surface treatment with just a little, maybe, cupola on the top, as in Nassau Hall, which is different... But… so, we learned a lot from this great history that accommodates that. I remember writing a letter to the Mayor of Bethlehem in Pennsylvania, saying, you must really work at maintaining these great buildings you have and accommodating new uses for them, because it will be considered historically – your city – the equivalent of Athens of our period.

[DSB] I feel that I would as a… as an Urbanist love to have done a research studio of the kinds we did for Las Vegas and Levittown, on industrial Philadelphia. And see it again as a system. This was, as you say, the biggest heavy industry center in the world at that point and it made for… it had many ripple effects.  For example, it made workers some of the richest workers in the world. That’s why we get row house Philadelphia. They could all afford single family houses.
[RV] City of homes, as you know.
[DSB] Yes and so, there’re many ways. And now, that heritage is here, it’s given us an infrastructure that we can hardly afford anymore, of parks and mainly roads. We have redundancies. This morning when Shurs Lane didn’t work there were certainly other places, other ways to come down to Manayunk, for example. And we have the redundancy of two River Drives and there’s many ways in which we live on that heritage – but we have difficulty maintaining it because we’ve lost our heavy industry base. It’s gone to the Pacific Rim. So, here sits a set of relationships in Manayunk in particular; it started with a canal, so we could bring coal from Carbon County right here to Manayunk, and this was the first industrial area. And then it died because it was flatted factories and eventually trucks took over, but before that happened, the rail came and this was a very important area. And then, all the other rail based industry. Once you had that there was a Main Street associated and residential around it and as long as the employment opportunities remained, the whole thing was very stable. Once employment went, obviously the factories became vacant and unused and vandalised.
And I have often thought about the fact that we have workers’ housing around an amenity, which could be a canal or the river. Particularly there… there were houses along both rivers, and then the rail. And now we have work places there, which are empty, with ample parking and what should you do with that whole heritage? It’s interesting what happened to Manayunk but that was fortuitous. At the end of Main Street there’s a bridge and the bridge goes across the river and to the Main Line – an area of very high disposable income – which is what retail people talk about – high disposable income. Well, that meant that maybe 500,000 of such people across the river saw Main Street as a pretty place and as a safer place than Center City and nearer. So, it became classically the intervening opportunity between people going from the Main Line to the city.
So, if you are canny, you can reuse as a planner this heritage of pretty, old buildings and capacious old buildings for retail. And what you have to find is a retail economist who loves old buildings, doesn’t want to destroy the whole thing, but wants to reuse them. And then you find a pattern where the collectables stores move in first – ask the beer distributors – move into the empty stores. They also dealt with… you know, when there was only one eating place that sold basically beer and Kielbasa, because it’s a Polish area around here. And also there’s a small black community, an Italian community. And so, eventually we moved in… in 1980 and it was still empty stores and beer distributors and very little eating opportunity, and a few thrift shop type places or very small collectable stores.
Then they had their heyday and it was then the best. Main Street when it was full of trying… old clothing stores and old jewellery stores, and things like that was for us lovely. And then slowly they couldn’t afford the rents anymore and restaurants moved in big time, giving the local residents a huge problem because they took all the parking. And we’ve worked as planners for these areas, so, we know them well. And then, what happened was, as the rents grew higher, the few jewellery stores couldn’t remain and the nice little dress shops moved on. And just at that point, the interest rates were very low and the McMansions were being built out in the suburbs and suddenly what appeared on Main Street were big box furniture shops, boring, at least as far as I’m concerned. But there’s many of them here, now, those and restaurants. And really not very much else, and a few – like a nice little shoe shop – but not too many, kind of, pretty goods places anymore. And quite recently, the next wave seems to be children’s clothing, because people moved into the big… into the McMansions and started having babies, I would presume. So, you can see an economic pattern playing itself out on the street in relation to these buildings.  But this doesn’t help the rest of the industrial infrastructure very much. You can’t do too many Main Streets in that system.
 

[DSB] It’s been resistant to change, because it’s been family owned and passed between families and people didn’t want to lose that. But I think, very slowly, for example, people in our office moved into some of the little old houses. And suddenly, McMansions appeared at the top of the hill in Manayunk, we haven’t seen that in years – new housing. I look out of my window there and I see new houses. It’s a shock. And they’re not suburban McMansions, they are apartment buildings, but they’re big and box-like and you find some more… more ambitious in-fills happening where some houses have been demolished. And they even found it feasible financially, I’m still trying to work out how, to demolish part of the hillside up Shurs Lane and build row houses, having produced a bulldozer and got rid of the rock. I don’t know how they afforded that. Someone’s uncle must have owned a bulldozer, I feel, I don’t see any other way it could have happened.
[RV] But it is interesting that the housing, the old housing, which is very picturesque in this part of the town, never has become a art…
[DSB] Gentrified.
That’s interesting.
[RV] Gentrified, art place. It really is… it really is very interesting because it’s so picturesque you know – the river… the, this and that. By the way, it is interesting just to answer your original question about the significance of the… of the traditional loft buildings, industrial loft buildings in Philadelphia in general. It’s almost as though we don’t mention it much because it just sort of goes without saying that you’re right, that they’re just enormous… there’s an enormous tradition and I’m sure it’s had an effect on us.
[DSB] And we are in one of them, our office is in one of them.
[RV] It’s rather interesting that if you go right across the river here, you are in an area that was donated or sold to the Roberts family in the late 17th century by William Penn. They were naturally Quaker farmers and that whole acreage was farmland and then eventually the family went into industry, became very wealthy. And then around… they became Episcopalians around the time of the civil… the time of the revolution. Then there were huge industrial buildings on this side of the river, further that way, that we remember, that were very soon demolished. Across the river, that were the Roberts family, I don’t know… I’m not sure what the product was, but they were huge beautiful buildings that were torn down and then they built this industrial… this commercial stuff. But it’s just very interesting evolution of Quaker farmland and then they became Quaker estates of the family members… became… one of them was a President of the Philadelphia Saving Fund Society.  Another was the President of the… in the 19th century, of the Pennsylvania railroad. I happen to know a number of them, because they went to the school I went to – the Episcopal Academy – and then of course, they came down the hill and across the river with these factories. So, it’s a fascinating, kind of, indication of evolutionary history of the city in this period of Quaker industrial to commercial… then to industrial, yeah industrial and then other kinds of uses. Actually, the Chairman of the… the Director of the American Academy in Rome when I was there was Lawrence Roberts, buried nearby here, who was a wonderful person in my life and he was from that family, and they then became academic and stuff like that. So, it’s really interesting evolutionary story.
[DSB] And if you walk along the tow path by the canal down there, it’s very romantic.
Yes.
[DSB] And the canal was cleaned out, but it doesn’t operate as a canal anymore. On the other hand, there are fish and turtles and sea snakes in there, and garbage in there that they all happily feed on, obviously being a modern city. And you see people fishing there and there’re geese that land there. And in the 1970s they took down a great many of the mills that were on that tow path, but many remain and some are disused and the desuetude of the whole thing is part of its romance. There’s a restaurant down at the end which looks out on the canal and the river, very picturesque. I wish the food were better. And you can walk considerable length along it and I sometimes do that. It’s just enjoyable. It’s like it replaces for me things like the wilderness in Africa, that I knew very well, because it is in disorder.  If it was all remade and made a pretty place for living and modernised and all that, I’d want to move on somewhere else.
[RV] But you’re right that the city in general and in the immediate location, has had an influence on us, there’s just no question about it. But as the sort of immediate influence you’re not so conscious of, in a way as you are of the influence of architecture in Rome and so forth.
[DSB] But this research studio that I would have liked to have run –, it… it would also look at that… those remains and say what should you do now? And I think, there are places one should look for where there’s still a configuration, a confluence of uses and nuclei of commercial uses. And particularly those ones which are near water because that’s where people will want to live and fixing up the old mill buildings into loft apartments. And pushing development under the expressway at places where you can. There are certain places where you can go under and particularly if those places where you can go under also have a commercial nucleus there. That’s the place you should look for development.  And because I do a lot of poring over maps to understand about systems and patterns, and how they’re emerging, I wouldn’t be at all surprised to find if I went to some of those that I’ve noticed I would find that in fact they are right now being developed. So, when you look at something and you work out what the pattern should be and you go and find it is happening, it’s a wonderful feeling.

[DSB] The kind of Urbanism that we have worked on, which has been to do with little main streets and their revivals, and poor neighbourhoods and helping them. And working with little communities where the people are not upper middle class people who bring their lawyers to the meeting and want to maintain their property values but people trying to preserve their homes and, you know, having a different view of things.  That has been wonderful work. But, there reached a point where we could not afford to do it anymore – the fees were extremely low. Under Nixon-ism and Reagan-ism, planning commissions became like haunted houses and they had no staffs and no data and no money and what they could pay you, you couldn’t do the work on.
So, the last one I did was for Memphis… Memphis Tennessee… for the downtown. And the cultural patterns were amazing with the clubs and with a black population right in the inner city, and with Elvis Presley having grown up in public housing there and with the cobblestones and the historic quality of the relation to the Mississippi at that point. Though there are amazing stories to do with spotting the trends that were likely to happen as a result of some… of some innocuous things that I saw there. I’ve learnt how to be an urban detective. I went down on to the cobblestones and it was very desolate there – incredible feeling of history. And the old cotton factor’s offices were being moved into by who else – architects like us here, wonderful architects’ offices – but otherwise the cobblestones were used as a parking lot. And a mud island had surfaced in the 1920s and was being developed. It was able to be used for building and I had seen a plan for a route coming through there –, it was called Route FAP3 and I knew that there was a route… a ring road round the whole of Memphis.  And I was on these cobblestones, and they were used for parking, they were not treated with respect and love.
I said, ‘Okay, but then here’s something that doesn’t follow.  The ramp down to these cobblestones has not been made permanent, it’s a mud ramp. Now, they want parking here. This whole society is trending to finding places and they’re using it, but they haven’t put a ramp there. Why not?’ And I looked and suddenly I had a picture in my mind of an urban renewal area about to be demolished, all boarded up. And I said, ‘They’re going to demolish the cobblestones and put an expressway across the front’. Then I went back to that map of the ring roads and I put in FAP3, which was authorised, but not built, on Mud Island and there was this much space with no expressway that was the cobblestones.
So, I went to the next citizens meeting and I showed them that map.  And I didn’t need to say a word they all started screaming. And then the engineers were there and they said, ‘Only she says there’s going to be an expressway there’, and they were all saying, ‘You’re lying’. And it was an amazing, amazing meeting.
And so, what happened was the express… the FAP3 was dropped and… but they… it was a pyrrhic victory because they took all that money that was needed in the city and put it out in the suburbs. And the engineers were saying, ‘You people want development, why don’t you help us? Be rational, do the right thing.  Wreck the cobblestones’.
Anyway, it was… so, but, those were wonderful days and I love that kind of planning where we were into folk music, black patterns of living and medical centers and environmental problems with the danger of earthquakes. And the whole of the bluffs falling into the river, and yet they were building skyscrapers on the bluffs and we started warning people. It was really wonderful work and there was a very strong character there and the design component of helping to maintain that character as they grew. But I said at the end of that, I can’t make our firm lose the kind of money we’re losing, for doing that kind of work and particularly since there was little support for it, in the end, in Memphis. So, just as I said that, Dartmouth approached us and said, would you like to do some campus planning?

[DSB] Well, as an academic I’d done considerable campus planning. So, I said, ‘We’re very busy right now’, and they said, ‘We’ll wait’. Have you ever heard of someone saying, we’ll wait for an architect?
So, we started out mapping the way I’d mapped in cities and the way we’d done it in research projects and in studios. Mapping city town uses in Dartmouth and college uses, and putting them all together. And their Medical Center was moving out. I couldn’t believe that they would dump a whole building – that was in 1969 – and many labs. After I did many more medical center planning I knew exactly what they were talking about.
So, Dartmouth said to us… I said, ‘It’s as if the lake dried up in Chicago and you’ve got all this land right, you know, half of your city sitting there waiting for you to develop as a campus, the Medical Center’. And so, they said, ‘Help, if we don’t watch out we’ll become Dartmouth Institute of Technology.  We’ve inherited all these labs’. So, we began thinking with them, about what they could do and what they really needed and how they should… and we produced a campus plan for them based on our mapping. And evolving from within the system not imposing from the top.  And then, we went on to design the major first new increment a, kind of, pièce de résistance of the plan, which was an addition to the library there. They needed a library twice the size so we had to add the other half. And so, we had this great joy of going from a campus plan and evolving from within that the needs of the new building. And taking the movement systems from the outside and from all the philosophies you’ve had about meeting and community and relationships and academic relationships, into a building, and then out again the other side.
And one thing we learnt is that, planners don’t think of levels very much. Even landscape architects when they work, miss the facts that we’ve spotted.  For example, that the lake in Michigan could really give us a great many cars parked and no harm done to the relationships, because dipping down and our going over it gave us these two different kinds of uses. Well, the same thing was true in Michigan and we’ve used the same technique at Penn and other places. We can take uses in at a basement level on one side and at ground floor level on the other, and meld them. Strongly, we did that at the Frist Campus Center at Princeton too.
So, one thing we can contribute because we’re architects as well as planners, is that we can use levels to good effect. We know sections as well as plans, which planners don’t do. If the people in New Orleans had known sections as well as plans, they could have saved many lives. They don’t draw in section.

[DSB] In New Orleans they… they built a city where a city economically needed to be and they had flood plains which they allowed to be used, and they built levees. And they had levees at a certain height. That will stop the water. Well, if planners had actually drawn the section of what they had done and looked at the possibilities, they would have said, ‘Look what could happen’. Now, people did warn that it could happen, but it wasn’t graphic to anyone and I doubt whether it was thought of even a few times by, you know, the kind of people who do development there. Now, you let the poor go live in the flood plain. You find that all over the world, poor people live in the flood plains, it’s dreadful that. Now they have ownership in flood plains and they can’t see that they were oppressed in the first place. And they say, ‘We don’t want to hear about that, you’re not telling the rich people in the flood plain they’re oppressed’.  You’ve got other means of dealing with that. But if the section had been as prominent as the plans in thinking of that city, I think, there could have been more public support for much greater care about the levees, when they were built.

[DSB] We’ve done, since then, plans at Penn and at Michigan, and at University of Kentucky using these same principles, and later on at Tsinghua, in Beijing, China. And always, we have mapped the city and the campus together and we put down all the activities in the different buildings on the campus, and we give them land use colours. So, the retail uses in the town are shown in red and then the student center uses we’ll show in an orangey red, so that they’re visibly related. And then the same with the cinema and museum uses in town, and museum uses and auditoria, maybe, in… on the campus. And the sciences, at Michigan, we mapped academic sciences, medical sciences, engineering and then beyond that the commercial sciences, pharmaceutical research firms that were on the border, showing them all as part of the same pattern. And then, see what that pattern is and how you should add to it. And out of that, grew this Palmer Drive Life Sciences Complex that I explained. And so, we can take…
Is that in Michigan?
[DSB] In Michigan, yes and that’s, I think, altogether it’s over 800,000 square feet of building. And it’s a… you know, it’s a huge important complex that ties into the diag on the main campus, produces another diag right through the Life Sciences Complex and then goes on with the Medical Center. And we made plans for the Medical Center and also for the main campus and the other six campuses there – tried to help them with their problem of having the North Campus very much denuded of facilities and a very dull place to be.  And a difficult place to be after 5 pm, where people do major research in the digital library that they have there. And they can’t even get a coffee.
Where, in the North Campus… what type of study goes on in the North Campus?
[DSB] Engineering, architecture to their great distress, music.  Music doesn’t mind being set in the woods and separate from everyone, but everyone else minds mightily.
Engineering is quite separate from the rest?
[DSB] Yes, yes and we tried to help them think of ways to get rid of the feeling of oppression people have, because it’s so denuded of anything that makes life worth living. And then these big buses. I call them the big smelly buses, which bring students all day long on to the campus. And get… the medical people told me when we first started, we take our lives in our hands crossing Washtenaw Street, because of all those big buses coming in, in the morning, bringing students into the campus. That’s why we produced the bridge system, to let them get across safely.  And then, bringing this project out of that and then taking the same philosophies of encouraging serendipitous meetings.
It will probably interest you that, not only is the coffee shop at that meeting of minds position on the pathways, but just under it is Bioinformatics, because that’s looked upon the place where everyone goes to get their digital help. As the place where they begin to realise that all their formulae are the same, they just use different alphabet letters and the variables. And that the hope is that they’ll meet trying to do that kind of work, as well as having coffee.

[DSB] When it came to Tsinghua, the… we were approached there by academic administrators who had been in America and they loved Princeton.  And they said, ‘We see a cultural landscape there’.  That’s what they called it, which was interesting because we use the same term. ‘A cultural landscape and we know we don’t have it and we want to be a world leading university.’ They see themselves as Princeton and MIT wrapped in one. And Princeton is plenty good enough for them to be compared to, they feel. So, they say, ‘It’s not just a question of producing a landscape.  Tell us educationally what it means?’ And so, they used us for the experience we’ve now had working with many universities, going from educational policy to land use, and then to building.
And so, the first thing I did was give a… the most beautiful lecture hall I’ve ever been in. It was made like a, you know, a Chinese temple, to these academic administrators – very bright people – a lecture on the history on American urban campuses, as a set of themes… themes and ideas – educational ideas, related to philosophies of landscape and building. And just surveying the development and the origins and why education had the place it had in America and in a nation of immigrants – why education is so important. And so, why everyone sees this as their way out and hold their kids over their heads and put them in the university. And so, I tried to explain from all these points of view.
And then, we starting mapping their campus and they said, ‘After such a short time, how do you know so much about our campus?’ Well, it’s because we look at it visually. They had a very good Institute there, as they call it, which could give us the information and then we could map it our way to show relationships. And something I remember, watching an early morning TV program on statistics and they had animated the statistics and you saw a rolling pattern of events going by. I don’t know what they were showing but it was spectacular that the whole thing rolled once you animated it. And they said, ‘Even with computers, it would have taken us many, many months of study before we recognised the circularity and the variables. Physically, looking at it, we saw it immediately’. And that’s the same thing we do, we can see something by the pattern it makes, because we love pattern and we’re used to looking at aerial photographs and land use maps. We can see things which we can then work on.
I have another funny little story. In talking about the coffee shops and no coffee shops, and you can’t get a good cup of coffee on the North Campus, and you can’t get, you know, much of anything after five pm.
At Michigan?
[DSB] At Michigan, finally the Head of the Publishing Department… the Head of the University Press, he was an Englishman. By the way, next time I saw him, he was in Hong Kong heading the University Press there. But there he was in Michigan, and he said, ‘You’re saying that you can’t manage to find a good cup of coffee anywhere on the North Campus? I can’t even find a bad cup of coffee where I am on the South Campus, near the Athletics Center’. So, I’d started then looking at the South Campus, looking at the patterns there, where were the movement patterns and where were the retail patterns? Where could I find a place for Colin to get a bad cup of coffee? So, I found my site and we went looking on the South Campus and I went to look at the site.  It was a little cottage and I couldn’t believe it. It had a notice in it – it said, Coffee Shop coming. Those are the great rewards.
 

[DSB] We were not asked to do a master plan. We were asked to look at their master plan and use our skills and expertise, and comment and make specific suggestions for one place. Well we probably got out of order with them, because we did a little more than that, we couldn’t stop. We were just… it was just a wonderful problem. And for example, it was a beautiful campus in the beginning that had been built as a, kind of, prep school for people who were going to America to college. And there’re many American buildings but the most spectacularly beautiful things were Chinese landscape and buildings and with lots of beautiful landscape there. And then, when the Communists took over, the rest of the campus became a Russian campus – very regimented, everything separated from everything else. Foreign students here, women students here, graduate women students here, faculty there. We said, ‘Well, why wouldn’t you, at least, let the foreign students share?’ And they said, ‘Oh, no, we give the foreign students a higher level of comfort’. So we said, ‘That shouldn’t be, and anyway if you want to be a world-class university, meeting of the minds is the thing’.  And they didn’t want to say anything, they just… uncomfortable.
And it finally turns out that is part of Party control, to keep the foreign students from indoctrinating their students. They said, ‘At least now the students can go into the other place, before they couldn’t even go in, our students’. Well they were embarrassed by that, and I think, that will change. But athletics is kept… there’s nowhere where you can just sit down. Sitting down is not a good activity it leads to talking. Athletics has to be organised into active athletics and they have standards, so many acres per student and this and that. No, there’s no room for a green space. But look at your campus, it’s too hard edged, you need a green space here. And so on. So, they’re saying… and then they saw the students lying on the lawns, and you know, at Brown, and they couldn’t believe it. They said, ‘Here the students can’t go on the lawns’. So, we were saying, ‘Well, if you’re really want what you’re saying you want, this is the philosophy of it and we can only explain to you, you may want it, you may not’.
Meanwhile some aspects of their campus are, in fact, the Russian parts… are kind of beautiful – they’re worked down to minima and the minima work. And you can get…you can get an imaginative life in some of those minimal dormitories and minimal faculty apartments, they have a beauty themselves and we were very respectful. And the bicycles were stupendous. We called them frontal bicycles.  They come at you, because for thousands of students are here and a classroom for 10,000 students is down here. And they go… it’s a series of classrooms for 10,000 students… and they go by bicycle. You know how we say college students will take a car to go two blocks, they say, ‘College students will take a bicycle to go two blocks’. And there’re bicycles all over everywhere and we’d say, ‘Don’t lose your bicycles, if you’ve got cars you wouldn’t survive’.
And then we started to say to them, ‘You can’t just ignore Peking, you really… it’s making inroads on you and it’s going to take part of your land and you really have to set up relationships. At least if you were in America’, I always added that, ‘the transportation engineers would be telling you, get in touch with the transportation planners in the city around you, make friends with them, be on exchange relationships. One day you’ll need a favour from them.  If you’ve managed to do them a favour, they’ll listen to you’. And then, we went on and we said, ‘Princeton had the Head of GM associated with them and the Head of Mobil associated with them. If they needed some help with the city of Princeton, where do you think they went?’ We said, ‘You have enormous numbers of powerful politicians associated with your…’ now this is a Communist system, so you know, actually the Premier went to Tsinghua University, ‘you should be using that influence. You should be telling people in Beijing not to put a road under your whole campus’, which is one of the plans.
And so, we just shared that kind of expertise and then we left them, because we think that they will go their own way. I don’t know how much of it they will… they have heard and they have listened and they have to debate about what they will do. They will… we showed them a way in which they could use… they wanted to put parking under a mall and we agreed they… it would be a good idea.  We horrified them by saying, it’s not a good idea to put parking under lab buildings, which is one thing we did not do in Michigan. We put it beside but not under because the vibration affects high tech experiments very badly. And also, the cycles of change of a parking structure are different from a building, so, you‘d be doing construction in the parking structure and then louse up the experiments again. So, we warned them about that but they didn’t want to hear that.  But we did show them how the mall would be a good place to put parking and how they could do it. And Bob produced an interesting design for that. I produced a design for a Campus Center at a very important site where they thought to put an administrative building. And, I think, we convinced the administrators not to put an administrative building there – it’s the perfect site for a Campus Center and they need one there. And so, they will guard that site, but apart from that they may not listen very much, we have to wait and see. And you know, when you’re a campus planner, unless you can go on a produce a building which will help direct the plan and interpret the plan, you see the next President arrive and dump everything. Now it’s going to be my watch and I’m going to do something very different. And then, they wonder why they get such disorder on campuses.

[DSB] We have had a diminution in the amount of work we have, and some of the time we’ve spent lecturing and writing. We find that there’s a lot of demand for us.  For example, some very young architects at Harvard got in touch with me, and they say, ‘We’re very much interested in research’. And universities tell us that the kind of research we do is interesting to other fields because it’s much more free-floating. We have imaginative ways of doing research that could reverberate for other people, which I’d always felt and I feel studio is a very wonderful teaching tool that should be used by other people. But, so, they said, ‘We’ve based it all on your Learning from Las Vegas and Learning from Levittown studios.  Those have been our models for years. And we know that you’ve done other studios and would you please come and talk to a group of researchers about studio as a research tool?
Well, I had many to talk about and they let me be keynote speaker and give a talk rather longer than the rest of people, which was nice of them, but then I was also older than all the rest of them. And age has some perogatives, maybe, in the very, very end. So, I gave this talk showing many studios and talking about research in ways that they hadn’t heard of before, because the planning studios used design as a research tool – not only research as a design tool, as a design heuristic. You didn’t only go from research to design you did interim designs which were not going to be used, as such. But they were a way of marshalling thoughts to help you realise, it’s no use trying to build over here, because when we bring everything together we can’t develop this area, its flood plain, but we can develop this other area. You do a design to learn these things, then you go on and you know better where to put your research money.
So, they were fascinated: ‘Design as a research tool, we never thought of that, that’s different from what researchers tell us’. If you listen to a… a social scientist planner told me just the other day, ‘Why do you call what we do design – you’re being oppressive to us. You’re saying we don’t… you don’t accept our definitions. We don’t say we do design’. I said, ‘That’s part of the trouble.  You think design is only intuitive, you leave out a lot of stuff in your own field, because you won’t realise you are indeed synthesising and you won’t be responsible for doing that’. She said, Why do you oppress me by using that word design?’ I said, ‘What do you think you’re doing?’ ‘Well, its analysis, you see.’ ‘If it’s only analysis, if you’re only taking things apart you’re a menace, because when you bring them together you don’t notice. You don’t notice there’s a discipline needed in doing that.’ Anyway, I didn’t say that as strongly to her as she was a nice person. But the point is, that we have something to offer when we talk like that. And that’s what they spotted and I was thrilled. And I don’t think there’s many architects being asked to do that, or many of the famous signature architects now, in demand in places where people are really thinking about the future of architecture in that way.
And we’ve been asked to talk in Delft and in Vienna, in London, at Princeton – again there’s a research studio there, doctoral students there. And they wanted me to come and they said, ‘What would we have done without you?’ And I kept saying, ‘Where’s your rigour, no one’s teaching you how to be rigorous.  Yet all other fields’ research have ways in which to be rigorous and you learn the philosophy of that and you learn how to do statistics, and you may have a different form of rigour but at the moment you have no rigour’. And they really, you know, people like me need to tell them that.
Well, that’s what’s happening to us.  People are spotting that we have something to offer that is not, you know, where can we go next for the next Neo-Modernist building, that’s going to show how advanced we are? You see, that view of advancement now is being rejected by a younger generation and we’re very thrilled to be asked to do things like that. In the same way Bob was at Columbia last week, I think, or just two weeks ago, and they were wanting a new generation of people to talk to him about Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture – the book – and why he wrote it and how he came to write it and. etc. And what’s lovely now is that whole debate about Postmodernism, which hung up an older generation.  They haven’t even heard of it and it bores them anyway. And they’re not labelling us with something we’re not and then fighting us because we’re not that, because we are that thing when we’re not that thing. That whole thing is gone by and the next generation is just very interested in what we do and looking upon… everyone except Rem Koolhaas. Rem Koolhaas they admire, but apart from that they seem to think that they’re their grandparents and they’re not… probably their parents and they’re not interesting.
[RV] It was also another place we’ve lectured a lot, which you forgot to mention, was Istanbul.
[DSB] Yes, that was wonderful.
[RV] That was a wonderful one because it contains my favourite building, as I said, in all civilization – Hagia Sofia. It was wonderful also because there was just an enormous number of young people who were interested and familiar with what we’re saying. Interested in and familiar with what we were saying. There are a lot of Asian, young female architects who were wearing… everyone… they all were wearing American blue jeans.  On the other hand they were also wearing these things around their heads.
[DSB] Head scarves.
[RV] The head scarves, the combination of the head scarves and the blue jeans is complex and contradictory.
[DSB] People said don’t… don’t assume anything from seeing a head scarf on someone. And it’s true they were vibrant. We felt like grandparents to a family of thousands. All the young people there. And they were people we’d never have met anywhere else, because they got fellowships from obscure parts of Russia and Arab countries and a pile of Kenyan architects all put their arm around me. They… the whole lot of them, they see you, they approach you, they say, ‘Photograph please’.  And you have a photograph with their arms all around both of us.
Was this in China?
[DSB] No, this was in Istanbul. Yes, photograph, and then autograph, and then they don’t want to talk, they run off. But we really felt it was like a family… a family of thousands.
[RV] I think we were there…
[DSB] Those conferences are wonderful because of their atmosphere.
[RV] I think we were there six or seven days and every single day I drove out to Hagia Sofia.
[DSB] Yes.
[RV] To say hello.

[RV] We even had an interview in Hagia Sofia, which was fascinating. It was really funny.  It was with Denise, me… what’s her name?
[DSB] Zaha Hadid.
[RV] Zaha Hadid, who was a vital enemy.
[DSB] And Süha Özkan.
[RV] Süha Özkan is a dear friend, and the guy… the American. You know the American guy?
[DSB] I can’t remember who it was.
[RV] It was…
[DSB] Peter Isen?
[RV] Peter Isen yeah, they were all so friendly, it was sort of weird.
[DSB] And I was sitting there in that… in Hagia Sofia and thinking, when I was a little girl in Johannesburg, did I ever think I’d be on television sitting in Hagia Sofia. It’s a funny thought. And then, we were asked to do a very nice thing. The American Embassy had been asked to help support… Süha Özkan is a great leader… architectural leader and he organised this. He works for the Aga Khan… he was then… and he organises support, so, he asked for donations. So, the American Embassy’s donation was to give scholarships to it… to a group of Turkish students from rural areas, who couldn’t afford to go on their own. And then they asked us to come and have lunch with these students and talk with them – as another offering from the American Embassy – to these students. So, we sat out in a tent in the grounds of the fair and we had a nice lunch and we all talked. There were about 25 of them, I think, and they weren’t as… I think, I suspect they weren’t as poor and anywhere naïve as maybe people thought they were. They were just from out of town. But anyway, what I tried to do was think of myself as also having been from out of town and what could I say to them, because I’d had good opportunities, it’s true, but I also used them. And if I’d had a mental outlook which said, I’m from out of town, I couldn’t have done all of that.

[DSB] Invited by the American Embassy to talk to a group of students they had subsidised at the International Union of Architects Conference in Istanbul. I tried to think of myself in their position, because indeed I had been – I was an outsider. I came from out of town as they had and I’d had many opportunities, but if I hadn’t had a certain outlook I might not have spotted and used the opportunities. And it seemed that was what I should be telling them because they too need to not let the opportunities pass because they hadn’t noticed them and have a kind of outlook, which said I can use these opportunities.
So, I thought about the sociological definitions of power structures in cities. These things come in useful in lots of different ways and the notion that in any city there are the local power structure people. In Philadelphia they largely live in Chestnut Hill or on the Main Line, and they are involved in local events, local institutions, local support. Then, there are the cosmopolitans – in Philadelphia these people live in Center City, on Washington Square. I could even think of two different kinds of lawyers I know, the ones who are cosmopolitans and the others who are locals. And the cosmopolitans have their connections with London and Jerusalem and Los Angeles – they bring certain benefits to a city as do the locals and the two are needed. And there’s connections between them – very often lawyers are connections between everything. Well, that’s what I was trying to tell them, that if they would think of themselves in terms of those definitions, they might very well want to be cosmopolitans as Bob and I obviously are. Our power locally is facetiously little, as our experience has demonstrated of almost never having a building to design outside of the University of Pennsylvania.
How would you categorize academics in Philadelphia? I mean we have 95 universities and colleges here, so that’s a large population.
[DSB] They’re a very basic part of the urban economy here, they… then…
So, would you call them cosmopolitans?
[DSB] Some will be cosmopolitans and some will be locals. I think the great professors are usually like you, Tom, ardently cosmopolitan. Look at all the places you lecture and all the connections you make, all the pathways you… you open up for your own students. The network around Tom Hughes would be an amazing thing to look at, as to where it goes and as to how it’s involved other people. Well, Jews of course see themselves as part of a Diaspora and so like it or not, you probably think that way if you’re Jewish because you might have to leave and go somewhere else. American Jews probably less than anyone else, but it’s always at the back of your mind – get a good education, you might have to take it somewhere else. The capital you’ll need will be in your head. And that makes you a cosmopolitan.
Yeah, definitely.
[DSB] Yes.
And if you read the New York Times instead of the Philadelphia Enquirer, you’re a cosmopolitan, I think.
[DSB] Maybe, but no one is more parochial than New York.

[DSB] From our point of view, just about the whole of New England you can write off for us except Harvard and MIT maybe because they… they don’t self select us. They have another view of… so, we can’t just say the colleges are automatically our clientele. Who is automatically our clientele?  Well, over most of our career was our clientele are those tea and sympathy clients, I described.
You mentioned, yes.
[DSB] And the very, very high culture clients who’re involved in making the art with the artist, and those sustained us in amazing ways. I remember once Sydney and Frances Lewis, who were the epitome of that high culture client.
What did he own?
[DSB] Best Products and they supported many artists. They bought their work. They sometimes swapped a refrigerator for a painting, then they found it was better to buy the work – they did not have to buy a refrigerator at Best Products if they didn’t want one. And they took us for dinner one night in New York and to a show, which is a nice thing they used to do and we had much of our office… it was 1973 and like many architects, much of our office was on unemployment. They were still coming into the office, because they were allowed to, doing their own work there and also once a week doing some work for us, which in the terms of unemployment they could do. And I told Frances and Sydney this story.
Lewis?
Lewis, yes, and I… it was not totally without… I was not totally innocent in telling them. I… I hustle almost all my life.  I’ve had to, to help support this place. So, I was telling them knowing that they hired architects, but the next day they called us and they said we have a building for you. And it was just kindness, just pure kindness we loved them eternally and think of them with great gratefulness.
[RV] We’re seeing Frances next week, she’s coming to the opening of the… Sydney has died… to the opening of the exhibition at… of your house.
[DSB] Yes. Of course the Basco… the building that they gave us, rather, was Best Products that we did in Montgomery County, the one with the flowers all over it.
Part of that wall decoration is in MOMA, isn’t it?
[DSB] Yes, that’s right.
[RV] And a lot of other museums… lot of other museums throughout the country.

[DSB] I want to tell you about one other lecture that I recently gave – again, a very young group of just recently graduated architects in Spain. And Spain is zipping economically right now and Spain is very easy to reach – Madrid from Philadelphia is very direct and easy. And they called, and they… or they wrote and they said, ‘We are a group called Basurama’.  They had to get us an introduction via another group we’d already worked with in Spain, and they said, ‘These people will tell you about us’. And basura is the Spanish word for waste.  ‘So here we are an architect’s group calling ourselves… making a rama out of waste, like a diorama’, or something like that. So, I thought that sounds interesting enough.
[RV] I said no, but you said yes.
[DSB] And so, then they said, ‘If you can have studied Las Vegas we think you will have something cogent to say about waste’. And so… they didn’t know the half of what I wanted to say about waste. I started very far from Las Vegas and ended in another place too. I said much of architecture is going to have to take a trip from now on to the waste dump and for reasons that I explained during the lecture.
What were those reasons?
[DSB] Well, it’s a long lecture.
Why don’t you give us a summary?
[DSB] But, well, let me tell you a little about what they do first. Then I’ll tell you about what they said… what I said. They… they take industrial procedures that exist or neo-industrial procedures and they think of ways in which they could use the waste products. That’s one of the things they do and an interesting one that they were looking at when I was there is there’s a lot of fruit boxes in Spain and these have got ads on the fronts and the fruit sits out in the market. And you see where it comes from and a picture of the fruit and there sits the lemons in the box, or whatever it is. And they thought what a pity that these things couldn’t be used. And also old cereal boxes which have printed covers on them. They said, ‘Couldn’t we get these either not used but chucked, or used’, and out of the fronts of the wooden boxes they were making jigsaw puzzles and then out of the cereal boxes they were making book covers. All their books were each one a different picture by an industrial process, which is what fascinated them. And then they had to put their own very recognisable stamp over it, but there sits the cereal box picture and then their book stamp over that.
Then, it turns out that there’s a law in Spain which says you can’t use an old food product for anything at all. So, they couldn’t use that whole line of investigation – they should have checked that first.  But the notion that you can get a lot of variety in an industrialised product if you will use a waste product. Another exhibition they held was, they took a computer and they took it all apart and they did an exhibition of all its pieces in an art gallery, on the basis that everyone uses them every day and no one knows what’s on the inside of them. So, they do various things. So, I talked about cycles.
By the way, they referred me to another Kevin Lynch book, it’s called Wasting Away and, I think, it’s his most poetic book. By that time, he was not writing as part of MIT and therefore he didn’t have to think of research that had to be computerised and he could really be literary and poetic about the subject of waste in a lovely way. But he didn’t deal with one subject in that book, which was, the artistic possibilities of waste. So, I called my lecture The Art in Waste.
 

[DSB] I had to define my terms and I had to show them that, for example, there’s a class basis for waste. Upper middle class people define lower middle class peoples’ product as waste, as pollution.
People talk about visual pollution, Las Vegas as visual pollution. I said, ‘Where is the scientific measurement of that pollution – the way we can measure chemical particles in the air?  If you can’t, you can’t call it pollution’, and so on. So, I took the terms that professional people use to express distaste and I deconstructed them to some extent. I started out with an illustration of a talk I once heard of a woman, a gardener, who came to give us a lecture at Penn. She had done time lapse photography of the blooming of roses and you saw this beautiful bud and then it bloomed and then finish and the next bud to beautiful bloom and so on. And I suddenly thought, where is the other half of the cycle, where’s the deterioration and death? Well, that wasn’t pretty and that was waste that was actually called wasting. And I said, ‘Ignoring half the cycle is wrong and if you’re a planner it’s very wrong because there’s many’, you know, they think of re-use of waste.  Composting, in that case, is a re-use of waste but we have to think of cities in those terms too, and I began talking about that. And then I also… I shifted to… I talked about the Freudian aspect of waste and of toilet training and I had to… it was funny, I wrote them a letter and I said, ‘To be really scholarly I have to deal with some of these aspects of waste… I will be very delicate’, I said. And they sent me a little note back saying, ‘Your lecture is going to be fantastic’. And so, I very nicely put this whole thing that an intelligent mother must be very tactful and she must stop… I said, ‘If a baby messes in its diaper, if you don’t catch her in time’, and I use ‘her’ because I’m a feminist, ‘You will find her playing with the faeces, she loves them’. And I said, ‘But the mother will not survive and nor will the society. So, a very tactful mother will, will gently redirect the child to playing in mud’. And I said, ‘We must be careful because in fact our creativity depends on this. And a child that has been too controlled in its toilet training will be an uncreative person’. And now I was being… I don’t think Freud has managed to prove this, but nevertheless. And I said, ‘So, it’s very important to us to think about waste as part of creativity. So, that’s why the creativity and waste is what I’m talking about’.  And then I gave examples about Africans who use old tyres for sandals and the inner tubes for the straps. And I showed beautiful examples I have in Africa of, of use of beadwork, for example, and of other examples of using abandoned scrap iron for making toys and things like that. And then went from there into why we looked at Las Vegas and how we tried to take this unloved effulgence from another society and understand it from another culture.
[RV] Did you explicitly refer to the aesthetic idea of objet trouvé?
[DSB] Yes, I referred to that too and I said, ‘Las Vegas and Levittown were our objets trouvés’. I traced the history back for the objets trouvés from the early 1930s - rather the early 1920s – notion of things. And then I took them on a walk along our canal and I showed all the waste there, these old industrial buildings, and told them how I’d move on if they were ever prettified. And so on, just related the whole thing and talked about Basurama’s work. But again, we’re very flattered and very happy, and we could lead a life now where we just gently went and saw our architectural family all over the world and were welcomed warmly and gave a lecture, and had a nice dinner with people and were shown the sights and all of that.  And that would be a lovely world, a lovely way to walk toward the end of your life and I think academics have that privilege – it’s called emeritus. But, we’re addicted to practice and we gave up teaching, much though we loved it, because practice was even more thrilling and we don’t think that this is necessarily a time to leave practice. We have to think hard about how we will continue.

[DSB] For someone who from the age of two, knew about Modern architecture… really literally, when I was two I saw blueprints, I remember it, and I was two years old and there were these prints and they were really blue. People haven’t had blueprints in years, so you could, kind of, date it. But, I’ve had this love affair with that house, with its flat roof and its steeled alley columns.
This is in South Africa?
[DSB] In Johannesburg, our house there, which was about the second Modern house ever built in Johannesburg.
I’ve seen a picture.
[DSB] And, so, I’m not about to depart from Modernism, particularly as I’m a moralist. Someone once said there’s a corner of heaven for those… reserved for those who believe in morality and the arts. So, I say I’m a functionalist for moral reasons and I believe in that morality, but I’m also a functionalist for aesthetic reasons. I think following functional precepts very… letting them lead you to ugly places can help aesthetics develop and change and adapt. And you can find excitement, aesthetic excitement in doing that. And that’s the kind of aesthetics that we like, the aesthetics of… I call them agonised aesthetics, sometimes, transitional aesthetics. We like antique furniture that isn’t quite pure – the legs are too big and the feet are too big like a puppy because they’re heading somewhere else, or something like that. We like impure mixtures. So, all of this goes with our take on Modernism and, I think, I’ve shown how we refurbish the idea of the Neue Sachlichkeit, the New Objectivity, to cover this and we redefined functionalism. So, it isn’t blindly following just the program of the first client. Our view on Urbanism, our view on cycles make us see there may be 100 different functions because we’ve seen buildings in use in housing from the 12th century, in European cities. And we know the plumbing isn’t the same and the way houses are lived in isn’t the same. So, all of that makes us redefine functionalism. And then the social categories we’ve learned and the technical ones we’ve learned make us have other means of redefining functionalism too. So, its Modernism adapted and these are the ways in which we’ve adapted it.

[RV] Well, I’ve mentioned before that there is this situation where I’m, kind of, a combination of many things. I’m an Italian American… Italian American son of Italian American people who migrated here. I am a Quaker. I am an artist and a guy who went to the Episcopal Academy but who could not study art there and did not enjoy the emphasis on sports but I somehow got through. So, I’m sort of… in a way there’s a tension in all that but I enjoy being many things at once. Maybe that’s why I’m so interested in complexity and contradiction, because I am complex and contradictory in many ways.

[RV] Well, I did enjoy writing an essay on… which was anti-visionary, which emphasized… which analysed my lack of… a lack of interest in or admiration for people who were being explicitly visionary. And in that article I emphasize that being visionary is something that is accidental, that is incidental. You don’t try to be visionary. The name of the title… the name of the article was The Vision Thing – Why It Sucks. And, I think, I had great fun analysing how being visionary is incidental.  I can’t say any more than that at this moment but anybody who is interested should refer to… to the article and I think it is relevant for now, because I think an awful lot of current thinking about architecture and sort of decadent Modernism in architecture in our field does involve the kind of pretentious attitude towards being visionary.  I am visionary, I am ahead.  Don’t try to be ahead. The way to be ahead is to not try to be ahead but try to be appropriately for now and for the immediate future… than being appropriate for the immediate future… will be… will automatically happen.
[DSB] I remember one of the well-known Postmodernist architects faced with a reduction in market for his services, announced that he had gone to India and in India, he said, ‘I had an epiphany’.
[RV] Oh my God.
[DSB] And he came back no longer a Postmodernist.
[RV] God.
[DSB] Well, it’s just that kind of specious quality that we’re reacting to.
[RV] We really don’t like – down with epiphanies.

[DSB] Unfortunately, I’ve written and talked a very great deal on this subject, and I say unfortunately because I’d have to spend the next 10 hours talking about this. Linda [Palmer] Nochlin wrote a book called, Why Are There No Great Women Artists? [sic]. And she asked the question why are there no great Lithuanian jazz musicians? Now, there’s several ironies here.  First of all some artists who were great people did not know they were women. And we know that in our times, and 19th century, it was very difficult for women because in arts schools they were not allow to go to life drawing classes. Now you couldn’t really get to be a great artist without drawing nudes and they were denied this experience. So, that’s one of the ironies. Of course, the Lithuanian jazz player irony is that Al Jolson was the original jazz player and he was a Lithuanian, so there’s the second irony there. But what she meant is, situation and opportunity condition what you can do. And so, that is part of the story.
Another part of the story is that there have indeed been famous, or rather great women architects, but who did not become famous or who were lost and… and not very many, we have to admit, but there were. And then we went through a very quiescent period in the 1950s here where Rosie the Riveter was knocked back out of the factory into the kitchen and women are also… lost ground in the professions in general.
[RV] It is interesting… it is interesting though that… there were… have been historically, not a lot, but more women writers for instance, than women architects. There are some things of that sort.
[DSB] Well, I’m coming to that. I’m coming to that. My mother studied architecture and this was not looked upon as unusual in the ‘20s, at least, not as unusual as it would have been in the ‘50s in America. So, you know… I didn’t think it was unusual for a woman to study architecture.  But now when I got into the field as a young woman at the Architectural Association and then South Africa, you were of interest because you were a woman.  And what woman wouldn’t take advantage of that? The first time I hit the notion of discrimination was when I went with my other friends – we all idealistic young architects – up to Scotland to interview a certain Egon Riss, Head of the Scottish Coal Board, who was doing wonderful Brutalist architecture. And we loved the work he was doing and he was interviewing us for jobs. And he said to me, ‘Well, of course, you would be paid less than the men.  I can’t pay you more because I would make the secretaries jealous’. And the joy went out of it for me, there’s no way I was ever going to work for him. Anyway, I have a feeling he wasn’t a very nice guy either but that’s another matter. But so, that was the first time I met that and that was 1953, ’54 something like that.

[DSB] When Bob and I married, it was a cruel shock what happened to me, because I had been a professor. I had my own following of people who thought I did very well. I was rather well known for my age, that is, which was in my early 30s, in California where I had been teaching the last few years. And there was no shred of suspicion. Well, one day the Dean had said to me, ‘Denise, Henry’s problem is he’s Chinese and your problem is that you’re a woman’.  But I nearly added under my breath, ‘Your problem is you have an alcohol addiction’. So, I didn’t take that with more than a pinch of salt. And, so… but I suddenly found I was looked upon as Bob’s typist, Bob’s secretary. I was pushed out of the way: ‘Let’s just move so we can take a photograph of the architects.  Would you mind moving?’  I said, ‘I’m an architect – would you mind moving?’  Things like that. I began to realise there’s a higher order of prejudice for women architects as you get high up in the field.  And at that time it was still one woman to 12 – one to five in planning school, one to 12 in almost every architecture school. But when you were there, you didn’t… some women said, ‘He has a problem with women, that man’.  And I felt many of my professors had a problem… not my professors, my colleagues – when I was teaching. When I was teaching at Penn there were two women in a faculty of about 50, I think, and I felt that there were… I said, ‘I can deal with the students’ mother problems, but God save me from the professors’ mother problems’.  And so, at the end I did have problems of that kind, but nothing compared with when I got into practice.
Now, look around you and the Pritzker Prize was awarded in the late ‘60s, I think.  It was started and Bob was given his Pritzker Prize too late, compared with his colleagues who got them at a certain point. They put it off until they couldn’t any longer and, sort of, reluctantly awarded it to him. He said, ‘I want it to be given to Denise Scott Brown too’, and they said ‘No’. Just like that, no. And it took them 23 years before they gave a woman the prize in architecture and that was Zaha Hadid. The nearest thing they could find in 23 years to their definition of what an architect does.  And of course their definition is the problem. Their view of what architecture consists of makes a… makes it a man, it’s just as simple as that. And they…
[RV] One reason I’m not… don’t have a gold medal AIA is that I will not receive it without including Denise and they say ‘No, we only give it to one person’.
[DSB] Yes.
I understand at MIT now, that about 50% of the undergraduates student body was women.
[DSB] That’s true in architecture too, now.
I was wondering about architecture.
[DSB] Yes it is now true there, but… and those young women they paraphrase Freud. Freud said, ‘What do women want?’ Feminists have been on his case for that for years. Now these young women in architecture say, ‘What do older women architects want?  We’ve had no discrimination’. And the problem with that is when they do reach it, they reach a glass ceiling – and it’s not too far in architecture – they blame themselves. They don’t have a feminist awareness and they don’t have a protective system for dealing with it, for that reason. They think, I’m a lousy architect and in actual fact architecture is very much an upper class profession. It’s less so, but it still is. You’ll do better in architecture if you belong to the right clubs and you either have money or a rich wife, and you just need that. It’s a very difficult profession. Upper class people have retained those prejudices.
 
So, in many respects, in many different ways, in which… which in England and I believe in America, and I believe in England too, you’ll find that there is discrimination in the top ranges of the profession. And the Pritzker Prize will die. Now, the present… they’ll die before they’ll give it to me. I’ll die before they ever consider it, although the present head of the staff, I believe, is rethinking or has rethought, and thinks it was a mistake what theyAnd then, I must tell you one thing, the National President’s Medal for Design was given to both of us, under George Bush the elder but mainly under the nice and thoughtful woman head of the NEA. And so, we both got the National President’s Medal. And the… the identity crisis I felt while I was there is indicative to the psychological stress this causes in my life. All the time, I kept telling myself at that thing, ‘No, they wanted you here.  No, they did give it to you both’.  I kept on having to say, ‘I’m here because… I’m here because’. And so, there’s enormous stress in siding with them, thinking I must be no good, because they’re saying it.

[DSB] The first thing that I say is, ‘It’s a question that really means, is it nature or nurture?’
That’s right.
[DSB] And that’s a question we can’t answer for, I say, 30 years, and then other people say, ‘You mean 60 years’, because there has been a history of nurture which has differentiated between men and women. And as the differences change or breakdown, maybe become less or at least become different, will these roles change.
I see.
[DSB] And now, having said that, I noticed… you see, people say little boys and little girls before they meet any nurturing or much nurturing, the boys gravitate to playing with trucks and engines, and the girls… well, I think, the nurturing starts from so early that I don’t know whether you can really say that. But I… when I was teaching I certainly did notice that the men I had to, sort of, say… organise.
Now, I think, this is another problem in architecture. I think, if you’re a man and you’re not very good at english or arithmetic, you go to architecture. It’s horrible to say that. People with dyslexia have a huge problem. I think, dyslexia is a difference not a disability and it is very much creative people who tend to have it and people with… who think visually. Well, if there’s no educational system that deals with their needs, like Bob at Episcopal, they go under. But they will gravitate to where that kind of mind is welcomed and that’s in things which have to do with creativity, with making and so on. So, I think, there’s an inordinate number of men who have dyslexia. You can see it in their handwriting in this office, you can see the difference and you can say, ‘I’m sure that one had reading problems as a child’, and so on. And they can be very creative people and they can deal with it, and they can read a lot too.  So, they have to learn.  The wisest thing the school said… a school said to me once is ‘We put pressure on the children and they find their own way to compensate’. And that’s what much of the teaching of dyslexia is.  You demand of them and they must find the way for their own brain to deal with it. And that’s what architecture helps architects do. But, for all that, I think, I had to say to the men in the class, ‘You must get organised’. And I had to say to the women, ‘You must risk it’.
You must risk it?
[DSB] Yes, don’t just try to be a good little girl who will please teacher. Now, we know that from the very earliest stage mothers man-handle little boys and talk to little girls. And all of these are the sort of nurturing questions that come up. But, having said that, I know that I’m the person in the office they need to psyche out the client. Bob gets pretty good at it. He once said to me, ‘When I asked her a certain question, she didn’t answer but she did move her foot’. Well, you have to spot all of those things. It seems women spot them better than men. It’s seems the kind of things I’ve talked about, growing a system, nurturing a campus, dealing with rain water management as a system that will make form, forming from within, you could say those are feminine precepts – but Lou Kahn did a lot of that too. So, and every time I’ve talked that way that there’s a woman’s way of teaching and a man’s way of teaching, I’ve found significant men who teach the way I like to teach. So, it’s confusing and it’s temporary and we hope that men don’t have to suffer from being success objects, any more than that women have to suffer from being sex objects and that these patterns will change. And, I think, another interesting thing is when men took up cooking in the household, women suddenly found it was honourable work. So, I watch for all those inversions and I can’t tell you where it’s going.

[RV] There’s this issue of kinds of mistakes we find we have made in our practice and I don’t know how Denise would answer that. I would answer it that it’s not exactly mistakes, it’s that we have been not cynical about compromising ourselves in order to get the job, or in order to do work that is likeable to the majority or to the public, or to the journalistic press. And that, in a way, is a mistake because it has diminished the extent of our… of our client…
Base.
[RV] Base. But on the other hand, I think, I would not have done it any differently – I think it is the right way to go. And I’m being, kind of, oppressively idealistic here, but, I think, is the right way to go and, I think, you do pay the price in art for being ahead of yourself or for being not within the main fashionable approach. And it’s true, that our approach has been one that is complex and contradictory, difficult to understand, not simple, not ideological but… and that has harmed us in terms of getting a lot of work and being a big practice. But I don’t think I would do it differently. On the other hand there is the problem that we’re maybe not as smooth and good at being salesman, but again that’s the way it is.
[DSB] We… we are well defended against our own mistakes, I suspect, because we do say, ‘We haven’t done something we’re not proud of’, and we show examples of where it would have been wrong to do the things people are saying. Like people said, ‘Move to New York, you get much more work if you move to New York’, and we haven’t. And, I think, we would have been very distracted in New York and… because there’s so much going on there. This has been a place for… we can reach places we need to go very easily but we can also do our work here. That’s the kind of situation where people would say, ‘You could have grown to be a much bigger firm if you had been in New York’. Not sure if that was our role. Now, I’m defending against the mistake when I say it, but I also believe that.
Not so long ago, we were designing a certain building and we were designing it in a certain way and they came back from a client meeting and they said, ‘If you go on this way you will be fired’. So, I stepped in very firmly and made us differentiate the façade of that building more and found good reasons that Bob could accept to do it. Because the only reasons he’ll accept are different activities going on in there, and I could show him there, indeed, were different activities. And it really would make sense to put more variety on that façade and we did it. And I felt, when we were doing it, this may be my lack of self confidence because I really pushed a certain idea – this isn’t the best building we could do, but it’s the one the clients wants and likes and we just have to do it. We’ve done many others of this type and so we will do that. So, we satisfied them, they liked the building and to my… and I gave up watching on that project, and to my amazement about nine months later, we were fired anyway. And we were fired because a community group didn’t like the bulk of the building, which had nothing to do with us. It was the clients’ decision on the bulk and the actual shape was made by the architect… the lab architect. But nevertheless, we were fired.  Why?  Because that would satisfy some activist community members who wanted Venturi out as the price. So, we’d… we’d already done something that I wasn’t quite sure we should have done and it didn’t help us anyway. So, you see what I’m saying, there’s a reason. Bob liked that building in the end well enough. I still had questions about whether it was the best we could do, but it was what they wanted.
Mostly we haven’t done what we call B buildings – ones we don’t show because we’re not proud of, but we made money out of. And we would have been proud of this one, I think, in the end, but I had these questions and then when the client fired us he said, ‘I'm very sorry, and we screwed up and you’re having to take the brunt of it’. So, it’s… there’s lots of ironies in this thing.
Then we did make a mistake and it’s a mistake I will admit to and justify. We discovered that there had been a defalcation, it’s called, and it means money had been stolen from us. And we should have checked things more carefully than we did. It was after our partner left and I was struggling to get a grasp on all the functions of this place, not only the management ones I’d done before. And to run everything and getting jobs and making sure projects were well run, was the important thing, and financial record keeping was something we were working on, but we hadn’t got the full grasp of it. And in that time, something happened and so it’s our fault, we should have been on top of that. And then, I say, ‘But how could I have done all that and also all the other?’ And eventually it was caught and it was caught through the actions that I instituted bringing in another… a new bookkeeper. But it took some time to be caught and that was a mistake.

[DSB] Why are there no female gurus in architecture? Because most architects are male, I would say. And to understand the meaning of this, we need to think about the nature of our field and the fact that we ascribe honor, and almost the only honor, to the path that’s least measurable – the design aspect. And to be a good designer is a very nebulous thing. First of all it depends on fashion. Who describes you as a good designer? And history is full of discoveries, you know, so and so was a really good designer but it wasn’t spotted in his time or her time. And so, if the only thing we honor is something that you won’t achieve just by working hard, by doing your homework as it’s been put, then, what do you do about it? And I’ve made a parallel to other situations where people must navigate uncertain, un-measurable waters and without help of scientific instruments, because there aren’t any. And that’s… you could say in navigation itself, before the advent of compasses.  And what did sailors do to get them across the ocean when they had no way to measure – they put a beautiful lady on the prow of the boat and they got across by magic. And so, we use magic techniques when we can’t find any others to use. And architects who realise that their fortunes will sink or swim because of their design ability, want to use some magic. So they invent gurus and they try to get a little bit of the guru somehow. The guru must come and lecture and we want to be near the guru. We want to touch a bit of the guru, we’d like to eat a little of the guru, something to ingest into ourselves as magic that we otherwise don’t know how we’ll get. And so, I think, that’s why architects make gurus so that it’ll help them with this difficult un-measurable ocean that they’re demanded to cross every day of their lives, one way or another, until they realise, lots of other ways to make money in architecture by producing reliable service, for example. But even then, you have to have your designer because one of the ways to get the job is having the designer. And so, it’s a conflicted situation and particularly in the highest ranges of architecture, because other architects who will survive in producing run of the mill work because that’s what their clients want. But where we operate, it’s not an option.
So, now, the next thing is there are no female gurus in architecture. The prima donnas in architecture are all male. And, as I say, I think the reason is because most of the architects are men and you choose a guru to be, kind of, like yourself. In the same way as you choose a wife who, kind of, looks like you – look at all the wedding photographs and see if that isn’t true. And you choose an architect who, kind of, looks like you and for that reason I would try to get a look at the client and send someone to the interview who looks like the client. You think that’s funny, but it can be a tragedy, you do the wrong thing. So, you try to cover all those bases but in the same way, there’s no such thing as a female guru, and a mom and pop guru is just out of bounds.

[DSB] Where is the… what’s the word I want, the… the reputation for the architect in choosing a woman? First of all, we know that in all fields the top training is given by people sitting next to the top performers. The best surgeon has the best student sitting there in the operation and it’s not very often a woman, because there’s no prestige in training a woman if you’re a man. And his wife would probably object anyway. So, this is hard for women to get that, kind of, hand to hand, eye to eye top training in any field, particularly hard in architecture. That’s another reason it’s hard for women to rise to the very top. And affirmative action doesn’t really help because it mandates very small firms and I’ve integrated one of the great firms of architecture in the world. Most women who practice want to practice with their own, very small firms and get the affirmative action projects that come their way if they are like that, but it removes their opportunity to head toward greatness. You won’t get a Pritzker Prize out of being a woman firm, in those terms, because you’d be too small to have the oeuvre that they look for. I’ve joined a large firm but then my identity gets submerged within that firm, but I do get to do the work that I’m trained for and able to do. It’s a big problem that. So, in the end then, the lack of women gurus is no accident. And the mom and pop guru is something that brings no prestige to the person conferring the title.
Do you remember that famous tennis match between Bobby Riggs and Billie Jean King? And she won. Well, the story goes that he realised that winning would make him look even more ridiculous than losing. You don’t… winning… beating a woman is a ridiculous, makes you look ridiculous, it doesn’t make you look good. He did give out that he bet heavily against himself and therefore made a lot of money in the deal. And I don’t know if that’s a true story or apocryphal but there would’ve been his reward, you see – you say, ‘I, in fact, was clever. I won the system anyway’. But, the same thing crowning a mom and pop guru would make the crowner look nothing more than ridiculous. So, that’s the long sorry story about room at the top in architecture and about architectural discrimination in relation to the star system.
[RV] Maybe we should divorce or one of us should have a sex change?
[DSB] Neither of which would be particularly good for our work, which is the most important thing. So, sexism and the star system is a sore subject. But, you see I’m smiling and one of the reasons is, I think of the opportunity I have had and would I have had that with a firm of my own? As I say, you have to be very rich, very well tied in, very well organised and to lead a pretty tough life, and coming to this country when I did and not being connected, I think that would’ve not really opened me.
[RV] There are other difficulties on being a man, but having an approach or a philosophy that is not currently in fashion.
[DSB] That’s a great difficulty too, yes.
[RV] And the combination of the two in our case has made it not easy. But we’ve struggled along and because of some wonderful clients – not a lot of them, but some – we’ve had wonderful opportunities, starting with my mother and going beyond that.
[DSB] Yes and when you look at the work that we’ve done, no one can say – not even Bob who tries to say it all the time – that we haven’t had opportunity. I have to keep reminding him that we’ve really done a lot of buildings and…
[RV] True.
[DSB] It’s really kind of miraculous, if you think of all these problems that we talk about.
[RV] That’s true. And we love our work and I… we love looking at it.
[DSB] And we love doing it.
[RV] Yeah and most, most… very much most of it, we love.

[RV] Toulouse, again where the client… and we, in the end got along well. We were able to do a lot of what we were able to do, while a very big building. We were able to do a building with a way through it. We were able to do a building that fits beautifully with its context of Toulouse – which is one of our most favourite cities.  It’s a red brick city, with a beautiful aura. We were able to do a building that had explicit ornament on the surfaces. We were able to do a building that had… that had symbolic elements, especially the two columns or representations of columns on the front. We were having to do a building that had wonderful restaurants in the neighbourhood, where we could have lunch. And as I said a while back, maybe we went back there a few weeks ago after six or seven years and it was so heavenly to say, it is still wonderful, it is being beautifully maintained, inside and out. And we talked to the clients’ users and they seemed to love it and that’s the reason they maintain it. And so, we were extremely happy…
[DSB] The building…
[RV] Made us very happy.
[DSB] The building sits on a cleared site – the site was cleared when we found it and large. And on one side is an old arterial called Avenue Serres and then there’s a bridge on that Avenue and it is over the canal called the Canal du Midi, which comes in a great curve around the other site. And the site sits between those and then some small streets on the other sides.  And between the bridge and the end of the site, we put this way, which in fact linked a commercial district on the one side of the bridge and a new commercial district beyond the site. So, we made a way between those two. And then, we put our administrative buildings on either side of that way and then there was a park on the canal side and a little square facing on to the old Avenue Serres, where the assembly hall was. So, the ceremonial buildings of this – it’s like a state capital, this building – Hôtel du Département and the Département is like a state and this one was called the Haute-Garonne. And Monsieur le President was our client which is the president of the state – the Département of the Haute-Garonne.
[RV] Equivalent of a governor.
[DSB] And they were pulling together all these regional offices and putting them in the one place and the reason was decentralisation in Paris. So, France was becoming a less centralised nation giving some governmental functions – more governmental functions – to the départements and now, they will once again. So, we had to hold, I think, it was 1400 workers and now there’s going to be 5000 there.
And so, it’s a really big building and the public came there to pay their taxes and various businesses that they had to do with departmental government. And then, the deputies came there to vote, so, a wonderful combination. They also wanted a day-care shelter there and this park, and so on. And a big restaurant for the deputies, another one for the staff. It was a socialist government. American music and all the radios of the labourers as they worked, it was funny.
But, so, many people would have taken that site and say, ‘We could put a slab here and another slab here, and another slab there’. Starting as Urbanists, we start with the city builder, the movement system – that’s one of the functions of the movement system, it builds cities. So, there’s our city builder, then our buildings on either side. Having the whole divided basically in two and then with a ceremonial addendum, you know… addition to it… allowed us to keep the buildings low. And the area in Toulouse where we built was not the center, not the sacred historic downtown, which is exquisite with red brick, even red brick cathedrals. And here, it was…
[RV] Just one cathedral.
[DSB] One cathedral and other churches.  And here the buildings were smaller, more modest and made of stucco and limestone and brick. So, it was a mixture of red and white here. And we followed that tradition of red at the center and red and white on the outskirts. So, our exterior walls we made all masonry but the walls were made of limestone and brick. And then, along the way the walls were all mostly brick, red brick, and certain decorative elements at the entrance, where you came across the Pont des Minimes over the Canal du Midi. And as you approached, you saw two columns – but they weren’t columns, they were flattened representations of columns and actually, they were representations of two old columns that had once been on either side of the Avenue Serres and then in a street widening, they’d removed them. And we found old photographs of these and we put them right at the entry to the two wings of the building as a, kind of a, scale mediator. So, you as an individual were closer in scale to those columns and then to the building itself. And yet, none of the buildings were too big. The heaviest scale around was the infrastructure of the canal and then the street and the bridge and then our building had a scale which was partly civic and partly the scale of individual workers, when you saw the windows on the sides.
And the building is loved by people there, although it’s looked upon as a bit old fashioned by the architects. And the interesting thing about that way through is I had wanted it to have a street market in it, like the ones you see in streets in Toulouse. Fruit and vegetable markets and book markets, and you name it they have markets for it in the streets. And Monsieur le President said, ‘No this is a civic street you can’t do that’. So, we couldn’t have it there. But kids walk – take it as a short cut – it’s a diagonal so a diagonal is a short cut between… in a rectangular grid situation. So, kids walk to school there in the morning and other people use it for short cuts, which makes me very happy when I see that. But, indeed, an informal, possibly illegal, fruit and produce market did grow up in the other logical place you might put it if you were a creative retail economist – in the parking structure underground between the majority of cars and where the elevator is. Along that route – the route that gathers all the cars – they have a fruit and produce market in the mornings there.  Amazing. So, I had wanted it above ground, I got it below ground where in fact a lot of people pass.
[RV] But Denise they’ve mentioned now that they are… they are going to start up a process for… about just to happen… of having market and other kinds of systems within the complex.
[DSB] Well it was… yes, but it was a market of ideas, of trade things of… in other words a much more high class market than the street markets.
[RV] That’s still there.
[DSB] And also Monsieur le President was very proud that they have celebrations there, where the whole community comes into that street. So, it does have a function even although for security they close it at night.

[RV] Another project we love that’s foreign was the project in Japan near the city of Nikko. And that is a project in the rural area around Nikko in a national park.  And that project is, or was to be… they later changed it… changed… it was designed as a… as a hotel spa complex. And the client and we got along very well from the beginning… we understood each other, the whole process with the local associate architects and with the client and with the builders was just wonderful and very smooth.  We made 17 trips back and forth. And every one of the trips was just… involved a great pleasure. When we presented the building – just an indication how we understood each other – to the… even though it was to be a hotel, later it became something else, but to be a hotel it was to be run by the government. And when we presented the original idea – the very early preliminary idea – for the design to the individual who was representing the government, we said, ‘Our approach is going to be one where the buildings will not just be Modernist – abstract form – but will be Modern, but also accommodate and employ explicitly symbolism’. And we mentioned that there would be the lobby and the area between the two buildings and which would be a lobby… or it looks like an outdoor space, but it had a glass roof, and that would be a way again through the building and would – via symbolic elements within it – would exemplify a typical country village street, which was very rich in Japan – full of all sorts of objet. And we had signs along it that represented… that do represent flowers that are hanging from the lampposts. We had the lampposts, we had signs that represent the green telephone booths and public telephones. And also the mailboxes and other everyday elements, but that would be… involved symbols of… would be symbols of Japanese ordinary elements. But, I said in this presentation to the… to the client representative, I said, ‘But we have to be very careful because we are not Japanese and we have to work with a Japanese group of people, with a committee, to advise us on this’. And he said, ‘Yes, we do not want this to become a Madame Butterfly’. I just roared with laughter because that was just a wonderful indication of humor, but also of understanding the problem entirely. I think this guy was an opera fan but also as a Japanese person who was… Madame Butterfly must be very funny.
[DSB] Bob?
[RB] Yes.
[DSB] I think it still is a hotel, it was just going to be a different kind of hotel.
[RV] I think that’s right, yeah, it was a… run by the government, now it’s another agency that runs it. You’re right, it still is a hotel.
[DSB] It’s to be for the employees of the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunication and then they changed that and made it open to the public. And then eventually, it was also run by different people, not by the Ministry.
[RV] But it was just… it’s just a lovely complex in the countryside where it has indoor tennis courts buildings, it has the hotel it has other elements for meeting, for conferences and so it makes a kind of complex of buildings within a natural setting. It has a bridge that is both Modern but does employ symbolism applied to it. It has the ends of the buildings that look like Mondrian compositions, one of them being Broadway Boogie Woogie, but it also reminds you of the system in Japanese architecture of having exposed steel… exposed steel… exposed wood elements on that… on the ends of buildings. We made the roofs flat, but flat roofs were considered illegal in that part of Japan, you had to have traditional buildings – sloping roofs – but we made decorative elements that implied that the roof did that, but you are also aware that the roof didn’t do that. So, we had that annoying element that we were able to turn into a positive esthetic element in the thing. It was a wonderful experience, going there every day, and having everything work well, being understood and so forth.
[DSB] It was also a beautiful national forest landscape and we handled it with ecological care.
[RV] Yeah, right.
[DSB] We brought with us from just up the road on Main Street, Andropogon – the famous landscape architecture firm – and they were our landscape architects there. And even all the trees that were removed to put buildings there were replanted. And an amazing experience happened when we went to visit the site in the first place with our friend and mentor, and the person who helped organise our work in Japan, Akio Izutsu. And we were all tramping this forest site and we came across a series of trees that were marked and we asked, ‘What is this?’ And they said, ‘They are…’ no, they didn’t know what it was.  And then as we walked we came across the people putting the markings on the trees. And we asked what it was for and they said, ‘This is where the construction road is going to be’. So, we said, ‘But we don’t know what we’re building yet’. And they said, ‘Well, the construction road will eventually go away again so, it doesn’t matter where it goes’. And I said, ‘If you’re going to have trucks coming over this site, day in and day out thousands of them, what you do to the landscape may not be remediable, you should think hard before you put this road and get the right place for the road’. And we went away for lunch and during lunch a message came: ‘We’ve stopped the road’. And I’ve thought not in America would my say so ever stop a road, perish forbid, would they ever do that. And here, they had responded quickly and correctly and we pointed out that Colin Franklin from Andropogon would be arriving the next day. And the next day, Colin gave them chapter and verse of what it would do, particularly to the stream through the site, if they put the road where they were thinking of putting it. And, in fact, I watched those trucks drive back and forth, and back and forth on this road and at the end when we came back, thanks to Andropogon and their careful planting, there was no sight of that road.

[RV] Another funny story just to indicate, kind of, sense of agreeable relationships. We had a wonderful – happened to be female – translator who would do the translating for us during most of our time there, on all these trips. And one time we were having a conversation, she and I, in a taxi going through Tokyo and she was talking about her mother who was an unusual person. And I told her about my mother who was an unusual person, who was a pacifist. And I mentioned the story that my mother, right after the bombing of the first atom bomb that she went through the neighbourhood with a petition for people to sign their names for the government not to… to drop another atom bomb. And I noticed for several days after that I was being treated with extra courtesy by all of the Japanese I would meet at different meetings and things like that. She obviously told that story – it was, kind of, funny. But we had a very understanding relationship, we would… it was really funny, you know, we knew their language not at all and in French, I’m not very good at it but I, kind of know the language, when we work in France. And in Britain I really don’t know the language very well but we somehow got along pretty well. But in the… in Japan I just found that we would… once via translation we would all be laughing at the joke just at the right moment, there was just absolute understanding on all… at all levels.
[DSB] In fact, our translator told us, another funny story, she was wonderful. Noticing this and when I first got to Japan, I thought, here I can relax because in Europe I have to try really hard and I’ll probably understand some French, some Italian, some German, some related languages, a little Danish through Afrikaans and all of that. So, I have to work really hard in Europe. In Japan, I’ll never understand, so just relax. And then, as we went there more often I began to spot that there were words that were actually English, if you keep your eyes… your ears open.
[RV] A lot of English words.
[DSB] Like hotel is hotero, and these masks that they wear on their faces when they have colds is masku. And so, if you listen you’ll hear those, and then if you listen really hard you’ll hear the German words from the influence before ours. They have the word arbeiter which is used in Japan. And she said, ‘Yes this is true and we Japanese know that when we are doing a deal with an American company, the nearer we get to the deal, the more we must take out those words because the Americans will spot where we’re going’. And she said, ‘We begin to sound archaic even to ourselves’.
And I have just one other funny translation story. Mr Akio Izutsu believed in… you must… each side must have their own translator and there’s the Italian phrase ‘traditore, traduttore’, which means traitor translator. You can have traitor… traitor-hood in how you are translated. So, when I was at the opening of… it was actually the ground breaking for the building and there was this Shinto ground breaking ceremony. And a great white tent and a beautiful white fabric moveable altar on wooden frames and these monks in their robes. And we had be to part of the ceremony, we had to say, ‘Hey, hey, hey’, as we hit a stick and moved some earth and things like that. And so all of that was there.  And there were two women at this thing – the translator and me – but there were women in construction on the outside. Maybe 2000 people constructing on that site and – very un-American and not even very French – but… and you’d see them in their silk workman’s jackets and their construction helmets but also Japanese bonnets under the helmets. So, we saw the women on the site but there were no other women there and over 200 black clad men, very picturesque. So, we each had to make a speech. And in my speech I said, I had noticed that there were no other women present except on the site and there were women there, but I knew that there were women in architecture schools in Japan. And maybe by the time the building opens there will be some women at the opening. And the man from Bechtel afterwards said to me, ‘It was a very interesting speech’, but he was the only one. And no Japanese apparently heard what I said and when I talked with the translator and I talked with Mr Izutsu and all of the others, I said, ‘Well now, what did people make of what I said?’ They would, sort of, very politely change the subject. So, I presume my speech was not translated in that respect.
[RV] It was censored.
[DSB] Yes.

[RV] There’s one other architect, American, who worked there a lot, French… American French… French American. Who was that?
[DSB] Antonin Raymond.
[RV] Antonin Raymond, to what extent… they were really American even though they were French, or not?
[DSB] I think so, I’m not sure.
[RV] Well, I’m a little mixed up on that, but there was that couple partnership. Otherwise, all of the modern buildings were tremendously international and therefore very American, in many ways. So, you kind of feel at home. It’s an extremely exotic place but it’s also extremely familiar in other ways. It’s just a wonderful juxtaposition of the now and the then – the modern and the traditional.
[DSB] And this experience made us…
[RV] We loved it.
[DSB] Come to another conclusion. Like, we work here weekends and weekdays, and all the time and people say, ‘Can’t you stop to smell the roses’, and we’ve always said, ‘Well, the roses better be right there on the drawing board or else we’ve got no time for them’. But in actual fact, through our work look what’s happened to us. We go to a country and in no time at all, we’re on whispering terms with people who we’ve never met before about things greatly important to them, like a building they’re going to construct. And we get to see the country from a point of view that no tourist ever would. Why would we need to be doing something different than that, when we get all these excitements through the work we do?
[RV] It was also near the end… fun to go… go there when the… the hotel was open… open for business and so, it was wonderful to stay in a room that we had designed.  The architecture and the furniture – we had at least designated what kind of furniture was there. It was thrilling, yeah.

[DSB] We had another adventure while we were there, particularly Bob.  We gathered information wherever we could find it for this use of Japanese culture in the building. In a way that, it was an American interpretation and openly so, but it was valued by them as a contribution because it was our interpretation, an artistic interpretation with love and respect. So, we had lots of little objects from markets and friends who gave us gifts in the traditional Japanese way… gave us objects from markets rather than the traditional lacquer vases and things like that. And common everyday objects, and beautiful ones and religious ones but also comic books and rubber shoes and whatever seemed to be enticing and beautiful and we… in fact we have, I think, about 1000 chopstick holders.
You’ve spoken of your interest in pop art.  Are you familiar with the… renowned Japanese approach of a similar kind called anime?
[DSB] I’ve heard of it, I’ve heard of it. But to go on from there, we discovered a book of Japanese indigo fabrics. Now, these are fabrics made on the farms from cotton and they’re what farm workers wore and they were made by women and much… many of them were worn by women.
[RV] You call it peasant art.
[DSB] And… yes and so this, well, it was really peasant wear. And this woman who seems to have been married to a manufacturer of cottons, she became interested and she went to the various farms and she bought these old bits of fabric from farmers. And she made this exquisite book and she gave a social history of how they were made too. A very moving history about the women who were the field workers and how they would try to improve themselves and the whole… just the combination we love, the social and the art and the whole thing mixed up. And so, we decided that these would be ideal to use as the base for the furnishings in the rooms. And Akio Izutsu said, ‘If you want to do this you will have to go and ask the permission of the lady who wrote the book’.
[RV] This would be for fabrics, for as I say, carpet patterns…
[DSB] Wall coverings.
[RV] Wall coverings, upholstery.
[DSB] Furniture upholstery and all of that. And so, Bob journeyed up into the mountains somewhere and visited this elderly lady and they had a nice time – help of a translator – conversing and she willingly gave her permission for us to take patterns from her book and adapt them. And use them for this room. And so, you go into the room…
[RV] A typical room.
[DSB] The national park is called Nikko Kirifuri. Kirifuri means misty. So, the landscape as you look out of the window is a little blue with mist and then these patterns on the inside are all blue, because of the indigo from which they came. Not an indigo, not a dark indigo, but a pale one, one made paler than that and they cover everything. And it really does relate to the misty landscape outside and it’s a lovely feeling of cool. We also did the furniture there, and… except for some 1950s pieces that we then reupholstered in these. And so, that’s beautiful, it has a lovely atmosphere in those rooms. And then we invited this old lady to the opening and she came to the opening, walked into the room, looked at it and burst into tears of joy.

[RV] Working in Japan, was just heavenly in so many different ways.  It was just so stimulating and friendly and efficient.
[DSB] And they have the same sense of fun.
[RV] Yeah.
[DSB] Same sense of humor.
[RV] Yeah.
[DSB] They used to call Bob, Mr Shadow Jointer.
[RV] Because I loved shadow joints so the architects in the firm that we were working with… the detail… I’d always say, now, make sure the shadow joint is right. So, eventually I was known as Mr Shadow Jointer. The other thing was also… the restaurants were fabulous. I mean you know, wonderful Japanese of course. But the best French restaurants I’ve ever eaten in, including Paris, were in Japan. Italian restaurants and it was just fun to be there on so many levels. And it’s the combinations of different kinds of architecture and it wasn’t sort of Disneyland, kind of, combinations to it, it was just vital and nice. Oh God, I just, I want to go back. And then, of course, we also loved what architects normally love, especially Modern architects and that is the architecture of, of… what was the other city besides Tokyo? What’s the name of it?
[DSB] Now, you see I’ve…
Yokohama?
[DSB] No.
Kyoto.
[DSB] Kyoto, yes.
[RV] Kyoto, Kyoto and there they have these Shinto gardens that are just heavenly. As much as I am a lover of Michelangelo and I’m a lover of Italy, and so forth and so on, maybe my favourite spot in the whole world is one of these gardens, these Japanese Shinto gardens, which are, kind of, miniature stylised, idealised nature. Made smaller and generalised, oh… they just bring tears to my eyes when I… you just… thinking of them and I want to go back and experience that and just… oh, it’s so fantastic. I remember having dinner one night with… I don’t think you were there, we visited our dear friend an architect there and he took me down to southern Japan. I forget the name of the area.
[DSB] Hokkaido.
[RV] Where he was doing some buildings.
[DSB] Not Hokkaido was to the… Hashido?
[RV] That’s right, he taught at a university there and I gave a lecture. And then afterwards we had dinner at a beautiful restaurant at the edge of town, which was surrounded by… or we were facing a beautiful traditional Japanese garden there and it was, sort of, gently lit. And we had this beautiful food. But, beyond the Japanese garden were all these neon signs, the Modernist and the combination of the modern Japan and the old Japan is so beautiful and there it was juxtaposed. I’ll just never forget it. I love it. I wish I had photographs of it.
I wish you did.
[RV] And his name is Nori Yasuyama and his daughter now works in our office. She’s just fabulous – she’s the main architect now for working on the project in Georgetown.
[DSB] Dumbarton Oaks.
[RV] Dumbarton Oaks.
[DSB] And her father worked for us in the 1970s.

[DSB] I loved the Chinese gardens and in 1982 we received a visit from a Professor Luo, a woman architectural historian from Shanghai. And she spoke American as much as we did. She was a lovely early middle aged woman and she had an understanding of our work. Her fields… her field was American post World War Two architecture in China. And she understood us, in a way that I haven’t found other critics anywhere to understand us – American or English or anyone. She just was on our wavelength and saw what we were doing, and we really, really liked her. She happened to be there on Bob’s birthday and there was a birthday cake in the office, to Bob’s consternation, and she joined in the fun and then she had dinner with us.
[RV] I hate birthday parties.
[DSB] And so, she became a good friend there then.  There are some people… there’s an urgency because they’re going away.  You’ll see them once, you become good friends immediately and it stays. So, when we went back to China, we went to visit her. Now, she was a much older lady.
Her other field of scholarship was Chinese scholars’ gardens. She took us to one in Shanghai and she showed us how, on these small town sites in Shanghai, they made a garden that felt infinite by various clever tricks. And she showed us the tricks. And I looked at these… this garden… and it had little paths and it went by pools and then it stopped at a wall but it looked as if the water went under – one of the tricks – and so on. And there were vistas carefully organised.
[RV] Miniature, miniature mountains.
[DSB] Yes and then at the top of a little mountain was a little summer house. And there it was, with its seats around it and a place for sitting at the front and you could look out. And I thought, well, this is this scholar’s place.  I want to come here and bring my work and sit there and do my work.
[RV] It’s supreme.
[DSB] And then I began to fantasize. I said, ‘I want a scholar’s garden attached to a hotel spa. And I will come and live here for two weeks and I will do fitness in the spa and have my sauna, and I’ll bring my books and just sit the rest of the afternoon and look out. And do my writing and edit and the things that I do in my old age’, and it would be for me the perfect vacation.
Just two weeks?
[DSB] Well, because you can’t spend more than two weeks in that kind of idle – not idle because you’re doing good work – but sort of un-oppressed splendour, it would be too much. You might never go back.
[RV] The wonderful thing is…
[DSB] And then also, after that she took us to see some housing which are called lilong and she’d showed us round parts of Shanghai. You know, Shanghai had this amazing history of the foreign powers that were all spread out around the river and on what’s called the Bund. And the story of all the groups that moved through there, including Jewish refugees during World War Two, is an amazing story. But the lilong were constructed on the basis of an English model, the mews cottage. And a mews cottage often has a ceremonial archway.  And it’s behind the main houses and it’s where the servants lived, and where the chauffeur kept the automobile and before that the carriage for the horses. And then, there were small mews cottages along the mews, having gone under this archway.  And the cottages might be above the parking garage, or there might not be any parking left any more – converted into living spaces.
So, that relationship of mews and mews cottages was taken to China, made much smaller and much longer and much more complex, and it’s a whole warren of housing off major commercial streets. So, the stores go along the street, you go under the arcade and there you are – in the middle of this busy commercial life, private housing on the ground, in enclaves. And so, recently, I had to write something about Shanghai for a book that’s coming out. I don’t know how people contacted us and asked us, but it seemed the right thing to write about. And somehow along the way I also wrote it for a newspaper, I wrote it for the Washington Post. I forget why they wanted me to write something – I thought the thing to write about would be these lilong. Well, it netted me a letter from a Chinese professor at an American university, who said, ‘I grew up in a lilong and never in American have I found a place where I want to live. I’ve tried the New Urbanism, I’ve tried apartments, I’ve tried… I’ve tried suburbia and there’s nowhere that will give me what I had in my lilong by way of social contact and yet privacy. And when my family come to visit they suffer anomie and depression after one month of living in housing environments here’. It was an amazing story.

[DSB] What do we think of the future of our field? We’ve spent quite a lot of time saying you shouldn’t predict the future. You should evolve a system for reacting to what future comes. And also that goes along with the question of what you do with things you can’t measure, because you certainly can’t measure the future. I remember a certain scientist that I was on a jury with once for a competition and I said, ‘Something is good for your soul’, in this garden that had been designed. And he said, ‘If you… if you would tell me how to measure it, I will consider it.  If you don’t, don’t bring it up’.  And I said to him…
Sounds like an engineer.
[DSB] Yes, he was. And I said to him, ‘You may have the luxury of doing that in your field, I certainly don’t.  Because the expressway that I’m talking about, that I’ll be designing and I thought you were too, that expressway will be there a thousand years. And for a thousand years there’s no way of measuring the future. So, then, what do you do then?  You can’t say, well, I’m just not going to design the expressway, it’s needed now and it will be there a thousand years from now, probably. So, what do you do, refuse to do it because you can’t measure it, because you can’t measure its future?’ So, these are the issues that come up for us that we produce things of enormously long standing and yet, we want to deal with it in the here and now. We don’t want to have the vision for the year 2020, which is a… an avoidance – the perfect vision year, it was called with great scorn in planning. That’s an avoidance of dealing with here and now problems. So, that’s our take on the future. We don’t find it too very interesting to talk about the future of our field. What do we think architects will be doing a hundred years from now? That’s hard to say and is it really worth thinking about?
[RV] My response is… parallels that… it is… has two parts, I guess. One is that it is very difficult to… to predict as Denise points out and I think, trying to predict is really not worth the energy or not terribly relevant. I think, what you want to do is work for now and you want to hope… we want to hope that what we think is right for now, but is not happening now, will in the near future be happening appropriately, i.e. an architecture of iconography that can be accommodated by architecture that is flexible. And the second part is, we hope in the future that this architecture that accommodates flexibility via the loft idea, will… will then be able to accommodate the future in almost any direction it goes. Or in many directions.  In other words, many different things can happen within the mitten. So, we… we hope that the future will be varied and rich and therefore the architecture will accommodate that. It is true also that it will involve evolution and revolution. Modern architecture emphasise the value of revolution being new, being original, being whamo in that way. But an awful lot of great art involves evolution rather than revolution.  Both are appropriate and you have to… you have to do what is appropriate – evolutionary or revolutionary. So, we think that the glove loft can accommodate different kinds of revolution and evolution. And we also hope and expect that symbolism will come back as a… and signage… as a valid and appropriate element for architecture. Not only in American commercial architecture as it exists now, but in all kinds of architecture.

[DSB] We started out by being invited to think about… well, we’d had this experience of trying to work out how the Medical Center would empty out at Dartmouth. So, that we dealt with Medical Center buildings but from the point of view of what do with this organisation once the organisation left – the organisation of buildings itself. What it was and something about why it was and what pieces we should keep, and what we shouldn’t. So, we started getting into the problem that way and then we were asked at Penn to help the new head of a Medical Center, as it then was, Bill Kelly to understand where he was in Philadelphia, because we knew west Philadelphia very well. And we had to tell them things like, ‘No, you really can’t take over Franklin Field for the Medical Center, close though it is, it has too much history going for it’. And rather simple things like that, but also the Urbanism around it. And working with some hospital and medical center planners we got into the question of medical center planning quite a lot. But this was complexes of hospitals.
And I’m proud of the fact that, while they were recommending a two billion dollar project, I was saying, ‘You already have a bridge connected to a building which is only partly in use. Why don’t you start your new growth from the bridge at the Penn Tower Hotel?’ – whatever the name was of that hotel – well, the… the two billion dollar project came and went. And they did start at the hotel and I was, sort of, aware that you could be pragmatic even about medical center planning, though sometimes they had been too pragmatic. So, we got our feet wet there.
And then, in Michigan we did a lot of medical center planning for them, on two campuses there. And again, not… not buildings, but the ways in which all buildings should be seen and how they should grow and change, and what the options were. The whole issue of how ambulatory care was changing the practice of medicine and getting to understand the way medical centers are put together. And then, the last medical center we worked on was at Kentucky, where they wanted to put four new labs into the Medical Center. And, oh, at Michigan because we were architects, as well as planners, we could work on the labs there and we could save them a lot of time because we could knew basically how the labs would be organised. We might have got the actual dimensions of the labs out by about 10 feet, but that didn’t matter at that stage. We allowed them to work out that they had to move some important utilities in order to get the labs going and with just the rough outlines we could get them. They started moving the utility pipes. They saved maybe a year on construction time, for that reason, because we could get ahead of the game. We weren’t only programming in the early stages, while we were planning, we were also actually planning the buildings. And then, after the Medical Center at Michigan, the one at Kentucky, we… we knew enough about labs to tell them the plan they’d made in 1991 was not… not suitable and they had to give up the notion of having their lab buildings right next to their medical offices. Because, if they put four big new labs they were so much bigger than they had allowed for, that they’d have no Medical Center left. And then, we started analysing the pathways in the Medical Center at ground level but particularly above ground and we saw the network of relationships on the second floor and the bridges that connected them. Some people say this is just the ego of surgeons, all those bridges. I happen to believe they actually need them.

[DSB] So, we said, ‘The idea of…’ which was not our idea, it was the President’s idea… the President’s idea… ‘of crossing the major street and putting the labs on the other side, would work and would be a good idea’. Because there was already built in a place for the bridge in the hospital and they could use that place. And they… we then gave them a plan for the Medical Center on the other side of the street, of a series of labs and place for clinical extensions too. And so, we’d done that plan. At that point I had 150 medics in that place going like this at me. One actually said, ‘I’m going to take my million dollar research grant and go to another institution’. Made me think that professors, like curators in a museum, professors in a university see themselves as oppressed and see me as a running dog of the imperialists of the oppressors… of the oppressors. And they probably are oppressed and I’ve said to presidents, ‘Stop oppressing the faculty and I’ll be able to plan for you’. Anyway, it’s the… the administration are bemused by faculty. They can’t… particularly engineers around facilities planning, they can’t believe what faculty do.
You know the story of the Smith building. They couldn’t believe what faculty did at Penn. Anyway, so, the question there was, how could we convince these people that, in fact, they really did need to move? Well, now, the building is up and the people who were so against it either have forgotten or left. It was a great joy to me to see a jogger, jogging along our bridge in the morning before going into work in the hospital. And also, when you are… when you at the… across the road on the other side of the bridge there’s a coffee shop, or there’s…
This is at Penn?
[DSB] No, this is at Kentucky, University of Kentucky, yes. There’s intended to be a coffee shop in a position we’ve left for it there and the idea is that, from the hospital you will smell the coffee in the morning. And this will take you across and help make that linkage which we’re trying to make, this meeting of the minds.
[RV] Don’t forget Lehigh Valley.
[DSB] And then, yes… no then I was going to go on from there. We have been hired to be architects for the Allentown Museum, which is in Pennsylvania, north of Philadelphia. And it’s in the Lehigh Valley. The Lehigh Valley is a very well kept secret, you don’t quite know what the secret is but they’re doing very well, thank you, there. And they don’t tell many people and they have this beautiful landscape and this beautiful campus of the university there. And things are going very well.
At Lehigh University?
[DSB] Well, yes and the Lehigh Valley in general – it gets its support from New York and Philadelphia – and so, it’s a… it’s a hive of activity that we Philadelphians don’t know much about. And it has this air of having a secret. Well, we were at an early meeting at the Allentown Museum and a trustee came up to us and he said, ‘I’m Elliot Sussman and I went to Yale. And I took Vincent Scully’s class in architecture and I know all about you’. Vincent Scully has sent us more clients and he said, ‘I love architecture’, words to that effect, ‘and I really wish you had done hospitals’. And I said, ‘Well, Elliot you know, in a sense, we have’. And I explained to him exactly how we had done hospitals. We deal with the part that brings amenity to the public way inside the hospital and to the access. We try to work out the siting of hospital buildings and bring amenities to the access patterns and clarity. I went on to say, ‘People who are driving to hospital are not their best selves – they’re sick, they’re worried, they’re worried about what the hospital will do to them and they also, often, are elderly. They really need a clear pattern to bring them to the hospital’.  And he said ‘This is exactly what we want, we have hospital architects we need this other’. So, he hired us then and there. Now, we’re just building our second hospital for him and are doing some other extra work after that, and a parking structure. And we do the ceremonial spaces and the basic layouts, much as we’ve done with the labs. And he has got many interesting innovations in hospitals that he’s talked about, mainly relationships between nursing stations and hospital beds. But when you walk into the elevator, quite often in the elevator you hear a, sort of like, a wedding bell ringing or a little soft bell. Each time that bell rings it means a baby was born.

[DSB] Robert Scott Brown was killed in 1959. I met Bob in 1960. Now, I was a sorrowing widow much of that time and I’d say in the end Bob was the cure for my sorrow, but at that point, I was trying to keep myself together. I finished school and I started teaching and that’s when I met Bob, and the teaching was just the whole structure for my life.  When we were on vacation my structure broke down. And David Crane was an important person in my life, Robert Scott Brown’s life and mine, when we first came. He was our student adviser and he was a kindred spirit in many ways, not all, but many. And he helped mightily when Robert was killed. I lived with them for about eight weeks. Were you there at that talk? No, did you come with us to that memorial ceremony for Dave Crane? Well, I described to them everything that Dave did for me, by way of having me live with his family and then I got my own apartment when I… and so, at that point, when I met Bob, he and I just talked once and saw each other maybe one or two times. And then Dave Crane was trying to, kind of, help me with my life to some extent and he knew Bob. He’d visited him in Rome and he at one point said to me, ‘You should marry Bob Venturi’. He said, ‘He’s, he’s very…’ I forget what he said, something like, He’s bright and talented but he’s too well heeled to do any good, to have a career and we know what you’re like and you should marry him’. He didn’t, sort of, say you’d help him with his career or anything like that, but he just, sort of, felt we would go together. He said I’m going to ask both of you for dinner one night, which is what he did.
So, we had dinner with Bonnie and Dave Crane, and after that Bob started inviting me out for dinner. And our dates were like that. We had a nice time having dinner together and I described how we… I’d take him to studio. I’d tell him what was happening. And then at faculty meetings, because I was full time and he was part time. By the way, we were paid the same. So, I was paid full time, I was paid a little more but I was paid full time for what he got for part time – shows you what they thought about women. And so, I started saving a place for him at the faculty meetings and a cookie, because the Dean brought cookies to the meetings and they were always gone by the time he got there. So, he had a place and a cookie next to me. And we found we shared a lot of feelings and we’re not the same as the other faculty members, there were a few people in planning and some in art. Not many in architecture that we felt kindred spirits with, art history also, architecture history.

[DSB] I think I've understood how the theories courses started. Paul Davidoff was up in arms giving this… saying we should be more socially active and the things that people should realise about planning and architecture, and the faults of master planning and all of that. And then he started to say, ‘Well, we need a theory course, a theory of planning course’. So, he could say everything that should be. He was naïve as a theoretician because he was saying they are, but he meant should be. And so, a theories course… theory course, theory of planning was passed and Paul and Tom Reiner ran it. And I kibitzed, I used to say, and I was a young faculty member then and this was first semester of 1961, probably. And I used to say, ‘You haven’t done any planning, I’ve at least done some, at least, you know, physical planning. And the things you’re saying just really don’t quite work the way you think. All of them are right, but they don’t work in the order you think they do’, etc., etc. Dave Crane was more of a theorist of planning method than Paul Davidoff was, because he’d done it and he had ideas about how you should do it and that’s how he ran his studio. So, I think, that the Dean of the School of Architecture who was planning oriented, was interested in this.
But also, there was another thing, the Dean too had a theory and his theory was that the people who came into architecture were graduate students, unlike England, for example. And they were already educated verbally. They were too verbal, he would feel and they’ve not had any manual training at all and we needed to have something to accompany studio that basically taught them how to draw, because they can’t draw. ‘So, we’ll give them their first project and this will be in the fall.  We’ll give them their first project and the project will be a neighbourhood unit, because there’s lots of stuff their verbal skills can work on as they gather the data and all that. And then, in another course we’ll give them a lot of drawing, so they can be ready to do it when they come to the second semester. So, it was meant to be a lot of drawing. Well, what should they draw? Well, they don’t know much about buildings and they need a vocabulary of buildings so, we’ll let them draw plans and sections of buildings that other architects have designed. So, we’ll produce boards the way fine arts departments produce boards of paintings but these will be of a steel and glass school by Mies Van Der Rohe, a steel and glass building by so and so, a steel and glass building by so and so, and here are all the boards, Denise. And Denise, what you need to do is just make sure in these work topics that you give them that they draw’. And so, there we had… that’s what he wanted them to do. But, he said, ‘You can’t just do this. Oh, well, I’ll tell you what else we’ll do, there’s the theory. Theory, that’s a good idea. So, we’ll get the different faculty members to teach theories – their theories – so, we’ll get theories of landscape architecture, and city planning and architecture, and a different one can come each time. And you run the whole thing and you put it together and you organise it and then, you can give a lecture if you like, one lecture. And then, and you set the exams and you do the term papers and the reading lists and all things of a course, and it will look like a course, but it will do what I want, give them some vocabulary of architecture and how to draw. Then what should we do for the second semester?’ ‘Oh, gee, there is a second semester!’ I’m presuming from the things he told me, he wanted. ‘There is a second semester, and, well, we can’t go on like that there’s not enough faculty. The other faculties aren’t worth talking to’.  I’m sure he felt that, because he sort of told me that. ‘And so, okay well we’ll have to go into history of architecture theories. Well, where can we find someone and it mustn’t cost too much money.  Where can we find someone who can be like Denise, not you know… not much older, like a teaching assistant really, just an instructor, who can deal with something about history of theory for architects? Well, there’s that young guy who comes from Princeton and… and he’s had theory. And he won’t cost more because he’s already on the faculty.’
[RV] I never had theory.
[DSB] Well, I know you’ve never had theory, you’d had history, which is want he wanted. ‘So, there’s that young guy from Princeton, I’m sure he can put together something about the theories of architecture, historically.’ So, there he had his course. Little did he know what it would lead to in American architectural education, but the interesting thing was that it really did help studio. And the first year I gave it, the students almost killed me, they were so bored with those steel and glass buildings. So, I then talked to the head of first year studio, I said, ‘I just can’t do it that way’. He said, ‘Forget about what the Dean wants, you do it your way’. So, then, I began having a lovely time and then the students really enjoyed it. When we were doing housing, I got them… I said, ‘Six questions about housing you need to think about and please illustrate these questions, and here are some books and one of the books is The Minor Architecture of Venice [sic]. And in it, please look to tell me how light is gotten into housing that is row housing. Tell me how the public side of the building is handled different from the private side, and all of these kinds of questions. Where do I get the feeling of privacy when I’m living in public housing?’ You see, and things like that.  And they took to those like ducks to water and they really used their historical books to teach themselves and they became much better at handling the problems of planning, because they had a better vocabulary. Not of steel and glass buildings, but of what the issues are and how they’d been solved. And, of course, this went along with Bob taking a separate issue each time. How did they deal with lighting in Gothic architecture? How did they deal with lighting in Renaissance architecture? What is the difference between a hole in the wall and an absence of light? The things he still talks about. So, we helped put together something that made their performance in studio much improved, and when we left and they gave it up, performance in studio went way down. It was interesting to learn that. So, that’s my take on how those theories courses happened and that’s a lot of what we were doing at that time.
And then, Bob started to write and my thinking is, he was really writing for a few reasons. One of them was because he wanted to make sense of his own Roman experience. Another is, because a lot of his friends were academics and what academics did was write. And so, and then, as I said before, he was trying to work out what he thought by his writing. So, I read that book in manuscript. I told him that the pictures were too small. Somewhere there is the text of the critique I gave him on the book, but I don’t know where that is. I found it one day in my papers and eventually, the people going through the archive will find what I said to him in about 1962 about the book. And then, after that we just… every now and then I wouldn’t hear much from Bob for some weeks and then, we’d have dinner again and once I was in a restaurant with someone else and there was Bob with another woman in the restaurant. I can’t remember who it was. It could have been Harriet? It could have been Harriet, you were taking. You used to take me to the Quaker Lady and you’d take her to something a little more chic than that. So, I thought well, I’m the Quaker Lady date, what does that mean? Well, it looks like you marry the Quaker Lady date.

[RV] Well, we… it was just sort of platonic, friendly… and we would have dinner together as Denise said.  We were often at the Quaker Lady. The dates I’m not good at, I’m usually good at dates but the dates are a little confusing at this point.
And there was that famous time when we had… went together to Louis Kahn’s lecture at the Art Alliance, and went and sat in Rittenhouse Square. I think I told that story. And I, kind of, said, ‘Oh my God, half those ideas… coming from his building… he got from me’. But, anyhow… Then, when she went to California, she invited me and took me to Las Vegas, corrupted me. And it was then, when we, kind of, got separated that we became maybe more friendly and more… was more a love… love relationship than before.
[DSB] You went to England and you met my mother there. Remember that?
[RV] Yes, it was ’66 I went to England.
[DSB] Yes.
[RV] ’65 I went to the Soviet Union; ’66 I went to England and I met Phyllis Lakofski, who I was very impressed by.
[DSB] You came to see me in ’66 and you were considerably warmer than you had been and it might be because of my mother.
[RV] I don’t know, might have been, I don’t know, could be, and, yeah, ’66 that’s when I came to visit you there. When did we go to Las Vegas?
[DSB] Then, 1966, November.
[RV] ’66 Okay. And, so, I think that’s it.
So, what year did it move from just friends having dinner to something more?
[RV] It was, sort of, ’66 when I went out to California.
[DSB] Yes.
[RV] It was… she was more exotic in California and, sort of…
[DSB] Well, he was now successful, he’d published a book and he’d built a house, and he’d got some renown and he had his feet on the ground. And he was in a situation where he was thinking about next steps, I suspect.
So, you got married one year afterwards?
[DSB] Yes.
[RV] ’67.
[DSB] And really there was not a courtship in the normal sense, until that time.
[RV] Yeah.
Who proposed to whom?
[DSB] I proposed to him.
[RV] We both proposed to each other at the same time.  It was both and...

[DSB] The word persecution comes to mind and that has many overtones. It’s biblical, it deals with what happens to Jews, it thinks… it relates to the Holocaust. I think the word oppression came in probably in the 1960s more. And, but, it still has those…
No, your personal relationship with this word. I’m not talking about an academic.
[DSB] I know, but, I’m talking about my… I think I began thinking in terms of the word oppression in the 1960s. And… but I was hearing it around me and it seemed to me a word that wasn’t… it dealt with the Holocaust and with persecution of the Jews and with the Bible, but it seemed to be… to bring it up to, a kind of, a more modern… you could use it for a milder form as well as for a stronger form. But you could make the link between the two. So, I think, I probably got it around the planning school or around what was being written and you know, places like The New Republic, which was much more of the Left at that time. Probably read it a lot in places like that. For what was happening to blacks in America then, and it seemed to be a word that had a wider range. I… I try very hard to think of myself as not oppressing other people also it’s, kind of, from that point of view. You want to control the tendency in yourself, to maybe do the same thing. I wouldn’t think of myself as persecuting but I think… would think of myself, as possibly being able to oppress other people.

[DSB] When we had this really horrific experience with the Fine Arts Commission in Washington, where we were given a job… and… we entered a competition and we won the competition. And we were turned down by the Fine Arts Commission and then, finally lost the job because what we had to design for the Fine Arts Commission could not be built. And with overtones of cruelty from Gordon Bunshaft that, you know, if you want to talk about oppression, they were right there. Describing it to some people, it was interesting, some of them… ‘Oh God, I can’t believe this it really is awful, what you must have felt’. Others laughed. And I often tried to interpret that laugh. And I think it was people who felt so threatened by that story they just didn’t know what to do. And I think the discomfort Will had felt was because he felt so threatened, he didn’t know what to do.
Other people have described you both as insular. Do you think you’re insular?
[RV] What do they mean by that?
[DSB] Can’t hear them, basically. Don’t listen to them. I think that in the process of designing there are times when we are very open and there are times when we dig our heels in. The times when we’re very open, we get the maximum of information we need and I’ve described processes for doing it, and the times when we dig our heels in is when  a certain president at a certain university says, ‘I don’t care what you say, you will not have chequerboard patterns on this floor because it’s like kitchens’. Well, it’s also like the original floor, for one thing. So, we dug our heels in. That president would find us insular. Insularity lies in the eye and the heart of the beholder, as much as in the projector.
 

[DSB] I would say something with interruptions and how they’re getting it out and people going on without responding or even listening, in the morning and then, I’d hear someone like William Wheaton in the afternoon, saying just the same thing. And people would say, ‘Oh, yes’.  They never interrupted him, of course, ‘You’re so right, how wise, how true’. And if got to feel resentful about that, I don’t blame me. But then, if I did behave in an aggressive way that was terrible, that meant the world was against me. Whereas, if a man is aggressive it’s… he should be that’s the right thing to do. Well, women have been taught to make nice, to get their way by wile. And I think the toll that takes on a soul is really, very bad and I have not done that. So, I haven’t smiled and said, ‘Oh, yes, and how wise’, and all of that kind of thing, because I felt it would destroy me, as well as, not being right. And there ought to be other models of behaviour open to women. But you find a lot of feminism talks about that. But, I think, I saw in my younger sister when she was very small that tendency and I just felt, first of all, anything she did, I couldn’t do. So, if she was making nice and getting the attention of my father by being cute and small, I had to do something different. And I think, these are some of the reasons for it in me, but if I were a man, I think, they wouldn’t be saying, ‘She thinks the world is against her and she’s insular and she’s all these things’.

[RV] People were shocked by Learning from Las Vegas. People were shocked by the book I’ve written recently about the architectural historians, who couldn’t stand Learning from Las Vegas.
[DSB] Just look at the press.
[RV] Couldn’t stand, not Learning from Las Vegas, but looking at… but from Complexity and Contradiction. We got lots of bad reviews in all sorts of elements of the press, so, it’s that way. A lot of the jobs we’ve been up for and we didn’t get it, and some other architect got it and they probably weren’t as good as we are.
[DSB] Some, some… we once heard this definitions… these definitions to do with paranoia: if you’re in the African jungle and you say there are elephants coming through the window you’re not paranoiac, but if you are in a Philadelphia living room and you say there’re elephants coming in the window, good chances are you are paranoiac. Well, someone’s Philadelphia window can be another person’s African jungle and sometimes people don’t realise the jungle we’re living in.
[RV] I have a phrase, if we… if you weren’t paranoid you’d be crazy.

[RV] We do have some problems with developers, we’re now working with several. But in the past we haven’t worked with developers, we’ve worked with institutions… institutions. And I think developers seem to worry that we as arty architects will not come in on the budget and within schedule, and we will not be realistic. That is very sad because that’s not true. If you’re… if you’re an arty architect you can also be a practical architect, as someone put it, we are arty and crafty. But that’s hard for people to understand and therefore also we don’t have a lot of back experience with development work and probably developers are worried about that. On the other hand, we’ve had a lot of repeat work, lots with high-faluting institutions and that means that they come back to us, because they like us.
[DSB] We… we get clients who want to challenge themselves. And they want to match wits with us, they want to have fun with us, they want to tease us. That’s another piece of it. And they want to work with us. Now, you can find developers like that too. The developers who’s working with us now, partly might want to use our name but they’ve also… they’re strong enough people in themselves that they don’t have to be threatened by us and they’re fun to work with. And one thing you get from a developer is crisp decision-making, which is a huge relief after institutions. The ones who can’t make up their minds probably can’t last very long. So, it goes well. On the other hand, developers really want to be on their own, they don’t like collaborating very much with other people, a lot of them. It’s one of those jobs people go to, because they don’t want a boss they want to be their own boss. So, they don’t want an architect bossing them either, from that point of view. So, we need to find ones that can be open-minded and work with us in collaboration without needing to boss us, but legitimately don’t want us to boss them either.
Arty architects such as Dan Libeskind, Richard Meier, Michael Gray, I don’t know […] Robert Stern have done high-rises of sorts. I don’t know about Peter Eisen, really in that way and they seem to get… don’t have a problem working with developers.  Why do you think you’re different?
[DSB] Well, don’t forget that we were being investigated by most of those… many of those developers at the end of the period of… the last period of a lot of high-rise construction. Now, we weren’t in New York, so, they had to travel out of New York to come and see us, and some of them did. And I’ve said they put their nose under our tent. Well, I don’t think they went away saying I won’t work with them. What happened was, the bubble burst. By the time the next bubble started again, we were old fashioned. Why would you use us? If you want a signature, it’s the wrong signature. So, I think it’s more fortuitous than this. In the first place, they hadn’t heard of us, as you’ve said before and by the time the second round came by, they’d sure heard of us. They knew that Pomo was out and we were Pomo. So, they didn’t know about us, even then.

[DSB] We’d had a good experience in Japan and Korea. Everyone in the world was building a building in China. We thought there could be opportunity there. We had this associate, Wai Li, who Bob knew well and liked. And he specifically invited him to go there to be on a jury. We thought this would be a good opportunity to see China with the help of a friend. And then, Wai Li probably organised that we would come the second time to be… help with the master plan. And so, those were the reasons we went. The research that we did by having three trips to China made us echo the thing that Mark Wigley said, ‘Every architect has been to China… yes indeed… to build a bad building’. And we decided by our experience there and from our architect in our firm, Ke Feng, that we had to be very choosy about the projects we would take there because we are a small firm and we’re very vulnerable. We couldn’t take a project where we could easily lose a great deal of money. And we needed to find one where we could trust the client and where we’d be dealt with in a way we’re used to being dealt with. And by the time we left China, we felt there would be a way to do a project but it would still… we did a project we did the plan for Tsinghua, but to do another project we’d have to wait a long time before there was one that was suitable. We think the one that Dalian… The Dalia Road [sic], is a suitable project. We hope it happens. We haven’t found another.
Have you been offered projects that you’ve turned down in China?
[DSB] We offered one and we tried to comply, but by the time we showed them what we needed to be architects there, they said, you can’t comply with our conditions, we can’t hire you. Their conditions were that you sign a contract within about three days of being asked for one thing. But we did feel that if the firms in Hong Kong that we talked to started to build in China, they could be interested in us and we could be interested in them.
Have you heard anything back from those firms?
[DSB] No, not at all. And you mustn’t forget that they also looked at us and said, ‘These are old people’.

[DSB] Getting older is not a problem for us, only to the extent that it’s a problem for our clients, or would-be clients.
Bob, do you feel the same way?
[RV] I agree with that.
Bob, is it a problem for you at all in terms of this lack of work that you’re getting because of getting older?
[RV] I don’t know how to measure that, I’m not so sure to what extent that is a problem. I just don’t know. I haven’t studied it. It’s very hard to analyse objectively.
How do you feel about getting older?
[RV] You know the funny thing, touch wood, is that I feel just the way I did 10 years ago. So, I don’t feel psychologically or physically older now, maybe tomorrow I will.

[RV] Well, I imagine whatever I do wouldn’t be quite up to Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony, which is maybe one of the greatest works of art in the history of civilisation. But, no, I was just using that as an example that we have to spend so much time doing this, sort of, bureaucratic promotional and bureaucratic work, that we don’t have the energy and time to put into creative production. And I really think that I’m being objective. I think that this is very different from what it was, even 10 years ago. Much different from what it was 20 years ago. And I think it’s very sad and ominous.
[DSB] Could I just say something about that? For Bob’s early career, I used to use the metaphor of Milton’s poem, a sonnet on his blindness, because Bob had all this talent and the talent that applied to complex large projects and he wasn’t being hired for them. So, he was frustrated. And the words in Milton are: That one talent, which is death to hide, lodged with me useless, though my soul more bent to serve… no, my soul more bent to… I forget… to serve therewith and present my true account lest he… wait… lodged with me useless though my soul more bent to serve therewith my best account and present… no and present… my true… to serve there with my Maker and present my true account, doth guard exact day labour, light denied? I fondly ask. Fondly meaning angrily and then, of course, the answer is: Patience to prevent that murmur then replied, God doth not need your talent… it says… they also serve to only stand and wait. Well, we reject the answer. But, Bob was feeling, I have this talent and I can’t use it. And it was very poignant. Now, my feeling is we – he – we have ample opportunity now, to use this talent. No one can say we haven’t had the opportunity or that we haven’t used it. We want to go on using it, that’s the issue now. But, we’ve… we’ve done, not skyscrapers, but the thinking and the design that leads the way for many skyscrapers. Even take, for example, the use of LED. Herzog and de Meuron with the huge Sony supported, or whoever, what giant of industry is supporting them next, buildings, wouldn’t have done it without us. It’s a shame we can’t do it, but look how we have done it. And we’re going to have to accept that that’s our role. We should be happy to take small buildings now, if we can’t get big, and just do that same thing.
Are you happy to do that or are you…?
[DSB] I’m happy to do that. I think Bob will be able to be happy to do that. I think, this Woodmere Museum and the Allentown Museum, the… we’re used goods for museum people now, we… you know, someone else used us, so why would you go to us?  Why wouldn’t you go to the next signature and the one after that?  It’s flaccid and it’s weak, and it’s stupid but that’s what they do. But, there’ll be the same kind of people, the tea and sympathy clients who gave us work at the beginning, who’ll give us work at the end.
Bob, do you feel that way?
[RV] Yeah, I think, that’s pretty accurate.
[DSB] May not like it, but I think you can live with it.
[RV] Yeah, have to.

[RV] I think a lot of people with good ideas, new ideas, original ideas… still are trying to be original, are… are misunderstood. It’s happening all the time. Denise likes to point out that Freud was not a Freudian.
[DSB] Marx was not a Marxist.
[RV] Marx was not a Marxist and I won’t go on about Jesus Christ!  But, anyhow, I think, that’s just inevitable that you are often misunderstood, if you are being complex and contradictory.
[DSB] I find that I… I am misunderstood when I think I’m talking pretty clearly. And yet, I find that people take a wrong meaning, which deals with something they’ve had in their head. So, they have a presumption of what you are and whatever you say it comes out what they thought you were they thought they heard. So, there’s two sides to that situation and a lot of it comes to what they read into us, which might be based on their fears or on to something they’ve heard, or who knows what. And, I think, sometimes I don’t get things out as clearly as I should, but I am puzzled as to where it is I haven’t been clear, because I thought I was being very clear.

[RV] I don’t know, I just think I’m a person whose real interest is  focusing completely on doing a good job and doing my work. And, I just don’t really enjoy, kind of, analysing salesmanship and convincing, and all that. It’s very important, but I’m not good at and I would rather focus on doing… doing it right and then I just hope and pray that some people will get it and accommodate. I think that’s my… my approach. I really don’t enjoy focusing on selling.
[DSB] I think, in architectural projects the selling happens somewhere other than that interview and people have already prepared their minds and very often they know who they want…
[RV] I think so, too.
[DAB] … from the start, and so, when you’re in there then, you can lose it but you probably, if you were going to get it, you already have it. And what they go by is something that feels like a… a pair of comfortable old shoes. That’s… it’s no joke that a person who looks like them, feels like comfortable old shoes. Well, we don’t look like many people. It’s hard for me to look like a male client. And so, I think, it’s as much all of those undertones in the selling process and the things that happen in the kitchen cabinet, as it is in the interview. Now, there have been some interviews where we’ve got it. We’ve looked up at the client and we know they’re our kind of person, and they know we’re their kind of person and we fall into each other’s arms. And you can see it right after the meeting. But not too often because not very often are our kind of people in the front rows of the jury, they’re on the back benches.
What are your kind of people?
[DSB] It’s hard to know – complex, people with lots of words, with, kind of, soft mellow faces, with some insight for the intricacies, with a certain warmth. I don’t know where else it goes after that, but I was very aware in the interviews with Cardinal Mahoney, for example. And he’s… he’s probably an interesting person in many respects and a contrarian one, and he bothers to stay in touch by Internet with… with priests who are no longer priests, for example and things like that. So, he’s got some interest but he’s got his role, and his job and his duties and he must be like this. Just… he looks like Moneo… Moneo… I predicted he would choose Moneo when everyone thought he’d choose Gehry. I was right.  He looked like him and his manner was like him, and then, his… his chief assistant really wanted to drink beer with the boys. You could see in that pink shirt he was wearing was this beer stomach and so, he was another kind of a guy. Nothing wrong with him either, but in the back benches there were nuns and priests – young ones – and they were, kind of, you know, of the Left. And they loved the things we were saying about sanctifying secular architecture, you could just… ‘Yes, yes, we’re with you, we’re with you’. Well, those in the back bench were our people. I was thinking, don’t you have a little chapel somewhere that you are building that we could do for you?

[RV] When we were being interviewed for the new cathedral for the Archdiocese of Los Angeles, by the cardinal of Los Angeles, and halfway through the interview I felt we weren’t doing so well but I’d decided I better say to him that he should know that I am the son of the first and probably the only Italian American Quakers. And then about 10 minutes later in the interview Denise got across that she was Jewish. And I love saying, somehow we didn’t get the job. Actually, we had a second interview and in that I was able to get across that my mother’s first cousin was a bishop, but that didn’t make up for what I’d said earlier. But, anyhow, so we’re not, we’re not… I’m not terribly good at this kind of stuff.
Do you feel sometimes, you have a penchant for saying exactly the wrong thing?
[DSB] No, he had to say those things.
Just in general, do you think?
[RV ] I don’t think so, no, I don’t think I’m a twerp. But, I’m not… but I’m just not… I don’t like being dishonest or fooling people. I like to be straightforward… knowledge complexity.
[DSB] You know, I have sometimes been on the other side of the table and I have watched my colleagues be interviewed. They don’t do so well and even when they’re smooth they make the mistake of not getting the sense of the client. And they make people mad, because they’ve said the wrong thing. And so, no one’s wonderful in that respect and that goes for some of the biggest architects I’ve seen in that context. And the truth is that you can have an absolutely lousy performance and if people want you they’ll make all kinds of excuses for you.
[RV] Exactly, I remember going for an interview in Philadelphia for a job and saying at the beginning, ‘You know, I should advise you that the architect who makes the worst impression during these interviews, is the one you should choose because an architect who’s a good salesman, is probably not very good in terms of being an architect’. They laughed and in the end we didn’t get the job, but no one got the job because it evidently fell… fell apart. But there’s something to that. I think, very often a good salesman is not a good producer worker.
 
Bill Bowen has said that he’s had to, when you were trying to get the work at Princeton, he had… you often gave a bad presentation to the Trustees compared to the other architects and he had to convince the other Trustees and say that it’s not who gives the best presentation it’s who’s going to design the best building.
[DSB] Yes.
So, even in your most successful venue, Princeton, there’s no point in having the interview. If you say well it doesn’t matter when the interview is, they’ve had to do that, so.
[DSB] They have their procedures and some of them are laid down. If they have federal funding, the procedures are laid down that they must go through. They can’t just say we think we’ll have Robert Venturi, because we like him best. They have to interview three architects and there has to be a competitive interview process and, etce, etc. So, they must do it and they want to do it, because they have fiduciary responsibilities and there’s all these reasons to make us go through hoops, which they don’t enjoy and we don’t enjoy.
