sherwin.nuland

Sherwin Nuland (1930-2014) was an American surgeon and author who taught bioethics, the history of medicine, and medicine at the Yale University School of Medicine. He wrote the book How We Die which made The New York Times bestseller list and won the National Book Award. He also wrote about his own painful coming of age as a son of immigrants in Lost in America: A Journey with My Father. He used to write for The New Yorker, The New York Times, Time, and the New York Review of Books.

There's a great line by Nabokov in which he says that people who are born elsewhere and do not have English as their first language are most likely to have a great appreciation of the language and be able to write well in it. And there are a number of, of examples that he gives, and I don't want to put myself in the same category as Nabokov in any sense, but at the same time, that notion appeals to me, because I was born to a family of completely unassimilated immigrants. Both of my parents were born in Eastern Europe. One in what is now Moldova, my father, and my mother was born in what is now Belarus. And unlike so many immigrants to the United States, they never bothered to learn the language very well, couldn't read or write, either one, until the day they died. I always had my report cards at Public School 33 signed by my brother, because my father could sign his name, but you weren't quite sure that was his name if you looked at it.
So here I was, born in what was then the East Bronx in 1930, and am aware, right from the start, as soon as I'm old enough to have any sense of what's around me, that we have been left behind by the people who have come from the same part of the world that my parents have, but who have quickly assimilated, became citizens.  My parents didn't become citizens for years and… years but yet, for them, this was the golden land, nevertheless. They still had the sense that this is where they wanted to be, this is where they had all of the freedoms that they had dreamed of in those little villages. It's an old story. Millions and… millions of people have been in this situation, and so when they arrived, they had had a very difficult time, because there were a number of deaths in the family among those who arrived with them. By the time I was born, I had lost two uncles and a grandfather to tuberculosis. I had lost two aunts, one to puerperal fever, and one to probably tuberculosis. And as I grew up, other people died. My mother had had one stillborn child, she had a little boy that she adored who was born about five years before I was. That boy died of probably the croup or diphtheria at age three. I've visited his grave. He died in 1927. And that grave is in a very large graveyard of children's tombstones, because, of course, childhood mortality was very high. Any infectious disease could carry off a child. So, my brother was born and then I came along. My brother was born, actually, within a year of this boy's dying, and three and-a-half years later, I came along. And we were the family's link to the outside world.
When we finally got into grammar school and learned how to read, we would translate, transliterate things. My parents could read Yiddish. They could read Yiddish very well and even write Yiddish reasonably well, but their conversation was in Yiddish. My grandmother, an ancient lady who, before she died much later, lost seven of her eight children, some in Europe, some here. And she spoke no English at all, so we spoke Yiddish to my grandmother, largely Yiddish to my parents, and English to the other fellow, the brother.

School, to me, was a frightening adventure, because there were plenty of immigrants' children, but those immigrants could read a report card and they could read the books their kids were looking at. There were many, many words in English I didn't know when I started at Public School 33 in the Bronx, and there were a number of embarrassing episodes that I had.
But it was a wondrous world. It was nothing like home. There were two marvellous kindergarten teachers. In those days, almost all teachers were Irish Catholic maidens, who had given their lives to these immigrant kids. A lot of us were Italian or Irish, a lot of us were Jewish. I never knew a Protestant till I went to medical school in 1951. And there we were, learning about America with these devoted, very kind women. And that was my experience all the way through school until… really until I started high school, that there so many of these unmarried women who recognized that our academic, intellectual, maybe economic, futures lay in their hands, and whatever they may have thought of us or our religious beliefs made no difference whatsoever. They were just kind and good.
One of the extraordinary things that happened to me along the way was when I learned to read. I wasn't precocious in learning to read. I was in second grade before I could read very well. So I'd go to the library, I'd get a library card, just like my teacher said, Sherwin, you should really do this. And I… it was about a two-mile walk to our library through the streets of the Bronx.

I got my library card and started coasting up and down the aisles, and I saw this red-covered book, relatively thin, not too much to take. It was called Ab the Caveman. And what it was about - purportedly what it was about - was the life of a fellow named Ab who lived in prehistoric times. And there were pictures in it. Lithographs – they almost looked like photographs – of Ab and his family and talked about his hunting and his adventures. Well… what an eye-opener that was! It took me to a time that obviously I'd never been in. It took me to a place I couldn't even imagine. I had never read about prehistoric times. And I just took that book home and I read through it immediately and went right back, and in those days, you could only take two books, and I went and took two more books, and in later years, when you could take four, I would take these four home, and I just couldn't stop reading because there were these marvellous worlds out there. And I was fortunate, in that I could always read very swiftly. I never used a dictionary, although I was told over and over again by various people that I should. But I discovered that all words that I didn't know were in context, and they were going to come up again. So, by the second or third time that I had seen an unusual word, I would know it.
The other very good thing that I was lucky with was that a distant relative had a series called the Book of Knowledge. It had 20 volumes in it, and it may still exist. They may have updated it again and again. The one this relative had dated from before World War I and they wanted to throw it out, but instead they gave it to us. Everything was in there: French lessons were in there, chapters about communication, transportation, inventions, history… current culture, current 1912, 1913. The pictures were very quaint. The French lessons were ornamented by Frenchmen with their moustaches curling up towards their ears and little pointed beards. And I would just curl up in an armchair for hours at a time and not look for anything in particular, just read what interested me. It's what I do with the business section of The New York Times today. I don't know the first thing about business, but I find interesting articles and I read them, and as time goes on, you start accumulating some knowledge.

So I was a reader at an early age, and not only that, but I became fascinated with the notion of storytelling. Because the Book of Knowledge wasn't really for adults. It was for, I would say, late teenagers. And they understood the importance of narrative, and describing even historical events, and how the railroad was built across the United States. And this caught on very quickly with me.
One day, I… went to a carnival that was about two blocks away. A huge empty lot. There were lots of huge empty lots in the Bronx at that time. And there was a travelling carnival, and I went there, and I was so excited that, coming home, I went myself. I was so excited coming home that I had to tell somebody and there was nobody at home to tell, and I had to write it somewhere. Now we lived in a home without a writing tablet. There was nothing to write on. But someone had given me a little volume… actually, I have it in the next room. A little tiny 2 x 4… It was really about… maybe it was 6 x 4. A book that was very popular at that time, about various things. It was called The Wonders of the World, and the Colossus at Rhodes, and who knows? Those wonders of the Ancient World. There were wonders of the modern world, with pictures.
Now the front of that book, the flyleaf was blank. And I sat down with my little stubby pencil, and I wrote about the carnival. It was the first piece of non-fiction writing I'd ever done. And what a great sense of satisfaction. I filled up the front flyleaves, I filled up the back flyleaves, and I had a little story. And from then on in, it wasn't just the wonders of reading, it was the wonders of writing, which I have always enjoyed. You know, I read the comments of certain writers, especially non-fiction writers, about how hard it is to write… and who was it? Red Smith, the sports columnist many years ago at The Times, said, writing is easy, you just sit at the typewriter until your fingers start to bleed. I've never had that experience. It's quite the opposite. I'm often driven to my chair and my desk, because I just have to write something. And when I start writing… and I think this began at that time, I get lost the same way I got lost in Ab the Caveman. I'm transported to some other world, and I know this sounds awfully narcissistic, but I'm fascinated by the sound of my voice… when I write. I just love it. I end up reading the stuff out loud and thinking, oh my God, I wrote this. Did I really write this?

In fact, my daughter, who is now 26, about four or five years ago… was sitting in the kitchen with me, and I was reading a book that I had written. I said… 'I am…' words to this effect, 'I am fascinated by the beauty of my cadences'. And she thought that was hilarious, so she got a little blackboard that was actually in the kitchen, and she wrote it… down. It's still there. Whenever it starts to fade, I ask her to fill it in a little bit more, because I have to be reminded of my own egocentricity. But you've got to be a little egocentric to be a writer. You have to assume that everybody wants to hear what you're writing, and you have to… some people say you have to write with authority. Well, I'm not quite sure what authority is. I write out of egocentricity. I was a beloved child. My brother was the hooligan and I was the good kid. I got very good grades in school, I did all the right things. He read constantly. He was always reading. But I did far more than read. I was a very apt student. I can see myself at a desk, with my hands clasped together so the teacher would give me some commendation of some kind.
I even skipped a grade in fifth grade. Just, sort of… a self-inspired golden boy. It's almost embarrassing to look back at me… myself in those days, living in this aura, cocoon, of I'm the most important person in the world and everybody wants to hear about what I've got to tell.

Well, I went through junior high school doing a lot of writing. I went to a high school in New York City called the Bronx High School of Science, which was one of the two, at that time, finest academic schools in New York City. The other was Stuyvesant High School. There was another called Brooklyn Tech that was pretty good, too. And I went through Science High, I graduated in the Honors Society, and it's time to go to college and… there's no money.
I didn't want to go to the College of the City of New York, because I really felt that by 1947, when I was applying to high school, its great, glorious days of the late 20s, early 30s, and right up through World War II, were over, through most of World War II. NYU [New York University] had a campus, it was actually the original liberal arts college of NYU. They had moved it up to the Bronx on this huge, gorgeous campus of its own. And so that was the only school I applied to. And it turned out that a lot of the people in my High School of Science class were very much in the same boat that I was: they had to go to college, if at all, in New York City, so they could live at home. And so there we were, in a pretty rarefied atmosphere of a lot of very, very bright kids. I got through college on a New York State scholarship. They had a competitive examination and I took that, and that gave me $350 a year, the tuition was $750 a year and the 92nd Street Y gave me a scholarship for $400. So that paid for it all.

Now I had a relative in the generation ahead of me, who had come to this country with his three brothers and his father and mother, lived on the Lower East side, been very poor, and… essentially invented the concept of the children's snowsuit and built a business called Tidy Products, and the snowsuits were called Tidykins, and became very wealthy. His brother… became… started out as a plumber and built one of the biggest heating and… air-conditioning companies in New York, put all the heating and air-conditioning into the UN.
So, these two boys, who had not even graduated from high school, had done very well. Business acumen must have had a lot to do with it. And both of them, especially my cousin Joe, the one I knew the best, took it on themselves to care for distant members of the family who were in financial trouble. And as my mother was very ill – she had intestinal cancer almost from the time I knew her, I guess from about when I was six or seven, I knew she had intestinal cancer – he would send cheques… that he and his brother had contributed to, and when I was… going to college, he offered to pay for it, and it wasn't necessary, because I had those scholarships.
When I came to apply to medical school, and now here I have to go backward, because I haven't said anything about where I got interested in medicine. My older brother was always going to be the doctor. I was fascinated by biology and I was fascinated by the way people behave. And in one of my autograph books from the sixth grade, I noticed that it said future occupation. I'd written in biologist, and I felt that way right through junior high school. But I was looking for something other than the opportunity to peer down a microscope at paramecia. I really wanted to work with people, and I didn't, at that time, see any way, anybody, in a field of biology, which was still pretty primitive – it wasn't what it is today – how such… biologists could work with people.

When the application for NYU came, and it was the only college application I ever saw, in the corner of it, they had a list of what you might be interested in. There was a box to check if you were interested in the College of Law, a box to check College of Medicine or a box to check Liberal Arts, whatever. And I looked at all those things, and I thought, the only box that fits my two interests, in biology and in human behaviour and in the nature of what a human being is, was College of Medicine.
So, I ticked that. And you know, it's funny. Once I ticked that and sent that application in, I was hooked. I was going to medical school. And the year was 1947. In 1947, it was very difficult for Jewish boys to get into medical school. In fact, medical school applications had these wonderful questions on them, like, what's your mother's maiden name? What's your father's occupation? Well, my mother's maiden name was Lutzki, my father's occupation was – you know – garment worker.
I had a cousin… who was almost a generation ahead of me. His name was Will. Willy, we called him. And he had wanted to go to medical school, couldn't get into an American school, he went to Lausanne to get his degree. But in trying to get into a medical school, he had changed his name. And his brother, who became an accountant, had changed his name, too. Our family name was spelled NUDELMAN, Nudelman. It comes from a Jewish word, actually, meaning a man who works with the needle, a tailor. And so I was 16 and my cousin Willy and his brother Saul kept trying to convince my brother and me that we should change our name, and we never wanted to do it, but I got pretty pragmatic, senior year in high school, and I changed my name from Nudelman to Nuland, and of course, I had to have my father's permission, and I still have the court writ that allows… and it is signed, apparently by my father, but I know it was signed by the lawyer, who was another relative, who did this for free.
All my dental care was a relative who was free, all my medical care was Willy. When he went off to war in 1942, it was a friend of Willy's, who didn't charge us any money.

I got this whole image of physicians as being wonderworkers. Because, you know, here's my mother, she's got a… it was really a chronic disease. She kept going in and out of the hospital. It was misdiagnosed for several years. They thought it was some sort of gynaecological thing, and of course it turned out to be cancer of the lower intestine. And when a doctor… whether it was my cousin Willy or anybody else, came to the door of our little apartment… the light changed, everything changed. No matter how worried we were about my mother's condition, the mere fact that this man, who knew each of us, who knew what to say to each of us, who essentially communicated to us, as long as I'm here, nothing's bad going to happen. So that became my image of a physician, and it was also perfectly clear that doctors didn't give a hoot about money, because nobody ever charged us anything. And we went to free clinics. You know, my mother, when she was hospitalized, it was what they called the ward service. My father, meantime, had a worsening neurological disease, and none of us knew what it was. Willy had made the diagnosis years before, and, jumping ahead, one day in medical school, I looked up from my physiology textbook and realised that what my father had was syphilis. He had tertiary syphilis, the third, late stage of syphilis, and it had affected his entire spinal cord with a condition called tabes dorsalis. What happens with tabes is, among other characteristics, you have no messages from your muscles and from your extremities telling you where they are. We don't realise how important that faculty called proprioception is. That, you know, you can touch your finger to your nose because you know where your finger is, you know where your nose is.
My father, you know, that's what he would do. So, he walked with a very erratic gait. His bladder didn't function like yours and mine do. He was sometimes incontinent, so I grew up with sickness. There were a lot of doctors around. There was a lot of hospitalization and nothing ever cost anything. But one thing that I recognized: when we went to those free clinics, the doctors in those free clinics were not nearly as nice as my cousin Willy and the friends that he brought to care for us. They… we were immigrants, my father had a thick accent, my mother had a thick accent. We were, sort of, emotionally pushed around a lot, treated badly by clinic secretaries, and so when I started thinking about medical school, pretty much as a high school senior and a college freshman, I promised myself I was going to be like cousin Willy and his friends, that money wasn't going to count for me, and this was a sacred trust.
I didn't frame it in those words until decades later, but, you know, there was something really special about these men. And they were all men at that time. This was not just a gift that they gave to others, but some kind of gift that they had been given from somewhere. And they were, to me, the epitome… of civilisation, of humanity. They were the highest form of human being, doctors were. And here I was, a kid who just decided that I was going to go to medical school because it was something I had to tick on an application. And from then on in, bingo.

It was hard to get, as I say, into medical school, and I knew it when I was a freshman in college.
And I told myself, buddy, your grades are going to be so high that no one is going to be able to turn you down for a medical school. And I had it all figured out. First place, I had, in those days, a head of thick blond hair. I had blue eyes. I didn't look the least bit Jewish. I looked like, I don't know, I was a Scandinavian, or some people even said Irish, but I could walk across the campus of Fordham University with a Catholic friend… and this was really funny, because when the priests walked by, they would always wave to me and not to my Italian Catholic friend, because he looked Jewish. Anyway, so I had it all figured out. I was going to get the greatest grades, I was going to be a WASP, even though I didn't know what a White Anglo-Saxon Protestant was, since I never met one. And I worked my bloody tail off. I worked very, very hard. I would have a date once every six weeks and I wasn't very social at that time. So, dates were, sort of, rigid and, you know, I didn't quite know what to say and this sort of thing.
I graduated from NYU with the highest academic average in my class. The highest you could get, because an A was calculated as a 95. The highest you could get was a 95, and I had a 94.3. I'd gotten a few Bs along… two Bs along the way. I used to get A's in ROTC. I would get A's in everything. But the A that was easiest for me was in a course in first year, given in the English department. It was a required course called Rhetoric and Composition. It was what, in other schools, are called Weekly Themes or Daily Themes. And once a week, we had to write what was called a theme, which was a non-fiction essay of perhaps a thousand words. And it was unheard of for anyone to get an A in every single theme for a year, but I did. Effortlessly. It was just… I just loved to write. This had gradually accumulated through my grammar school, public school and high school years. So, I just did it.

When I applied to medical school, my Jewish friends from the Bronx, who were much like I was, except their parents spoke much better English and they could read and write, were applied to 35 schools, because of how difficult it was to get in. I had a classmate who didn't get into medical school with 35 applications. He applied to the Harvard Law School and was accepted. Harvey Frank was his name, and he became a very successful lawyer. Well, I applied to 25 schools, because I was cocky; 25 was safe, for me. And the first school that invited me for an interview was Johns Hopkins, notorious at that time for a very small quota of Jewish students. So, I put on the only suit I had. It was an alumni interview at Goldwater Memorial Hospital in the East River, in New York and the fellow who interviewed me was a very patrician guy. He was a professor in one of the New York medical schools, a graduate of Hopkins and the Hopkins training program. His name was J Murray Steele. And we had a wonderful interview, and less than a week later, I was accepted to Hopkins. I couldn't believe it, even though it was my due. On the one hand, I thought, well, here I am, you know. I get all these great grades and I'm sort of, you know, an intellectually smooth guy, so I should get into Hopkins, but I can't get into Hopkins. But I did.
And to give you some idea of how peculiar that was for someone of my background, the night I got in, my aunt Rose, who lived with us, I heard my aunt Rose on the telephone, talking to one of her friends in Yiddish. My Yiddish name was Shepsil which is why is why everybody calls me Shep today. I've always been called Shep.
And she said to her… now again, this was Johns Hopkins, and I heard Rose saying to her friend, Becky - and it's now a family legend - she said, 'Shepsil [sic] has gone into Johnsons Thomson's medical school'. I mean, that's where we were. Johnson… whoever heard of Johns Hopkins? When I was thinking about college, not that I could have gone to a place like Yale or Harvard, but all I knew was that President Roosevelt's sons had gone to Harvard and so had he. That's all I knew about Harvard. I just… you know.

So here I am, on the one hand thinking of myself as this sophisticated intellect, and on the other hand, not knowing a damned thing about anything except that I read and… read and knew a lot of stuff from that.
So, I get into Hopkins, and Hopkins sends me, with the acceptance form, they send me a piece of paper, not asking for a down payment on my tuition, which a lot of schools did at that time, but to sign… not in so many words… I remember… I just don't recall how they phrased it, but that I was promising that I would go to Hopkins, and I wasn't going to go to any other school. Well, I looked at that, and I thought, oh my, this is serious stuff. This is a moral issue. If I sign this, I've really got to go to Hopkins. And it was a Friday night, and I was talking on the telephone to my friend, Lenny Leibowitz, and we were… I was telling him what a dilemma I was in. You know, it was a great school and I wanted to go there, but there were other schools that I didn't know much about, and wouldn't I like to have a bunch of interviews? And I only had these 10 days to decide. And Lenny said to me, did you apply to Yale? And I had to scratch my head a little bit and think, was Yale one of those 25? Yes, it was. He said, well, you know, Yale has no exams. No exams. For two years, then you have to take the National Board of Medical Examiners, and you do that at four years, too, but otherwise, there's no exams. No exams? I'd been batting my head against the wall for four years at NYU, which was a very tight place, and especially with me as a gung-ho premedical student.
The thought of no exams was too much. This was the Friday evening. Monday morning, I phoned the Yale admissions office. In those days, you could do this kind of thing. And I said, you know, I said to the registrar, her name was Adele Bellerad, and later she and I got, you know, really close. I really liked her an awful lot. And I said, 'Miss Bellerad, I have been accepted to Hopkins, but I've really wanted to go to Yale'. I just sort of made this up out of whole cloth, but I had to know before the 10 days were up. So, she said, 'Oh, come up on Wednesday'. This was Monday morning.
So, on Wednesday, I put on my suit, the one suit I owned, and I got on the… what's now called the Metro North Railroad, it was then just the Newhaven Railroad, $4.30 for a round trip, and I got on the train and I walked from the train to the medical school, and I had two wonderful interviews. One was with Henry Bunting, a Professor of Pathology, and one was with Tom Forbes, who was a Professor of Anatomy and the Director of Admissions. And I finished my interview with Tom Forbes at about four, and when it was over, he said, you know, we serve tea here. Every day, we serve tea. Tea at a medical school. He said, would you like to come? So, I said sure.
So, he took me down to this beautiful, gigantic, carpeted room. It was a room that the students would use for dances, you know, they'd take up the carpet.
And the place was filled with handsome young men and beautiful young women, because they were the Yale student nurses and the Yale medical students.
Again… what a wonder. I said earlier I didn't know any Protestants till medical school, and here were all these really good-looking guys, sort of guys you see in the movies and good looking, wholesome, clean-cut women. And I… and they probably weren't blue-haired, but I remember them as blue-haired faculty wives serving tea. And I thought to myself: this is where I belong. Of course, because it wasn't where I belonged, it became for me the place that I had to go. So, I got an acceptance 48 hours later. Yale had a quota, too, but in any event, I was accepted. I'm sure their quota… I know their quota was much more generous than the Hopkins quota. So, I went to Yale.

Many years later, I was invited several times to give endowed lectures at Hopkins, and I loved Hopkins. You know, I revere that place, but I'm certainly glad I went to Yale, because Yale did a lot of wonderful things for me. It loosened me up in many, many ways, it made me much more social. It taught me what the world was like.
Since we've got a lot of film, I can tell you this anecdote. Yale had it arranged so that the summer before your freshman year, you were put in contact with a fellow who was a year ahead of you, and he'd meet you somewhere and you had dinner with him, and my overseer, as it were, my big brother kind of guy, was a fellow named Jacques Quenn. And Jacques called me, and he called another fellow who was going to be in my class, named Leo Cardello, who had gone to Fordham, actually, an Italian kid who had gone to Fordham, and he took us to dinner at the Hampshire House on Central Park South. Ironically, the Hampshire House was a place where I'd worked as an elevator operator for a couple of summers, and here I was, you know, I was… a guest.
And having a lovely dinner. So, when we had to choose cadaver partners, Leo and I and another fellow were cadaver partners. And that first day, we were issued, or we had to buy, I don't remember, dissecting coats, which were short-sleeved coats that you put on like a jacket, and there was a string in the back that you tied up, like a smock, like a baker's smock. And we were warned, when we put them on, we should take our undershirts off. There were only four women in the class, and I don't know where they put theirs on, but we went down to a big locker room in the basement, and we were all stripped to the waist and putting our smocks on. And I look around, and all these guys. There were very few men with hair on their chests. Well, I'm used to… all Jews have hair on their chests, you know. I grew up with Jews, Italians, the Irish. The Irish tended not to have so much, but all the Italian guys had, you know, bushes on their chests, like the Jews did. I look around, and very few guys with hair on their chests and I turned to Leo… this has also become a family legend. And I said, very quietly, very sotto voce, I said, 'Leo, look at all these guys without hair on their chests'. And very quietly, so he shouldn't be heard, he said, 'Shhh, those are the Protestants'.

Well, you know, actually Leo wasn't quite as poor as I thought he was. When his father died, about 10 years ago, I discovered that Leo's father was a ship owner. He had a whole bunch of freighters. But Leo was very antisocial, and, you know, kind of had the same hesitancy about things that I did. In fact, at one point during that first day, I heard him. He was standing behind me, and he – this was for my ears, and I did hear it – he said, I don't really belong here. Which is what I felt, but I wouldn't say it. You know, I acted like I was to the manor born.
Medical school was a great time for me, and then I… God, I don't know why I'm telling you all this detail, but some of it fascinates me to this day. I was never going to be a surgeon. You know, we went through these various clerkships, surgery, paediatric, psychiatry, internal medicine. And I liked psychiatry. I was very interested in psychiatry, because of my old interest in why people do the things they do, and what it is that they do. But all the smart kids went into medicine. It's not that I thought I was the smartest kid in my class, but there was sort of an air to the people who went into medicine, whereas the guys who were going into surgery were seen to be of a lesser breed. And also, I had, by that time, met a lot of surgeons, and they all looked to me they were about 6'3”, had big shoulders, former football players, wore pinkie rings, drove fin-tailed Cadillacs. That was my image of… surgeons. Told dirty jokes in the operating room. That wasn't my kind of thing.

So, I was going to go into internal medicine, and about three or four days after I started my clerkship on internal medicine… I'm sorry, on surgery, I entered the ward, which was a long corridor with rooms coming off it. One-bed and two-bed rooms, and one four-bed room down at the end. And way down by the four-bed room was the chief resident. And in medical programmes, surgical or paediatrics, the chief resident is God. He's in his… in surgery in his fifth of sixth year of training, and he knows everything he needs to know, and he runs the whole service. And this surgical resident, a fellow named Bob Chase, was down at the end.
He was from somewhere in New Hampshire. And he beckoned to me. I didn't think he had any idea who I was, because I'd only been on the service for three days. And when I got down to him, he said, listen, I need your help. One of the interns on one of the services, actually it was the private surgical service, had a family emergency, has gone for two weeks, we need someone to substitute for him. 'We need a medical student' to be what was called a sub-intern, he said, 'and I want you to do it'. And I said, 'Why me?' And he said, 'Because you're terrific. I've been watching you very carefully for these three days you've been on the service, and you're far and away our best student. You've got to go over there and do this'. Well, if I'm the best student, sure I'm going to go. So, I go over there, and the third-year resident, who runs the private service under the direction of Big Bob Chase, was a fellow named Jose Petineo, who was from Bogota, Colombia, and Jose had been to medical school in Colombia, came up to Yale and was a brilliant guy and a technically wonderful surgeon. In later years, he became the Chairman of the Department of Surgery at National University in Bogota, then the Dean, then he became the Minister of Health. You know, his career was great. He was a very charismatic guy and I got so thrilled by working with Jose. And by the time the two weeks were over, nothing would do but that I would be a surgeon.
 Fast-forward 20 years. Twenty years later, I'm on the search committee for the new Dean of the Yale Medical School. And Bob Chase, that Chief Resident, the New Hampshireman, is one of the two final candidates for Dean. He had gone out to Stanford, become chairman at Stanford, and he was a wonderful, kind, gentle guy. And everybody loved him. He made very important contributions to hand surgery. He's one of the two final candidates. And I loved Bob. He had brought me into surgery, and we were talking, actually in his hotel room, about the surgical service, what it was like. You know, he was asking questions about the school, because this was to be the Dean of the whole school.
And I said to him, you know, Bob, I haven't seen you in a long time, but you're the reason I'm in surgery. And he said, 'Yeah'. As if he knew, but somehow something about it didn't please him. I said, 'What's the matter?' I said, 'You know, you remember, you saw me and you told me how great I was, and that…' He said, 'Well of course, you know', he said, 'I had never laid eyes on you before that moment, didn't know who you were. I needed a warm body and I was desperate. So, I made this stuff up'. So, I became a surgeon based on a fairy story that Bob Chase had made up. But that was a lucky break, that was a lucky break. I loved the surgical residency.
There was a pyramid. People kept getting knocked off every year and not rehired. And finally, it came to two people at the end, and I was one of the two people. And so, I got to be Chief Resident. I wasn't doing any writing, I wasn't doing any intellectual work, I was just being a surgeon. A surgical residency, a surgical training programme, is one of those situations in which every day you wake up and you realise how much more you know than you knew the day before. This went on for almost six years. It was five and-a-half years for me to do that.

I had a six-month hiatus, and I had a travelling fellowship to work in either… I could have worked in either… pardon me, Sweden or England. And I knew most Swedes in academic medicine would speak English, but I wanted to go to England and I wanted to work with a cardiac surgeon named… at that point, he was Sir Russell Brock; he later became Lord Brock. He had done the first closed-heart opening of a mitral valve in England in the 40s. And I went and worked with him for six months as his… one of his assistants. I was near the end of my residency, I had a year and-a-half to go, but I had this six-month hiatus. So, I worked in England and one day was invited to the home of some English people and when their - I was 28 -  when their 20-year-old daughter came home Sunday dinner. You know what English Sunday dinners are like... roast beef, Yorkshire pudding, the whole schemer. It was amazing. Anyway, she came home and I took one look at her, and I just decided that's the person I'm going to marry. And, you know, always so full of myself, even in those days. More than ever, because I had become Chief Resident at Yale, you know. Everybody thought I was going to do great things. And I convinced her in six weeks to marry me, and so we were engaged for another six weeks, and then we got married. And of course, we had nothing whatever in common, nothing at all. She was 20, I was… by that time, I'd turned 29.
She was a pianist, and a very gifted pianist, but a young woman who… just was about as unworldly and innocent as could be, and it was… it was dreadful. I brought her home and immediately went into six months of cardiac surgery residency, where I would leave in the morning at 7:00 and not be home until 10:00 at night. And here she was, this 20-year-old innocent, and people were very good to her and tried to help her, but what I didn't know at that time was that she was bipolar. I didn't know that either. And for the next years, she would become depressed for six months, and when April came, she'd suddenly, within days, become manic. And we had some really bad times, but we did have two perfectly wonderful children.

It took a huge toll… on me… and in seven years, I knew there had to be a divorce. I knew it wasn't going to work.
But I thought, I've got to make it work. You know, I'm the guy who doesn't fail. Everything has to be fine. But after that seven years, it was never quite the same. And I got more and more depressed. I don't want to say I'm attributing my depression to that. I think it had been a lot of stuff gradually coming on. In any event, I was getting more and more depressed, and she and I were having more and more trouble, and eventually I became so depressed I was non-functional. And my brother came up to New Haven and I was admitted to the psychiatric unit of the New Haven Hospital, and assured that, within 30 days, I'd be out of there and fine. Well, that was a crock of stool, because I was worse at the end of 30 days, but I was discharged anyway. I lived on my own for a while. They readmitted me, and then they realised I needed long-term hospitalization. But by that time, I was incapable of caring for myself, incapable of doing anything. And I was admitted to a… because of insurance I had. I'd been wise enough, when I started practice, to get this really wonderful health insurance. I was admitted to a large… private psychiatric hospital in Hartford, called the Institute of Living.
It had been originally an endowed place, called the Hartford Retreat, going back to the 1840s, and now it was this large campus, many buildings, many facilities. And when I was admitted, the team of senior psychiatrists who saw me couldn't figure out what they were going to do with me, what kind of treatment I could possibly have, because I was not only depressed, but I was severely obsessive and compulsive behaviour and all this sort of stuff.
Well, it turned out that the Hartford Hospital was associated with this… large psychiatric facility, and one of the leaders in prefrontal lobotomy, which was very popular at one point, but starting to fade at that time, when I was admitted there in 1973. They said that I should have a prefrontal lobotomy.
Well, you know, when you go into a teaching hospital, you're assigned to a resident. And the first day I met the resident assigned to me, and he was from Italy. He'd gone to medical school at the University of Bologna, and I was such a fancy guy that I would look down on all foreign graduates. And he had a thick accent. He spoke perfect English, but he had a thick accent. It's only a little thinner today. And he's the resident. He's 27 years old, I was 43. And he took my history and he talked to me for about an hour, and I later discovered that… you know, he had to present me to the board, who had already made up their mind that I should have a lobotomy.
And he said, you know this man's real-world problem is not the obsessional thinking and the fact that he's got crazy ideas about things. He's just severely, severely depressed, and the best treatment for depression is electric shock therapy. And they said, no, no, no, no, he has to have a lobotomy, and Vittorio Ferraro, which was his name, is his name, said, well, this is a terrible mistake and I won't stand by and see it happen. You know, this guy, he's a doctor, he's on the Yale faculty, he's this, he's that. You can't. You just can't make a slice in his brain. And if you do, I'm going to quit. I'm just not going to stay here.
Well, he was a young person, as I put it in this book that I later wrote, very highly thought of in that place. And they said, well, let's humour him. We'll give this guy a series of electroshock treatments. And that did it. I recovered.

I recovered, and I was helped in my recovery. I was in that place for 13 months. They were being very, very careful. I recovered so well that I was actually able to go through with a divorce. And some months before I left there, I was divorced, which was a huge boost to my psyche. And they said, we can't let you go until you actually have a job. We want to be sure you're working as a surgeon. And one of my old professors who taught me general surgery, Mark Haise, arranged for me to work with a surgeon in Milford, Connecticut, which was a town about… is a town about 15 miles down the line. They had a small, 150-bed hospital. Worked there and I hadn't been there a week. I was working with this older colleague and a young woman came into our office. We had about four examining rooms, maybe five. And this was a young woman who was an actress at the American Shakespeare Theater, which was in Stratford, Connecticut, very close to Milford. And she had gotten, ingloriously, a boil on one of her buttocks and gone to the Milford Hospital Emergency Room, where they had lanced it and cleaned it up. And they said, you know, you have to be followed by a surgeon. And we were on the panel, and she goes into this examining room, and I walk into the examining room, and Milford was a place where, during World War II, there had been a lot of small manufacturers, and they had sort of drafted half of Vermont and Maine and New Hampshire to come down and work in the factories. And these were not terribly well-educated people, and their children didn't have much of a drive, so you could be in Milford in those offices for weeks at a time, and never see anybody who graduated from college. So, I walk into this room, and I see a head of red hair with an examining sheet over it, with a surgical opening in the sheet, because the nurse had set that up. And I couldn't even see this young woman's face. I could see she was 26 years old by her sheet. And right in front of her was a copy of the Hippocratic Oath, as doctors often have in examining rooms. And while I'm chatting with her and cleaning up this pusey place, she says, 'You know, I don't think this is a very good translation of the Hippocratic Oath'. I said, 'What?'
Well, it turned out she'd taken Greek in college and knew something about the Hippocratic Oath, and we just started to talk. And I was fascinated by her mind, and I wasn't physically attracted to this child at all. I was, by that time, 44, and she was 26.
It never occurred to me that anything should… reach the point of a romance, but I enjoyed being with her. And I have to admit that I multiplied her follow-up visits, even after she didn't need to see me anymore, just so that I could chat with her. And it would get my partner upset that I would always spend so much time with this young woman.
And I always had one day a week off. He would take a day a week off, I would, plus our weekend arrangements. And it was always Wednesday or Thursday. So she and I, we'd go to the beach, we'd do things together, just sit and talk for hours at a time.

So here she is, she's just a year out of graduate school, drama graduate school, and I saw that the American Shakespeare Theater was putting on Romeo and Juliet, so one day, I said, 'I'd like some tickets, because I have these two kids, one of whom was 13 and one of whom was 11. I'd like to take them'. And she said, 'Fine, I'll get tickets for you. You don't have to pay for them'. So, we went and saw Romeo and Juliet, and I fell deeply, sincerely, eternally in love with Juliet, with the girl who was playing Juliet, and I had to meet her. And I figured this kid that I'd been treating was my entrée. So, I said, 'Do you folks ever have parties at the theatre?' She said, 'Oh, we have a party after the Saturday evening show'. And I thought, well. She said, 'Would you like to go?' And I said, sure I would, figuring this was my way to get close to Juliet, who was a beautiful young woman, perhaps about 30 at that time. So, I go to the party with her, actually, with the young… with my young patient who's now become my friend.
And it's about 11 o'clock, and I am making all the right moves with Juliet. We're at the bar together, and I'm sort of, you know, playing this wise fellow, and everything's going smooth as silk, and suddenly there's an announcement that the fellow… one of the young men in the cast – I'm trying to remember the part he was playing – but in any event, his mother was a librarian at a penitentiary in Brownsville, Texas. And there was a breakout. She was taken hostage, and in the shooting, she was killed. And we heard that, and that was the end of the party. I thought, oh my God, I've got to take this kid home now. And it was… I figured I'd come back to Juliet in time, but I had to take her home, so it was… about 11:00, 11:30. And I walked her to the boarding house that… all the actors stayed in the boarding houses around there. I took her home. And she said, 'Come on in'. And we started to talk, and I had a tennis date at 9:00, and we talked all night long. At about 8:30, I said, 'You know, I really, really got to leave', and she said, 'Fine', and there was a sort of a three-step walk-up to the room she was in. She stood on the top step as I walked toward my car, which was about half a block down the street, and people were streaming to the local Congregational Church, to get to the… I guess the 9:00 service. So, she stands on this top step and calls out to me. I'm right in the stream of these people, going to church, and she calls out to me, 'And next time, get a better room!'
Well, I just burst out laughing, and I thought, I've got to see more of this kid than I have before. And to make a long story short, we became lovers. I mean, here I was, 17 years older than she was.

When she said that, when she said, next time get a better room, I saw an aspect of her I hadn't really appreciated before, which was this great sense of humour.
And I just started spending more time with her. And one thing led to another, and we did indeed… become lovers, but I had no intention of getting married. I thought that I was pretty bad at that game of marriage. I blamed myself for the destruction of my first marriage. I didn't think I could be a good husband. I knew I could be a good father, and I adored my children, and when the divorce came, which was just before… a few months before I was discharged from the hospital, the arrangement was I could see the kids as much as I wanted to. We didn't have any specific geometric or arithmetic division of time. And the kids wanted to be with me, so I'd spend a ton of time. Every weekend, we were together all weekend. When I was off, which was every other weekend, I'd have dinner with them at least one night a week, and we had this group of three. And when Sarah came along, the kids just fell in love with her, and she was like a big sister to them.
And there we were, like a family, but I wasn't going to make it a family, because I wasn't going to get married. So, this went on. It was a total of three years. When she wasn't working, she, on Thursday afternoon, would take a train to Milford and I'd meet her at the Milford station, and we'd be together all weekend, and Monday morning, she'd go back, you know, at her agent's behest, and start looking for jobs, like actors always do. And I remember one Friday, I had a very complex emergency case and I came out of the operating room still in my greens. It was late at night, at least 9:00 or 10:00… late in the evening, I should say. And she was in the locker room. It was okay for her to be there, because there was nobody else there. And she said to me that this is over, I can't do this. You know, I'm 28 years old now. I want to get married. I want to have a family. I just can't… You know, I love you, but I can't keep doing this. And I thought, what's going on here? She's throwing me over? I still had that kind of sense of myself. And she left.
I said I'll take her to the train station. I took her right to the train. There was still a train, a Friday night train to take her back to New York, and she went back, and bingo, my friends started jumping on me. Are you out of your mind, letting that girl get away? And during that two-week time, I made a date with Juliet. I went to New York and took Juliet out. I went to have dinner with a friend I had met through Sarah, this now-28-year-old girl, who knew her very well. He later became a very prominent director in New York, Joey Tillinger. And he said, 'You're never going to meet another woman like that. You're just going to let her go?' Well, I thought, I know they're right, I'm never going to meet another woman like that, but I just don't want to get married. And we were never going to see each other again, that was the deal when she left on Friday.

Well, this all happened in the winter, and two, three weeks later was her birthday, and I phoned her. She was surprised to hear from me. And I said, you know, you left some stuff at the house and I have to be in New York tomorrow, which was her birthday, and I'll bring it down, bring the stuff down to you. She said, well, she wasn't very keen on that, but she wanted me to bring it. So, I got on the train, I got a… Milford flower shop, at that time, was not very good. I got some sort of… not really wilted, they didn't look very good… flowers, and I got into my little Pinto and I drove down to New York.
And she was living in a brownstone. She had the basement apartment. And two of her really wonderful friends, who were partners, lived together. One of them owned the house. And I rang the doorbell, and as I rang the doorbell, a florist's little delivery truck came up. And she had this guy who'd been crazy about her for quite some time, and lo and behold the delivery truck had a dozen long-stemmed, magnificent roses from this guy, and here I was with my little bouquet. And she asked me in, and within minutes of my coming there… Sarah's a Quaker, I've got to point that out, was a Quaker at that time, been brought up a Quaker, parents were Quakers. And I said to her something about I have a birthday present for you, not the flowers. And she said, 'What is it'? I said, 'It's me'. And she didn't know what I was talking about, because, you know, we had decided this was the end of it. She said, 'What do you mean?' And I said - these were really my very words - I said, 'Don't you recognise a proposal of marriage when you hear one, you dumb Quake?'
And we've lived happily ever after. It's been 33 years. We've been together for 36 years, you know, including the previous three. And we've had two kids. She brought up… you know, as soon as we got married and the younger kids found out, my previous kids, that they could live with us, they came and lived with us. And they were brought up by Sarah. And, you know, Sarah was a Quaker, and a devout Quaker, a true person of faith and although I had been steeped in Orthodox Judaism and knew a great deal about it, and actually continued to practice. I just… I know it sounds paradoxical, but I'm sure I'm not the only one, I just had no belief. I realised when I was getting out of being sick that my previous orthodoxy was just obsessional thinking, that I really didn't believe in anything supernatural.

But I loved to go to the synagogue. I do to this minute. And I love to say Jewish prayers, and I feel very attached to the Jewish people and I know a great deal about Biblical history and post-Biblical history. So, when Sarah and I were married, I used to take her to the synagogue, where I loved to be. Now here's this woman who's a devout Quaker and over the years, I never once mentioned any possibility of out, of her being converted. We were married in a Quaker ceremony six months after that proposal. But without my realising it, she was getting more and more interested in Judaism, and about six or seven years ago, she actually converted, and we were remarried in the Jewish cemetery right in the back yard, under this Japanese elm that we have. And she now knows more about Jewish ritual than I do. She's on the Board of Directors of the Synagogue, and people are pushing very hard for her to accept the presidency, which is four years down the line, because there's a sort of succession, and we practice Judaism. All my friends know I'm an agnostic, but I just love to go to the synagogue every Saturday. I love to be there. I love to be there with her. I love the prayers, I love the people I've met there. I love the sense of community that this particular group gives me, and I've written a book on Maimonides, who was one of the great Jewish intellects in the 12th century. And again, I've been closely associated with Judaism and Jewish things, and I never hide the fact that I don't believe.

I've had the good luck to have an intense sense of spirituality. One of the early books I read, which was called the Wisdom of the Body, in hardcover, and then the publisher decided to call it How We Live in paperback.
It's a book introducing the biology of the human body… to a general reader, and when I had written all of the chapters about the cardiac system and the nervous system and the gastrointestinal system, I wrote a section about what I called the human spirit, which I really felt was a genetic response… to 200,000 years of human evolution. You know, Homo sapiens appeared on Earth about 200,000 years ago, and my sense was that… spirituality was of benefit… to a biological creature, and as time went on, as in all evolutionary processes, those genetically favoured with a sense of spirituality survived, and this is why the human being has it. And I had what I thought of as evidence for it… primarily from the world of art, from the aesthetic sense. From music, particularly. Music seems to me to bring out my sense of spirituality more than anything else does. Sometimes reading some very wise moral philosopher will do the same thing for me. Sometimes, discussing issues, that old, old issue of why we are the way we are, which has intrigued me forever. Sometimes discussing that gives me a tremendous spiritual sense.

As I studied the human body in a much deeper sense, actually, than I ever had, in order to write this book, I had to do that, I developed the concept that our sensoria, our cerebral cortex is aware on a level deeper than the unconscious, to the rhythms of our bodies. When describing the animal cell, I made a point, in that particular chapter, of talking about the millions of biochemical reactions going on in each cell at any given time, and the absolute chaos of that. But in order not for the cell to be destroyed, there must be… some order to the entire thing. There must be a reason that cell survives amidst the chaos. And I found myself thinking of the old Greek concept of cosmos versus chaos. Cosmos is in the heavens, and to the Greeks, it looked perfect. Everything was always where it should be. As the seasons changed, you could predict what would be where, as opposed to the chaos on Earth, the chaos of human life.
And the more I thought about that, the more I thought of the idea that the chaos within the human cellular organism, and specifically within cells… because that chaos is there, the human animal… needs, looks for, searches for, yearns for, a sense of order. And that's what music is, and that's what poetry is. Why do we have poetry? When poetry rhymes or doesn't rhyme, it's in cadences, it's in repetitive form. Biblical poetry doesn't rhyme. Read the Psalms, read the Proverbs. It's the cadences. It's the repetitiveness. I'll grab examples from different areas. When you listen to the music that the kids dance to, what do you hear? You hear the heartbeat in the background. Every single piece of music that these kids listen to has the heartbeat in the background. If you listen for it, it's always there. Our heartbeat reassures us because it's a regularity amidst the chaos.
And I wrote about that, at least a chapter's worth, maybe more. I haven't looked at the book in a long time, but it's become a matter of virtual certainty to me, something that I can't prove with our present science, cannot even be studied, but that the human spirit, as I define it, is this sense of, and need for, order… and predictability. And this is what art is all about. Even the most abstract of art has a basic concept to it within the hands and the mind of the artist who created it. And that's true of the most abstract kind of music as well.
And I can read a piece of poetry in a literary journal, or something like the New York Book Review, or The New Yorker, and sometimes I say to myself, this isn't poetry, because it doesn't have that sense of symmetry and repetitiveness of thought. It doesn't have to be of words, it's of thought.

And when I talked earlier about my becoming fascinated with the cadences of my own speech, I'm actually aware, in my writing, of a rhythm to it. I don't know if lots of people are aware of that. Maybe nobody's aware of that, but I've always had this sense, and I listen to recordings of myself on radio. You know, every time you do a radio thing, they send it to you. And I realise that it's there. Now, I have to look for it, obviously, but I know it's there and I recognise it. So, this is my notion, this is my as-yet untestable hypothesis, that because of the chaos that's within, order becomes of life-giving significance to us. And that's what the human spirit is: it's a sense of order. In that book, I used an epigraph from St Augustine, in which he says that, 'Men wonder at the mountains and the seas, but they pass themselves and never stop to wonder'.
And I remember giving… I've talked about this at various lectures, and one of the lectures I gave was at a Catholic college here in New Haven called Albertus Magnus, and the president of the college… I was talking about… this is why we have invented religion: not just so that there should be an afterlife and we don't have to face our non-existence, but that religion provides for us a predictable rhythm to our lives, whether it's the Sabbath once a week, or particular rituals that we always carry out. It's very reassuring to someone who is essentially aware of the chaos within. And the president of the college, who was a member of a religious order, a nun, said to me later, as I was talking about religion being an invented thing, and the need for God being something that's consistent with my sense of needing that kind of reassurance, she said, 'You know what it is that you and I share? We share a sense of wonder'. And I hadn't even said anything about Augustine, as the Protestants call him, or Augustine, as the Catholics call him, and yet she recognized that what I call a spiritual sense is really a sense of wonder.

In recent years, I've met several environmentalists… two in particular, actually a married couple, John Grim and Mary Evelyn Tucker, who have joint appointments at the Divinity School and the Forestry School. And as I talked to them about their great love of the environment, what comes through, without having to delve at all for it, is this great sense of wonder at the universe, at Nature, at what a human being is, at what came before the Big Bang and how it fits with this great reverence that they have for Nature. And both of them are devoutly religious people. They believe in evolution, everything that any scientist believes in. They continue to believe in the power of an eternal God. And I have always had enormous respect for people of deep faith.
My wife is a woman of deep faith. I can understand where that comes from, in her and in other people, of deep faith. Of course, a lot of people of supposed deep faith are hypocrites, unfortunately, which gives a bad name to everybody, but it has to do with this sense of wonder, which to me is completely in Nature, completely in biochemistry and physics… and I don't have to have anything else to explain it.
But in those people, it extends to the wonder of what they conceive of as God.

So, I've been wondering, which is such an easy thing to do when you talk about yourself, because this is essentially an opportunity for my narcissism to come full flow, you're sort of a captive audience, and you're there and you're listening, and I tell myself, gee, he really seems to be interested, so I go more and indulge my need to talk about myself, and that's what I'm sure keeps people in front of the camera, like this one.

What, of course, I haven't… said much about is how I came to be a writer. How I came to realise that, at a given point in my life, in my late 40s, 50s, that I had absorbed an enormous amount of information, and unconsciously been thinking about it. Not aware that I'd been thinking about it. Maybe thinking is not the right word, because it implies a conscious process, and to me, it's an unconscious process. It's going on all the time, in all of us. You know, I'm convinced that the vast majority of us know a lot more than we realize we know, and the vast majority of us, especially people who are lucky enough to have a good education, have been processing information and have points of view that they don't realize that they have points of view about. Who was the writer who said, 'I write because otherwise I wouldn't know what I'm thinking?'
And that's the way it is for me. You know, this book that I'm known for, How We Die, well, I remember the first time I read that through, after it was published. You know, I'd been reading the manuscripts, obviously, and correcting the galleys and blah, blah, blah. But I sat down and read it like a reader, and I was astounded by that book. I said, Jesus, where did I get that from? How did I know that? Where did this complex mix of thoughts about death and dying come from? This whole philosophy of death which I'd never known I had.
Well, it came because we go around absorbing information, and something in there is working on it, obviously at the cortical level, but maybe some of it's in our brainstem and it's vegetative thinking. It percolates its way, as everything does, up to the cortex. Whatever it is, that brain's going on all the time. And if you sit down and start writing and don't plan what you're going to write, your unconscious just does it for you.

So how did I start writing? Well, to me, I've always been a writer. I've been a writer since I wrote about the carnival on the flyleaf of that book about the wonders of the world. I've been a writer through high school. I noticed in my high school yearbook. You know, I look at it about once every 10 years. There's this big, long article about one of the faculty that I wrote, and it really reads very nicely. No worse than I write today. I've been a writer since I was in college and got an A on every theme. I didn't work for the newspaper, I didn't work for other publications that the undergraduates had in college. I didn't do any of that, but after three years in Milford… Sarah and I… it was shortly after we got married, we went to a concert at Yale, at Sprague Hall, one of the concert… the second concert hall, second level concert hall. And by the time we got there, it was standing room only, and everybody… all the students were there. Not all the students, but the place was filled with students, and some faculty. And I looked at these kids. Now, you know, obviously I'd been teaching medical students before I had my depression. And I was teaching medical students all through my training period, and I loved doing that. And I looked around at all these kids, you know, they're 18, 19, 20, 21, and I said to Sarah, 'You know, I miss this so much. I've got to be back here, in New Haven'. So, I left Milford. I quit, and I started a practice in New Haven, which fortunately for me, you know, was pretty good right from the start. And that was in 1977, was when I came back to New Haven. And shortly after I came, the editor of the Connecticut State medical journal - the name of the journal is Connecticut Medicine - asked me if I would write a couple of things, small things for the journal. And I wrote a few articles. And he liked them and he asked me to edit a few things, and then he said, you know, 'One thing this journal needs is a literary editor, someone who'll write an occasional piece and also help me out with the non-scientific stuff'. I said fine. And I became the literary editor of the Connecticut State medical journal, something I enjoyed. You know, I'd do book reviews and articles and things like this.

I also wrote a few essays in the History of Medicine. I got very active in the History of Medicine, which I had been intrigued by since I started medical school. We've got a wonderful historical library here, some great collections, one of the finest medical historical libraries, literally in the world. I think probably the Countway in Boston has more. Maybe there's something in the national archives, I don't know. But Yale would rank second, third or fourth in the country in medical history, and it's a beautiful place to work and I'd done quite a bit of work there. And I got interested in the life of a fellow named Ignaz Semmelweis, who, in 18… in the 1840s, I think it was 1847, discovered that if you wash your hands, if you're an obstetrician, you're not going to kill the mothers. The frequency of death in university hospitals in Europe was 15-18% because the doctors were doing autopsies and then examining women, and they were contaminating them, because no one knew anything about germs at that time. But he was a man who said, you've got to wash your hands in chlorine water and that'll solve everything. And he was right, but he was also crazy and self-destructed at one point, just like I had. I became fascinated by his life, and I wrote an article for one of the medical history journals, the Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences, that became sort of a talking point for a lot of historians, because I presented a point of view about his self-destruction that was a new way of looking at him.

So, I was working in the historical library quite a bit, and there was a man named Lesley Adams working in Alabama, Montgomery, Alabama, who had started up a library of reproductions of great medical classics, and he would often use the originals from Yale and do some photography process, and reproduce them in leather. In fact, that's it back there. That's the whole library. And he was calling for information that people working there didn't know. And so, they would ask me, and eventually he started calling me for information. He asked me to be editor of the library. And with every new book, I would write an essay of about 5000 words, which is a pretty good-sized length of essay. And they would go out with the books. He would sell them to doctors at about $75 apiece. It was pretty cheap for what they got: leather-bound books on acid-free paper, perfect reproductions of some of the great medical classics. And people would write in and say: these essays are really good. And I got the notion, since my writings for the journal had been so well received, that maybe I could make a book out of the essays I was writing. Well, lo and behold, my wife, Sarah, had a good friend named Maria Tucci, who had worked with her at the American Shakespeare Theater and other places, whose husband just happened to be the President of the Alfred A. Knopf Publishing Company. And I had met Bob Gottlieb, you know, had dinner with him and chatted about various things, and I liked him. So, I went down to New York to visit him at the Knopf place, the building. And I said, look, I've got these essays. I'd sent them in advance, so he had read them, and he… I sent him five, and he said, you know, this is all very well and good, but how do I know you can sustain a book? A book is not just being able to write essays. So, I said fine, I'll write more. And I presented him, about a year later, with more material, and he said, 'Good, we've got a book'. And that was my first book. It was called Doctors: The Biography of Medicine. It was a medical history based on the lives of some of the leading people. And I thought, you know, it's a Knopf publication, but it's not going to sell a lot of copies. He gave me a very small advance. I didn't realize how small it was until later, years later. And I said, do I need an agent? And he said, no, I'll take care of you, you don't need an agent.

Well, to everyone's amazement, not only was the book reviewed in the Times Sunday Book Review, but in those days, the Book of the Month Club had a single selection and an alternate. That's… they didn't offer you a zillion books, just a… and it was an alternate selection for Book of the Month Club. So, holy crow, what a surprise! A surgeon, while he's working, is between cases, rushing off to the library, which was about two football fields away from the operating room, and writing this book, you know, not even stopping to look what he'd written, and it gets this great review in the Times, it starts selling very, very well. It never made the bestseller list, actually, but sold a very substantial number of copies, and is still selling today, by the way. And gee. Bob Gottlieb, though, let me down. He was invited to be the editor of The New Yorker, and he left Knopf and became the editor of New Yorker. Well, I had just published my book, and the last chapter of the book was a chapter on heart transplantation. So I can't remember the exact circumstances, but he says to me, why don't you write an article on heart transplantation for The New Yorker? And I said that would be a terrific idea. I called my friend, who was the chief of cardiology, who gave me the name of a person who was on the list for a heart transplant and he said, you'll like this guy a lot. And I did. We got along very well. And he… they never got a heart for him. He died without getting his transplant, after about six months of the two of us spending a lot of time together. And so I said to my cardiology friend, 'Don't let's do this again. When there's a patient on the operating table, call me, I'll go'. And that's just what happened. I went to watch a heart transplant, and then later I spent time with this fellow who survived, and I wrote an article for The New Yorker, one of… they called it Annals of Medicine, about heart transplantation. And I'll… you know, again, I was a surgeon. I was doing my regular surgical stuff. And we… Sarah and I went down to New York on a Friday evening. We were going to have dinner, just spend the evening in New York, and it was the… and The New Yorker came out on Friday at that time, and we were driving down West End Avenue, and I remember driving and looking up at these houses, you know, all those buildings, 70s, 60s, 80s, where all the New York intellectuals live, the Upper West Side, and thinking to myself: they all read The New Yorker. Everybody up there is reading my article right now. And many of them probably were.

About six months later, you know, I'm still writing essays and stuff like this, writing for the Classics of Medicine Library and enjoying myself immensely, and working all the time. You know, I had four kids by then, and I'd come home in the evening and write, and I'd write on weekends. I just couldn't stop it, I liked it so much. And one day, I'm in the office, and my secretary comes into the examining room, and there's no reason for the secretary ever to come into an examining room, but she did this time, and she said, she sort of whispered to me, 'There's a man on the phone who wants to talk to you'. Well, you know, I'm examining a patient, I can't go talk to this man. And she said, and you know, he's a literary agent.
Well, by this time, I had, because of the success of this book, Doctors, I thought I had a future in writing. And I was actually beginning to think, you know, I'd been in surgery for about 25 years at that point, not counting the training years. I was beginning to think that… you know, I'm in my late 50s, early 60s, at this time, and maybe I could sort of lateral arabesque into writing. As I had watched my senior colleagues over the years, I had noticed that something begins to happen to the great majority of surgeons in their early 60s. They don't lose their touch, they don't lose their ability, they certainly don't lose their judgement, but they start to slow down, and you can see it, again and again. They just start slowing down. The case that took an hour and-a-half takes two hours. They're more likely, if there's a decision to be made, to take the conservative decision. Not that it's wrong, but previously, they might have done the other thing. And I thought… I'd always thought I was going to quit somewhere in my early 60s. For some reason, I had the magical year 63. Well, at this point, I was, I think, 61, a time when people are just thinking of retiring from whatever they're doing. So, I finished the exam and I said, you just have to tell him to wait. So, he waited, and I was pretty near the end of the exam anyway. I came out and spoke to him, and this fellow says to me, 'You don't know me. I'm a literary agent. And I've got an idea for a book and I'm looking for the right person to write it. And I've talked to several editors in New York, and your name has come up as someone who might be able to write this book'. 'Okay, so what is the book?' He said, 'You know there is no book that explains to people what happens when they actually die. Suppose someone has a heart attack. What actually happens to him? What does he experience? Someone has cancer. Someone has a stroke. Someone just dies of old age. What's the mechanism of this?' And I said, 'Yes, there must be lots of books'. He said, 'Oh, go to the library and see. There are no such books
And what I discovered after I'd spoken to him, you know, in the next few days, was that there was no such book for doctors, either. You know, you learn pathology and you learn pathophysiology, but there was no place where everything was sort of put together. So, I thought, that is a book worth writing.

The more I thought about it, especially after I met him, the agent, who was a pretty young guy, he was in his late 30s, I think, I met him and his wife, who was a literary attorney, and I, you know, I took a liking to them. I decided to write it and I thought, I can't write a book like this and practice surgery, because this book is going to have some very significant emotional context. You can't write about death and dying and families and the problems of what happens in hospitals as people are approaching death. You can't write about that sort of thing with any sensitivity at all and try to take care of sick people at the same time. So, I'm going to take a year off to write this book.
And Sarah agreed that was a good thing. So, I did that. I took a year off. July 1 to July 1, it was going to be, and I sat and began writing, and right away, it came, very quickly. I just took the pencil… I write with a pencil to this day, and with pads of paper. And I started writing. And I discovered a few things. On the very first day, I discovered that when you're a writer, you don't get lots of calls from nurses and sick people. The phone doesn't ring. You're all by yourself. You're sitting there with your pencil and your paper, and it's a kind of peace I had never known. It was just a great feeling to do that. And I remember I'd started writing about 8:00 in the morning and about 110:00 or 10:30, I… Sarah was home at that time. I walked into the kitchen and I said, 'You know, I like this life. This is a nice life. We ought to think about what we're going to do here'. And so, we would talk about it as the months went by, and about month number nine, we decided… because the book by this time was about three-quarters written, and I was very excited about it and I loved doing it. And also, I was getting requests to write an article for this magazine and, you know, this kind of thing. And so, at month number nine, we decided I was not going to go back to surgery, I was going to just… it was taking a bit of a chance, but I didn't think it was, because things were going so well.

So, I wrote this book called How We Die. It was published, but before it was published… Oh, let me go backwards, backwards. I left out something so important.
 When I decided to write the book, or agreed to write the book, I said to Glenn Hartley, who was the agent, I said, 'What do I do now'? He said, 'Well, you have to write a book proposal'. I didn't know what a book proposal was, so I wrote a description of the book and he read it, and he said, 'It's all very nice, but you know, you've got to put a patient in there'. So, I thought about the first patient I had ever seen… as a medical student, who died right in front of me, and I wrote about this very dramatic death and my attempt to resuscitate this man, which was unsuccessful, and the emotional effect it had on me.
And so, he took this proposal and he sent it out on a Monday, 20 copies of it to 20 different publishers, and he contacted me on Wednesday, and he said, 'This is crazy', he said, 'there are already seven publishers who just want to buy the book from the proposal'.
So, I said, 'What do I do now'? He said, 'Well, you go interview publishers'. And I did. I met with about four or five publishers. I still hadn't heard from Knopf. Knopf was not one of these seven.
And people were making bids on the book, and he said, Glenn said, 'We'll have an auction'. I didn't know what an auction was. Well, an auction, you choose a fee that you want for an advance, and you say, next Tuesday is the day of the auction, and by 5:00pm, we'll decide which publisher we want to go to, whoever gives us the most money and blah blah blah, whatever the conditions are. I said, 'This is all fine with me, but what about Knopf'?
Well, on Tuesday, the book is put up for auction, and a few hours later, Glenn calls me and says, 'I got a call from Knopf and they offered me twice the amount that he had put as a seller for the amount that came in'. And I had loved my previous experience with Knopf. Everything about it had been good, and the editor at Knopf was one of those editors who had said to Glenn, 'You ought to get this guy, Nuland, who wrote the article in The New Yorker'. So, I went with Knopf, and… the book is published.

I had developed a friendship with William F Buckley Jr at that time. I'd known him for about eight or ten years. I invited him to speak at Yale and he'd come, and we'd sort of hit it off. And so, we would see each other from time to time. I mean, actually, he came to this house, I went to his house. And he called me. They had sent him the galleys for a blurb or something, and he called me and he said, 'You know, this is an amazing book. I want to review this book for The New York Times'.
I thought to myself, Jesus, what kind of luck is this? Buckley himself is going to review the book and he already tells me he loves the book? Well, he's William F Buckley, so he can call the Times and say: there's a book I read, I want to review it.
So, he reviewed it, and what an amazing review it was. I've got it framed. He sent it to me, framed, and I put it on the wall. It's going to stay there until they carry me out of this house. And all the reviews were uniformly terrific. And so, they sent me out on a book tour, and everywhere I go, there are crowds of people. You know, it came out in February, with snow all over the place, and the publicists and I were tramping through the snow and then we get a call from the Oprah Winfrey Show, and Knopf chief of publicity himself goes with me to Chicago, and it was a great… it was a great success. You know, Oprah with all of her emotionalism, and the whole thing. She was calling me Dr Shep, and it was just…
So, the book starts selling like crazy. It's on the bestseller list for 17 weeks, a lot of it at number two. It never made number one. There was some extraordinary book that stayed at number one. I can't remember what it was. And then later, when the paperback came out, it was on for another 17 weeks. I recorded it myself. The sales are astronomical and foreigners want it, so now it's been translated into 29 languages. And I've been to China with it, I've been to… many European countries a number of times with it, and I'm now a celebrity, and everybody wants me to come and lecture here, and everybody wants me to come and lecture… And so, I become known as someone who lectures on various topics. I lecture on death and dying, I lecture on ageing, I lecture on various topics in medical history. And I'm enjoying that. I enjoy getting on a plane and going to Seattle or wherever it is, or to Paris, as I have.
The book tour, part of that book tour, was a European book tour, and Sarah went with me, and for part of it we even took our two younger kids. They were with us in Scandinavia, they were… we spent Thanksgiving in Holland, as a guest of my Dutch publisher. He took us to a huge dinner in Amsterdam on Thanksgiving Day. You know, we've just had a wonderful time with this book, and the sequel to it was this book that I call the Wisdom of the Body, that in paperback became How We Live, to take advantage of the title. And then I just started writing books. Well, none of them has ever had the success of How We Die, which sold half a million copies in America alone, and who knows how many copies it sold in those 29 and more countries?
Also, when I say it was translated into 29 languages, there's a Spanish for Spain, there's a Spanish for South America, there's a Portuguese for Portugal, there's a Portuguese for Brazil, this kind of thing. There's a Chinese for Taiwan and then there's a Mandarin for mainland China. You just… so it just keeps going. I keep the Hebrew copy and the Arabic copy next to each other on the shelf, hoping… I can have an effect on the peace process, but it never has… never has worked.
So that became my book, and no matter how many books I wrote letter, I think about 11 or 12 now, whenever someone says to me, your book, I know exactly what they mean.
Although I must say, in the last five years, more and more people refer to my memoir, the book that I call Lost in America, when they say, your book.

I have to describe what it's like to write, because I don't have a method, but I have a method, which is to have no method. I've never made an outline, I've never planned an essay or a chapter. Essentially, what happens is that a beginning sentence comes to me, and I like its rhythm and I like the way it feels, and I like the way it sounds when I say it out loud, and I sit down and I start to write with a pencil and a tablet of paper. I write on every other line, and I just keep writing. And when the chapter is over, I reread it, and I might cross out words because, of course, I've left every other line blank, I can put a word in here, a sentence in there. I will usually then rewrite it, change little things that I need to, not a lot, just a little. And that is the copy from which I type it into the computer. And I'm still making revisions, but only revisions in individual words, only deciding that I need a comma here or a semicolon there, or dashes instead of brackets, that kind of thing. But essentially, that first writing, with the pencil on the paper, that gets fixed up a little bit as I go along the way, is essentially it.
I remember being interviewed after Lost in America, my memoir, came out, by Alex Witchel for The Times. She's Frank Rich's wife and she's… actually a terrific writer of her own. She came up here to interview me, and she was having a little trouble believing that I just wrote this stuff, so at that time, I had sort of a little office box made of plastic, in which I had all the tablets in which I'd written the book, and I got up and I just pulled one out, and I said, you know, if you want to look at page 52 to 79 and compare it with this, you're going to find out it's almost exactly the same thing, because my books are very lightly edited. Nothing I've ever written has been very much edited.
So, I sit down and I write, but according to what scheme? Again, according to no scheme. I just let my subconscious go and when I read through the final manuscript of How We Die, again written with no plan except that one chapter would be on stroke and one chapter would be on Alzheimer's and one chapter would be on AIDS, when I read through that thing, even though I had read individual chapters as I went, I realized right away that the book had a beginning, it had a middle, it had a perfectly logical endpoint and the thing read as if I'd planned it out carefully, and I hadn't done a thing to plan it.

Well, when you've had a depression, and boy did I have a depression, you get a lot of therapy. You spend a lot of time with psychiatrists, of whom my favourite sort are the psychoanalytically-oriented. And you learn a lot from your own responses and from the kinds of things that come to your mind. You learn a lot about the way the subconscious functions, the unconscious functions, that it does have a symmetry to it, that it does have an order to it, that it does have in it enormous amounts, not just of information, but of knowledge, and not just of knowledge, but of wisdom that you didn't know were there.
Another thing I learned a long time ago is that when you talk to people who are very thoughtfully and well educated, and who are in fields that involve a lot of thinking, things come out of you that you didn't know were in you, just in the conversation. And so, one of my main pathways to the writing is the talking. Spending long lunches, or just an hour talking, getting somebody's ideas and giving him or her my ideas, and things just come out when you write them.
I didn't know, when I first started writing, any more than anybody knew, about the plasticity of the brain, about the way the brain changes. You know, here I am, talking away, and from the time I started talking till the time I finish, whenever that will be, my brain has changed. The brain of anybody listening to me is going to change, and it's going to change not just physiologically, biochemically, it's going to change physically.
The synapses, some will get stronger, some will get weaker, there'll be different pathways that weren't being used, all of course on a microscopic level, but it's… they're going to change.

Very recently, I was thinking about writing a book on mental disease and how people recover from it, and I felt I had to learn a lot of neuroscience, so I thought I'd go back to Freud again. And I was reading one of his early essays, A Project for a Scientific Psychology. He wrote this before he really got into most of the psychoanalytic stuff.
You know, he was a neuroscientist before he went into psychiatry, or psychology, as he always called it, and he was one of the major contributors to the neuron theory, the theory of the cell and its dendrites and axons, it's the pathways that lead from it, the fibres that lead from it.
And he, in this essay, is essentially predicting neuroplasticity. I read it this summer. I was stunned by it. He was not only predicting neuroplasticity, but he was predicting the existence of the synapse, the place where the nerve fibres come together, decades before Sherrington won a Nobel prize for that discovery.
He sort of intuited it, because he knew how the unconscious mind worked, and he figured these things had to exist. It was the way capillaries were predicted before they were discovered. The only way you could explain how blood went from the arteries into the veins was by some tiny microscopic system of vessels. So, somebody said, you know, whether they're pores, whether they're vessels, something's got to connect them, and then later a guy called Malphigi came along and really saw them under the microscope. This is the way it is with Freud. He just reasoned that nerve impulses had to jump across a gap, the synapse. He reasoned that the more these microscopic pathways are used, they stronger they get, and the less they're used, the weaker they get. But they never fade out, and that's why we have memory. They can always be brought back if something happens that brings the memory back. And those pathways strengthen again. The plasticity of the brain, the changeability of the brain. And now we know even more. Now we know that there are adult stem cells in the brain, and with the appropriate kind of stimulation, they're converted into nerve cells and neurons. Whoever dreamed of such a thing? But now we know it. And as you read theories of the unconscious mind, you recognize that the only way to explain some of the things the unconscious mind does is with the concept of a changing brain. Whether it changes for the worse, and you get emotionally sick, or as you recover, it changes for the better, it changes, organically, just as it does physiologically.
 

Well, here I am, this 23-year-old kid who finds himself, as a sub-intern, on the private surgical service at the Yale New Haven Hospital, under the care or control or direction of a very charismatic Colombian fellow who had been to medical school before, who then goes to the Yale Medical School, wins the big undergraduate research prize, and has an extraordinary pair of hands. That term, 'pair of hands', we use constantly in surgery. His name was Jose Patino. He went on to great things in his career, and we became great friends during my surgical residency. But in any event, so here he is: he's an artist, he loves to paint. He is a bon vivant, and he is a great, how shall we put this? Expert on ladies. He was unmarried at the time, and he was like some sort of musketeer of the 16th or early 17th century. He wasn't flamboyant. He was very quiet about everything, but to watch him operate was an exciting experience. It was the finesse of his hands, it was the quickness of his motions, it was the intense concentration at the same time that part of his brain could focus on what was going around the room. More than once, over the later years as we worked together during my training years, and eventually, when he became chief resident, he would not look up from the operating field, but with his eyes glistening, would quietly say in a very thick Spanish accent, 'Hey, boy, have you seen the eyes on the scrub nurse?'

And so yes, charisma embodied. So, it was exciting for a young fellow for me. I had never thought of myself, in any way, either characterologically or physically, like a surgeon. 
A good number of the surgeons I knew had been athletes. A good number of the surgeons that I knew had been artistically inclined. I had been neither. I love sports, I played every sport that, at that time, was available to kids who lived in the city: stickball, softball, some baseball, even was on a football team for one year, but had never been really and truly organized sports.
So this notion of ongoing teamwork and fellowship was nothing that had any particular appeal to me. I was essentially very much, although I had a large group of very close friends, they were intellectual friends. And we did play sports together in our clumsy way. But I was pretty clumsy, and when I was among the really good athletes and they had to choose up who was going to be on which side, I was always one of the second or third people. I did… I loved basketball and I wasn't even good enough in high school to try out for what was essentially a really bad basketball team. That was my level. So, I come in and I watch those hands and I watch the entire smoothness and facility of the performance. And that's what I want to be. How can I be like this? And as a result of that two-week experience with Jose Patino, I applied for a surgical internship and became a surgical intern at the Yale New Haven Hospital. And here I was, with these hands that had never been able to completely make a real model airplane or carve a boat, or… I could never do it, so how was I going to learn about surgery?
Well, very quickly, I understood that a surgeon really operates with his mind. His hands are accessories to his mind. You don't mind that I say his? In those days, everybody was a 'his'. His hands are directly connected to the thinking part of his brain. And every moment, he is making decisions.
And the more meticulous and careful he is in his work, the more direct connection there is. It's not reflex. Some of it's muscle memory and reflex, but it really is a coordinated effort that comes out of his conscious thinking mind. And once I realized that, of course, it had great appeal to me, but how was I going to overcome a basic clumsiness?
The same way I had overcome really having a Bronx accent. Part of it was conscious, but part of it was just being with my peers. And it was the most remarkable thing: by the time my internship – it was only one year – my surgical internship was over, I could work with perfect fingers, just like the best of the bunch. And not only that, but I also came to understand that I was recognized for a facility I had with my hands. Whoever would have thought such a thing?
I learned to use my left hand. And I'm so, in real life, so clumsy with my left hand, that in my basketball-playing days… we used to, in those days, use two-handed set shots. You never see that anymore. My right hand would always go out beyond my left, because I was so right-handed. And yet here, I'd get in the operating room, and who did this person become as soon as he put a gown and mask, but somebody else.

And the other thing was, I found that I enjoyed being part of a team. And as I went higher in the training programme, a more important part of the team, until, at the very end, when I was in the final year and-a-half, chief residency, I was the leader of the team. And everything depended on me, and I loved the responsibility. I loved the sense that this was my little cocoon. We could talk about anything we wanted to, except during very close concentration parts of an operation, of which, really in most operations, there aren't more than a few, and they might last 10 or 15 minutes, and then you're on to fairly routine kinds of work.
So here we were, like a club meeting every time I was in the operating room. And there were girls there, too, the nurses, who had become part of our group.
The other great excitement that I've talked about a lot in my life was waking up every morning and realizing you were significantly better than you were the day before; during that internship year it was technically being better. During the rest of the time, it was intellectually being better. It was judgement, which, to my mind, is the ultimate… the ultimate tool of the physician, is his or her judgement. Everything is about judgement. And even the Greeks wrote about this. The first aphorism of Hippocrates ends with the two words: 'judgement is difficult'. They talk about how delusive even your own experience can be. It can lead you astray. The importance of finding the patient's illness at a time when you can still do something about it. And so, they point out that opportunity is fleeting. Experience is delusive and then judgement is difficult. It begins, this aphorism, with the statement that the art, the art of medicine is long, but life is short. So essentially the Hippocratic physicians were saying to you: you're never going to know everything, and here are some of the roadblocks that will be in your way: the difficulty of judgment, the necessity to find this patient at a time when you can still do something about it, and how experience can fool you, whether it's your own experience or, as I learned later, by following the literature closely, it was the multiple experiences that are reported in the literature.
When you read a survey of 2000 patients, essentially these are 2000 individuals put into a pool. Essentially, it's the experience of 2000 individual people with individual manifestations of their disease, and it's one of the reasons that, if you follow medical literature for 10 years, you'll find, not infrequently… not frequently, but not infrequently either, diametrically opposed points of view at year number one and year number 10. Because as more… and more people come into the pool, notions change.
There are operations, for example, that we did in the 50s and 60s, radical mastectomy is the classical example that we wouldn't dream of doing today, except under very, very, very extraordinary, unusual, circumstances.

So those five and-a-half years were a time of learning the importance of very high levels of attention and getting so that you could think about mundane things while you were paying close attention. The importance of your head, which most non-surgeons don't recognize at all, the importance of everyone on the team. And the importance, when you're running this team, that when you're the surgeon of the morale of that team, and the continued interest in this expedition you're all taking. And cases can take two, three, four, five, six hours. And part of your job is not only to keep the morale up, but people get tired, their interest flags, and you've got to do this kind of thing. I learned… I had a funny experience with one of my assistant residents when I was an intern. His name was Bill Whale and he was a great golfer and a great bon vivant, and a marvellous fellow. And one day, we were doing a very long and very difficult dissection. He was the surgeon, I was the first assistant, and he looked up at me and he said, 'Tell me something - do you think we'll ever finish this case?' And it was a hilarious thing to say.
I used that many, many times. You have to know how to defuse fear. Now, fear is an uncommon thing among surgeons, but every once in a while, something suddenly and unexpectedly happens. It usually has to do with a blood vessel and a sudden spurt or burst of blood, and you've got to keep everybody calm while keeping yourself calm. And there was another resident who once, when we had one of these experiences, and everybody was at least psychologically trembling, as he gradually got control of the situation, he said, 'You know, I send my scrub suits, my operating suits, always to the Majestic Laundry', which was a local laundry. 'I always send them to the Majestic Laundry. They're not very good, but they're very discreet'. And I used that over the years, plenty of times. Things that just defuse a difficult situation. And of course, as you gain more experience, there are fewer things that worry you in an operating room.
And one of the great things about a surgical training programme is that you're exposed to, not one, but three or four, sometimes more, senior surgeons. Men in their 40s, 50s, perhaps even early 60s, who've seen everything and done everything. And you begin to emulate them. You get into a place where you have to make a very hard decision, whether to continue, whether to stop, for example, how much of a given area you should remove, and what we automatically do is think of what would Mark Haise do? What would Gustaf Lindskog do? What would Pete Bishop do in these situations? And that's enormously helpful. People, I think, don't appreciate the importance of mentors in general for young folks, but this is a specific sort of mentorship. You see how someone you admire, someone who is consistently good, someone whose judgement is good, does things. And that remains with you for the rest of your life. And as you're going through these five or six, and now probably about seven, eight years, you develop a style of your own. You develop a particular type of precision. You develop a particular type of something as simple as the way you like to drape a wound once the abdomen is open, and this is also very gratifying, because it's an expression of your personality. And if you're a thoughtful man or woman, you know it's an expression of your personality, because if fits with your approach to so many other things. And that, of course, was later reflected in my writing, that I later realized that I was operating the same way I was writing, or should say I was writing, in later years, the same way that I had been operating during all the years.

So those years of training were great fun, and I have deliberately chosen the word fun, and I'll tell you why.
Once, when I was… oh, I guess I was in my early 50s, the Dean of the medical school made a suggestion that first-year medical students meet with representatives of various specialities, so that these representatives could tell the first-year medical students what it was about their speciality that attracted them, what it was that kept up their interest, inspired them. So, they chose two people, we were almost all men at that time, two people from each of the major branches. Two people from internal medicine, two people from surgery, paediatrics, neurology, pathology, psychiatry. And we sat in this large conference room with about 30 of these very impressionable young people. Now, why two? One of them was from the full-time academic faculty. They didn't operate nearly as much as we did. They operated enough, but they didn't operate as much as we did, and they were expected to do laboratory research and they taught. That was the academic group. The clinical group, of which I belonged, were the ones who were primarily the operating surgeons, and we taught as much as they did, but we didn't do any research.
Well… the two people from internal medicine spoke, and I don't remember who spoke next, and it came time for the two people from surgery, and my colleague, who was an academic surgeon, stood up. We were all sitting in chairs like these. He stood up and he looked at these young folks, and he said, 'You know, surgery is essentially an exercise in practical physiology. You learn about wounding the body. You learn what the body can tolerate, and you study the mechanisms of healing, you study how the body can get along without a particular organ, or how the intestine, for example, can function when the food is going in a slightly different direction. It is really the way you learn, believe it or not, about the microscopic structure, the biochemistry that you're inflicting on the patient, because every operation is a wound'. It was really a very nice exposition, but we were only supposed to have two minutes, and being an academic physician, he used up his two minutes and mine, which left me having to synopsize what I wanted to say. But it was very simple, because what I wanted to say, and what I did say, when it came my turn to stand up, I said, 'I love surgery because it's fun'. And I sat down.
Of course, later, the kids asked questions and so on, but surgery was always great fun for me. I don't think I had more than three or four episodes in all the 35 years, where I suddenly became terrified, but one can always calm oneself down, because you have a history of getting out of trouble. And that's the other nice thing about lots of experience: you develop a confidence based on, quote: no matter how bad this looks, I've been in something just as bad or worse and I haven't had any catastrophes happen to me.

Interestingly, this career that I love, or I should say my love for this career, I began to notice when I was in my late 50s, was waning the least little bit. And it was waning because I'd always been interested in the history of medicine, ever since I started medical school. And I was starting to write these essays on great figures in medical history and devoting more and more time to them. And recognizing… well, the only way I can put it is how poorly educated I was. I had, I thought, a very good college education. My degree was a Bachelor of Arts, it wasn't a Bachelor of Science. I had developed certain great interests in English Literature, for example. A particular course on the history of the English Bible had influenced me a great deal, and I had become a tiny bit of a student of religions, but as I studied more and more medical history, it became pretty clear I didn't really know a lot about Western culture or Western civilization. And the more I studied it, the more articles I wrote, the more articles I had to research, the more I recognized that the medicine of any era, of any age, is really an outgrowth of the culture of that age, of what the Germans call the Weltanschauungen, the worldly view of the people who lived at that time. And so certain kinds of changes occurred during the Renaissance. Another kind of change occurred during the Enlightenment.
Medicine was turned upside-down by the fresh winds of the cultural revolution, as a matter of fact. The attempts at democratization of Europe that occurred in the 19th century, specifically the revolutions of 1848, but there were others, and I became avaricious to learn about these things. And avaricious is the only term that I can think of. Every chance I got, I would find myself reading and I would find myself reading less and less of the surgical literature, because I have 24 hours in a day and I've got a surgical load, so what gets sacrificed is reading the journals. I've never been overwhelmed by the value of surgical journals anyway, you know. Even when I read them a lot, I would look through them for articles I thought were important to me, or helpful. And then I would quickly read them. I'd read the synopsis first, and then I'd see what I needed to read. We were so good at teaching one another, because there were so many conferences during the week. We have a Death and Morbidity conference, we have an X-Ray conference, we have other conferences where people tell their most interesting cases. We have other conferences where surgical research is talked about. We have other conferences where visiting dignitaries talk. So you really learned on the job, and journals, I didn't think, were really as necessary as the other aspects, except if you wanted to be very lordly and quote them. That was what the internists were very good at: always quoting literature and spouting it. That's how you impress people.

In surgery, you impress people by your judgement and by your steadiness.
And one of the greatest compliments I used to get, which I got from people in academic internal medicine, was this guy is a medically-oriented surgeon. In other words, I was less quick to operate than a lot of my colleagues, that I followed my patients very, very, very carefully and attended to the physiological needs of their bodies in addition, I like to think, of their souls.
I could go to medical grand rounds and talk with some knowledge of the things the medical people were more interested in than the surgeons were, and I can actually elucidate this by something that happened to me when I was a fellow in the laboratory. My fellowship was right after the internship. I took a year of fellowship in cardiac surgery. And I had to learn. I was working on certain aspects of the major circulation of the veins into the heart and congenital abnormalities. And I had to learn a technique called differential bronchospirometry, which is something where you put a tube down the windpipe and extensions of that tube… one goes into the bronchus, the trunk of the right lung, and one goes into the bronchus or the trunk of the other, and you take gas samples, expiratory samples, from each side. And it's a very difficult thing to do. You've got to, you know, do it just right, and so my chief, Bill Glenn, sent me over to the pathology department, where Professor Averill Liebow was using the technique. He had essentially invented it, and wouldn't let anybody learn it, because it was his baby. Well, so I go down to the pathology research lab, and the door, of course, is locked. That's how secretive all this stuff was. Liebow was a very small man. He was about 5'5” in height, the absolute obverse of his brilliance, because he was a man who would look at the photographs of the class the day before the first lecture and know everybody's name and make a comment on it.
For example, there was a fellow in my class whose name was James Miles, and he came in a little late, and as he walked into the pathology amphitheatre, Averill Liebow said, 'Oh, here comes Jim, Miles from home'. Jim Miles. And he kept calling one of the fellows Red. He called him Red. Nobody could understand, because Bob Nodine, he wasn't red at all. I mean, he didn't have red hair. Turned out his wife had blazing red hair. And how did Averill Liebow find out? But Averill knew everything, and talk about meticulous surgery, he was a meticulous pathologist. One of my colleagues, you know, Honest Abe the Log-Splitter, as they say about Lincoln, this was Averill Liebow: Honest Ave, the Hair-Splitter, was what he said about him. But in any event, Averill Liebow hated surgeons. He thought they were primitive. It seems they were always stealing his research, and this was essentially what I was trying to do: I was going to learn bronchospirometry. So I go down to the lab and knock on a locked door, and after about half a minute, which was a pretty long time to be standing there - I'm nervous already about entering, invading this laboratory - I hear the click of the lock and the door is slightly opened by the diener, the guy who runs the lab. He's not a physician, you know, he sets up the animals and sees that everything goes well, takes care of the equipment. And I knew the diener pretty well, because I'd had some doings with him. He was a very pleasant, good guy. And he opens the door just a little bit. And I look past him, and I see, about four operating tables away from me, is Dr Liebow, little Dr Liebow, operating on a dog, standing on a stool with his head just over the dog's chest. And he looks at me and he see who it is, and he says to the diener, he says, 'Oh, it's Nuland. He's a little less Neanderthal than most surgeons. Let him in'.
Of all the years of surgery, I think that was the greatest compliment I ever got from anybody. So I went in and I learned how to do this technique, and in later months, published an important paper, from our point of view, based on the use of differential bronchospirometry.

Again, to get back to the change that was occurring in me: I developed this ravaging appetite for history, for culture. I would even try to memorize dates, which I got pretty good at, because I could fix things in my mind if I knew the date relationships. It wasn't a question of just knowing the dates. You know, it didn't help me that Constantinople fell in 1453, per se, but when you add this to something like 1492, when Jews were thrown out of Spain, or 1588, when the Armada went down the drain or 1519, when Leonardo da Vinci died, these become indices on which you can hang the important pieces of knowledge that you know. And it was about that time, again, I'm in my late 50s or so, about that time that I began to discern the difference between information, knowledge and wisdom. Information is the facts. Knowledge is using those facts and putting them in a framework so that you understand the arena in which you're thinking. Now wisdom comes from the evolution of one's judgement, the evolution of one's experience, to take the knowledge and try to figure out what it means. And try to figure out how you can use it in everyday experience, or figure out how you can use it in your interpretation of history. This, to me, is wisdom. So when people say, well, you know, you become wise as you become old, the only advantage of age is, of course, you have more opportunity to have experience. You have more opportunity to read, you have more opportunity to talk to people, and around that time was when I became a big talker. One-on-one, usually not coffee, because I don't like to drink coffee during the day. It would be lunch, it would be just dropping into someone's office, or them dropping into whatever I was doing, and I developed a group of friends, six or seven of whose pictures I keep right by the desk where I write today, whose thinking process I enormously admired, and I have to say, it sounds egotistical, but then again I'm a surgeon and I've confessed to you my narcissism anyway, that I was intensely flattered by their taking me seriously. They were people about half a generation older than I, and I realized they were mentors, intellectual mentors, to me, just like my surgical mentors had been. And with those people, it was usually lunch. It would usually be a long lunch, and anything would come up and I would always learn a great deal from it, not just from what I learned from the other person, but because when talking to challenging people like this, things would arise from my mind that I didn't know I was thinking about. Concepts that I had never consciously brought together. And of course, that's a great virtue of hanging out with… people whose minds you admire: you're surprised to find out, as you respond to their thoughts and their questions and their judgements that, my God, you've got thoughts and judgements too. And these people you admire so much are very interested. And that does a great deal for you, because you recognise that you can be like these people, just like the mentorship of surgery. You can be like them.

And of course, the secret was this intense curiosity that came out again. This was the same curiosity that came out when I first learned to read and I read Ab the Caveman, and then started eating books up. It was a curiosity that had ended at the end of college, when I focused on medicine and a career in medicine and then a career in surgery. Everything had been sort of in abeyance, but this curiosity came out in the recognition of how much I needed to know. And one reads about restlessness. There was a great pathologist named Giovanni Battista Morgagni in the late 18th century who, when he was young, at the university of… Padua. Or was it Bologna? It was Bologna. He belonged to an organization called the Academy of the Restless. I can't say it in Italian. But… their notion, the basis of their coming together, was… they didn't like the theories of the time.
They didn't like to stamp-pad intellectually. They knew there was a lot more to learn. Always restlessness, always restlessness, never being satisfied. And this is the way I've lived my life… since my late 50s. You know, we're talking about 25 years at least. Being restless, never being satisfied with what I know, meeting people who knew a great deal more than I did in certain areas, and feeling the courage to exchange ideas with them. It's actually been one of the joys of writing books: people write you letters. People get interested in knowing you when you go to various places and sit down and chat with all kinds of men and women with all sorts of backgrounds. So, this has been the richness of my life. And to go back to the waning period in my life, late 50s, I knew that I was losing interest, first in the surgical literature and then in the companionship of other surgeons. I had been very active in hospital politics. I'm not a shy person and I always speak my mind, so I would be on this committee or that committee or the other committee, you know, the executive board.
At one point, I was vice president of the executive board of the medical staff. I was secretary of the medical staff. I was interested in ethics from the beginning. Actually, what I was interested in was this notion that I call the goodness of the physician, his personal morality, how he lives his life and how that is reflected in decisions he makes at the bedside, and reflected in his way of healing and his effectiveness as a healer. And that got me into bioethics, so when the Yale New Haven Hospital formed its first bioethics committee, I was a member. They asked me to be a member of the bioethics committee. I was eventually asked to join the group that was forming the First American Hospice that was formed here in Connecticut, Bradford, Connecticut. So I was on the board and I was an officer of the board, so you see my interests, although they were growing out of medicine, were becoming much wider. Some of them had great applicability to healing. And one of them was humanism.

Humanism, you know, it's a Renaissance concept, but it means a lot. It doesn't mean just… it doesn't mean just being interested in people. It means… having an interest in what life is, in what human beings are, in what social relationships are, in the meaning of life. Okay, in the value of individual life. Humanism comes with a certain kind of morality and it comes with a certain kind of ethical principia.
And you know what it does, this kind of thinking? It does great things for one's self-image. I'll tell you why.
As you speak to people you admire, deal with people that you admire, you recognise that what the Greeks called the good life is the only way, really, to live. The good life is a life of happiness, engagement, challenge, kindness. Because none of it works unless people are kind to one another.
I'm jumping around a little bit, but I used, as the epigraph to my book about my life, a quotation from Philo of Alexandria, which was, be kind, for everyone you meet is fighting a great battle. That's the philosopher's stone, it really is. And I had not always been kind when I was younger. I've indicated to you how vainglorious I could be, how egotistical I've always been, how single-minded about my success I was when I was a young man. I had a certain tendency to sarcasm, for example. A nurse would drop an instrument and I'd make some wisecrack that was meant to cut, and that hurts a lot more than saying, why are you so clumsy? That's a direct thing, but sarcasm, it's a great word. Sarc means flesh, and sas, comes from caustic, burning. Sarcasm means burning somebody's flesh, which is very different than just going and sticking a knife into them, like most people would do, or punching them in the face. Obviously, I'm speaking metaphorically, but… so my way, when I got angry about something, was to let a little sarcasm go. And after trying to educate myself about Western culture, it was pretty easy, once I saw that statement by Philo to understand what it all meant.

Empathy, of course, is a great aid to kindness, but there's something else that I discovered as part of my reading of English literature. Percy Shelley, probably in the 1820s, I'm not sure exactly when, but probably in the 1820s, wrote… a wonderful essay – it's a long essay – called a Defence of Poetry. I'm fascinated by poetry for lots of reasons. Some of it has to do with this notion of cadence and beauty and what it means to one's unconscious… unconscious.
And in that essay, he talks about something he calls moral imagination. Now empathy implies that we can put ourselves in the position of someone else. We can feel someone's aching discomfort, we can feel someone's suffering, we can feel someone's excitement about something that might not excite yourself. Moral imagination, as Shelley defines it… here he is in his late 20s. Talk about wisdom. Why are some people gifted with wisdom? Why can they soak up things from the atmosphere and from reading that the rest of us take 50 years to get to? But here's… here's wisdom. His contemporary, Keats, had it too. Byron much… much less. But moral imagination is the ability to see the world through the eyes of others. Obviously there's that Weltanschauungen thing. Each person has his or her own way of looking at the world. But it takes a kind of extraordinary imagination to visualise how somebody else sees the world. Imagine if international diplomats were gifted with moral imagination, to be able to recognize why the other side is thinking the way it is, and what cultural background or intellectual background brought on that worldview, and thereby to recognize that there ain't no right and wrong in international relations, any more than there is in virtually anything. That as long as someone has good intentions, which we assume people we get to know well will have, there's always room to look with moral imagination, with empathy, at the other person's viewpoint and come to some decision or some conclusion that makes as much sense as is possible in that situation for everyone.
You know, so often when people are divided, there is no endpoint. You just have to make the endpoint that makes sense. Which reminds me… I'm sorry for jumping around so much, but as part of my reading, I discovered an essay written by Václav Havel when he was in jail. After I'd written How We Die, I started thinking more and more about hope. I had written some things about hope in How We Die. You know, how do you give hope to someone when both he and you, as the physician, know that they're not going to survive this thing? But you must never let anybody lose hope, and how do you provide that kind of hope. And I had written several paragraphs about the way one must deal with this problem.

And a few years after the book came out, I saw this quotation and went back to a book of Havel's essays that I have. It's actually a book of essays he wrote while in prison. And he says, and I've quoted this so many times: 'Hope is not really believing that something will turn out well, but believing that no matter how it turns out, it will make sense'. And that changes one's whole viewpoint about various crusades, including the crusade to help a dying person. You know, what makes sense for that dying person? What kind of empathy do you have to have… in order to see his impending death through his eyes? What kind of moral imagination do you have to have to see the whole notion of death through the eyes of people like him or his family? So it's a process, as Shelley puts it, of going outside of oneself… and seeing the minds of others, and again, in his words, and of many others, and the recognition that, in total disagreements, even if there's no decision that can be made, to come up with a solution, whether it's compromising or whatever it may be, that makes the most sense, under the circumstances, including circumstances where the problem is just insoluble, as so many of our personal and national and international problems are.
So again, I've been sort of jumping around about various things, but I'm, as I said earlier, a great believer in the power of the unconscious mind. That, you know, this stuff is in us and you think about one thing, and suddenly it brings something else, and if you were to examine, you'd... take time examining it, you would find out that they really are connected. So, whenever I get a burst of thought out of nowhere, I just express it, especially when I'm writing, because by my way of writing, I don't leave anything out. If I get a stray thought, it goes into my writing and lo and behold, by the end of the chapter, there seems to be some reason why it inserted itself at that point. And, you know, again, to repeat myself, writing, to me, is an expression of one's unconscious mind. The unconscious mind is the high road toward expressing what you really know in this world and in this life.

[Q] How are your ideas about death and your relationship to death might have changed over your life. I mean, you're in a position of not only having written How We Die, but also having seen a lot of it, so maybe have more to say about this than most people, but I wonder what you would have to say about that?
Well, clearly, ever since 1994… I have become the person who is supposed to be very wise about death and dying. And I don't suppose I'd have any more wisdom about it than many, many, many people, especially clinicians and nurses who've spent a lot of time with people whose outlook is very grim or essentially impossible, but predictable. And to begin with, think about my personal history. Think about the fact that I'm born into a family has had severe trials and tribulations in this country from the point of view of health. By the time I was born, two of my uncles had died of tuberculosis. In New York, my grandfather had died of tuberculosis. There was this aunt who had died in childbirth, another aunt who was dying of late-stage kidney disease, what used to be called Bright's Disease, chronic glomerulonephritis. My mother had had one stillbirth child and another child who died at two and a half, three, something like this, a much-loved and apparently very, very bright child.
 Death was part of the legend and lore of our family, and also my mother. I hadn't been on Earth more than five or six years when I came to the realization that my mother had some sort of illness. I didn't know what it was, and it took some long time for the diagnosis to be made, and took some long time for people to be willing to talk about it, because in the 30s and 40s, you didn't talk about cancer. You just didn't. I saw her hospitalized three, four times during the years from the time I was about five until she died shortly after my eleventh birthday. My father had the chronicity of late-stage syphilis and was going in and out of the hospital all the time with various problems associated with that. My grandmother died at 97, and the first 18 years of my life, I was living in this small, four-room apartment with, among other people, my grandmother and watching her gradually go downhill.
So, I was very familiar with death. I was very familiar with mourning and mourning customs, at least among Jews. I was very familiar with grief, I was very familiar with… sorrow and loss. I was very familiar with the way that you have a whole construction in your life based around the people you truly love, and one of them suddenly disappears. And maybe not just someone you truly love, but someone… whose life… has moulded what your life is, like your mother.

Shakespeare has this lovely term he puts into Macbeth's mouth when Macbeth… not Macbeth, Macduff, when Macduff is telling Macbeth… he… remember, he's not… whoever gets Macbeth, kills Macbeth, should not of woman be born or something. And he says, I wasn't, I was untimely ripped, which meant he was born premature, I guess, but I use that word, untimely ripped, differently. People are untimely ripped away from you. And what do you do?
I had never had any idea that my mother might die, strange as it might seem. And one afternoon, I came home from school. It was a cold, dreary December afternoon, a Tuesday. And I was told, you're not going to Hebrew school today, your mother is too sick. My mother died about three hours later. You know, no one had shared anything with me about how sick she was. I knew she was very sick, but I was used to her being sick. I certainly didn't know that her death was close.
So, all these different ways of death, except accidental death, I had become… pretty familiar with. And it's interesting that it wasn't death I was afraid of. It was disease I was afraid of, because I'd known so many sick people. And somehow, something inside my… still-childish mind when I was a senior in high school and I ticked off college of medicine, made me feel that if I could be the master over disease - I told you how quickly I converted myself into wanting to be a doctor - if I could be the master over disease, disease would not be something I needed to fear, the dangers would go away. And it was like a piece of superstition. You know, it was like carrying an amulet of some kind, that I knew wasn't real, and yet something in me continued with this mythical idea that, as long as I'm its master and can conquer it, it won't get me and it won't get any of the people that I love.

About four years ago… my PSA went up; PSA is so-called prostate-specific antigen, and it's a relatively new test that tells men whether they're in danger of having prostate cancer. There's a certain level it's not supposed to be above, I think it's four, and if it starts going above that level, sometimes you have to have a biopsy of your prostate. So, mine went up to 12, and I had a prostate biopsy, and lo and behold, I had prostate cancer, about four years ago. It didn't bother me one bit, and I'll tell you why. When I was in medical school, Averill Liebow and his colleagues had taught, and this was confirmed in textbooks and still textbooks of today, that if you were to autopsy every man in his 50s, a perfectly healthy man, let's say he dies of cardiac disease, let's say he's in an accident or brain tumour. At age 50, 50% of men would be found to have microscopic cancer in their prostates. At 60, it was 60%. At 70, it was 70%. Well, 70% of men at 70 don't die of prostate cancer. Turns out that about one in five men who gets prostate cancer dies of it. And with the others, it's a slow, indolent thing, and big deal, who cares if it's there or not?
So, I was convinced, based on the fact that this was completely microscopic, couldn't be felt on examination, and the numbers looked pretty good, that I would never hear from my prostate cancer again. I did agree to radiotherapy, reluctantly. I had a course of radiotherapy. I wish I hadn't done it, but I did do it. And so, everything is fine, and my PSA remains at a very low level. And then, about a year ago, it started going up. And so instead of having it once every six months, I was having it once every three months, so I had it four times in this past year. And about six weeks ago, it was found to have risen from .3 to 6, which is in the abnormal range. And I talked to my urologist, and I talked to a very close friend, who had been the chair of urology at Yale, and all three of us agreed it has to mean that there's a recurrence, in spite of the fact my numbers had been good in both of them when I first got the microscopic diagnosis. It said, you know, you're going to live to be 250, you'll never hear from this thing again. I was sure of it, but then my PSA is going up and what else could it be? We all agreed that in spite of all the good stuff I had thought, I had a recurrence of my prostate cancer and I was going to die from it. Because, you know, you have a recurrence, it takes a while, two, three, four, five years, but it gets you. So, for the first time, this man, who was sure who was going to live to 120, because he's special, he's been special since he was three years old, you know, this tremendous egotism…
I guess we all think we're never going to die. We all think there's something special about us. But, you know, I had some pretty special experiences. I wrote a book that won the biggest award… literary award in the United States. I wrote a book that translated, as I said, earlier, into all these languages. I had a great surgical career. You know, I walk around with the title of Professor. I am special, but I'm going to die. Isn't that amazing? I'm not going to live to 120, I'm not going to live to see my three-year-old granddaughter's wedding, I'm not going to continue with this wonderful life I've found as a writer. I'm not going to be there for my wife, who is 18 years, 17, 18 years younger than I, to have all those wonderful years with. And you know something? This surprised me: I didn't get scared and I didn't get worried.

A few years after How We Die came out, I thought to myself, you know, buddy, what situation you've put yourself into? You've got to die as an example to others. You've got to have the good death. You have to be brave, you have to be courageous, you can't keep taking radiotherapy when it's futile. You know, all the things I had argued against in the book. You've got to be an example of the man who is very sensible and very wise about death and dying. And if you get really scared, you're not going to be able to do that.
To my amazement, I wasn't the least bit scared. My concern was that I would worry my wife. And so, they ordered a bone scan for me, to see whether it was in the bones, which would be the most likely place. And during the 10 days it took to schedule it, because there were snow delays, this has been such a snowy winter, and finally, about a week or 10 days later, I got the bone scan. And during all that time, in the midst of it, we took a trip down to Washington because I had to go to a meeting of the Institute of Medicine. I've got two children in Washington, so we spent the weekend with them and our grandchildren. And during all that time, I was perfectly calm about it. In fact, I felt that it was my job to keep my wife all pepped up, and I would, you know, tell my usual corny jokes and puns like I do, and kid around, and have great fun. That's what I wanted to seem to be doing. It turned out the bone scan was negative. So, there's nothing in the bones. There still might be something in my pelvis, and no one's going to treat a lab report. You know, just because my PSA went up, there's no sense whatsoever. And what would they treat me with? Radiation? My bones are already… littered by the results of radiation to my pelvis. Chemotherapy? No, what chemotherapy? In addition to which, chemotherapy isn't great for prostate cancer. So, I've been given this reprieve and I'm back to my usual self. But I was faced with death, and when I was at the Institute of Medicine conference, in the conversation I was having with one of the participants, I said, you know, I already know what I'm going to die from, because I was so sure I was going to die of prostate cancer. Well, I don't know what will kill me. Probably, like every other man who wants to be killed by a jealous husband as he jumps out the window of some woman's bedroom.

Every surgeon has the experience, some surgeons more than others. Maybe it's luck, it could possibly be skill, but in which, all of a sudden, unexpectedly, some imminent disaster doesn't loom, but appears, and it's usually when a large blood vessel is injured, and there's a cascade of blood all over the place.
It's terrifying, but what gets you out of it is several things. One is your experience that you've been in bad situations before, very bad situations before. Maybe they weren't terrifying, but they were very, very, very difficult. And you've gotten out of it. And I always think of all my years of training. You know, everything, all this stuff just comes up in your mind. All your years of training and how good one is technically. But perhaps the most important, and at the least, they second most important thing that goes through your head is you've got to keep everybody calm; if you don't keep everybody calm… this is going to be truly a disaster that's going to end up in the worst possible way.

So, in these situations that I had, I can think of three, in those situations, my primary motive was to keep everybody else calm, so I had to keep myself calm, even if I wasn't calm. And I also know it wasn't going to last long, because either I was going to get hold of this bleeder and control it without injuring other organs, or I wasn't. So, it wasn't going to last long, and I had all this background experience. And I had seen my professors in trouble, too. That's another great thing about a surgical programme that you don't hear much about. One of the great virtues of training in the best academic place you can, is you see the best surgeons in the country get into terrible trouble. You see them make terrible errors of judgement and have to compensate for that. You see them suddenly facing a torrent of blood. You see them hearing an anaesthesiologist suddenly announce, this patient can't tolerate much more. You've got to get this thing done. You know, all this. And you see that they always get out of it. And a true tragic ending is exquisitely rare. So, all those things give you strength, but I think, again, of all of them, it's the necessity to remain calm for the sake of others, because you're the boss. I've been with surgeons during my training years when they fell apart.
I was with the ageing chief of urology… a person who had been a great technical surgeon in his earlier days, but shouldn't have been operating, when he put a clamp… he was taking out a kidney. He put a clamp on the main artery to the kidney, the renal artery, which had so much arteriosclerosis in it that it cracked like a pipe, and all of a sudden, this represents about a quarter of the cardiac output, came zooming out into the air. And he completely lost control of himself, and I was the second assistant, I was an intern. The first assistant was the chief resident, who managed to keep a cool head. And the way we got control of that situation was extraordinary. It became necessary to open the chest and get the major blood vessel, the aorta, put a clamp on that to cut down the blood going through the renal artery, and then eventually it tied off and everything was okay. But we had lost a massive amount of blood by then. The anaesthesiologist had two pints of blood, you know, he's pumping one with each hand, and then they put more up, and then… so when you see people get out of situations like this, it also tells your conscious mind and unconscious mind, you're going to do it, you're going to get out.
But there is something about the necessity to stay calm, or you know everything's going to fail. So those have been the things that have saved me during those times. I once… I was very interested in the spleen, and there was a point in the 60s when splenectomies were being done for many, many patients with Hodgkin's Disease. And it had to do with the method the radiologists were using, therapeutic radiologists, to calculate how much disease was in the body. And so many of these people, with relatively early stage Hodgkin's, were undergoing a splenectomy. And I got to be really, really good at getting a spleen out with minimal derangement of anything around it.

And one day, one evening, we had company at dinner. And I always make rounds in the evening before I came home, but because we had company, I'd come home directly, thinking that when the company left, I'd go back to the hospital and make my evening rounds. And I realized it was getting to be about 8:30, 9:00, they weren't leaving and I excused myself and went to the hospital. I didn't go to the Yale New Haven Hospital, where almost all my patients usually are, I went to the St Raphael's Hospital, which is a Catholic hospital in town, about 500 beds, where I didn't operate often. But I had two patients there.
And I came in through the emergency room entrance, let's say it was 9:00, because I think it was 9:00, and I hear, on the page, the public-address page system, the page operator is saying something I've never, ever heard at any time in my career. I'm in my 40s at this time, late 40s. Any general surgeon come immediately to operating room. Any general surgeon come immediately to operating room. Well, at St Raphael's, the OR was on the seventh floor, and I just scooted up the steps. What was I doing at the hospital at 9:00 at night? Why was I at St Raphael's? The whole thing made no sense. So, I scooted up there, and the chief of gynaecology was the first person I saw. One of the surgeons had been doing… what was he doing? He was doing a hysterectomy or something. Oh no. Oh no, he was doing what he thought was an ectopic pregnancy. That's why it was an emergency. That was why it was going on at 9:00. And when he opened the abdomen, the wound filled with blood and cascaded out over the sides of the wound, and he panicked and called the chief. Put a lot of pads in there, you know, to try to decrease the blood flow. The chief came in and was perplexed, couldn't figure out what it was, and they said we better get a general surgeon. And so, I come in, I'm standing at the door of the OR in my street clothes, and I see those two guys looking distraught over their masks. And the anaesthesiologist is doing this thing, pumping two units of blood, and the blood bank technician is standing there with six more. And I see blood coming out through the sheets, through the pads, falling on the floor, dripping on the floor, and I rushed into the room to change. I didn't scrub, I just put my scrub suit on and they put gloves on me, and to make a long story short, I discovered that this woman had perforated the artery to the spleen. There is a condition that occurs of weakening in that artery in women who have had one child after another. This woman had five children. She was a devout Catholic. She'd had five children. And it's not common. It causes an out-patching called an aneurysm of the splenic artery, and the splenic artery had perforated, and blood was all over the place. And as soon as I recognized it, you know, I was in this situation of sheer terror. But the minute I recognized what it was, I thought, well, this is over. I'll fix that in a second. And I did. You know, I… this is my territory. I own this left upper quadrant to the abdomen. I own it. So, I… you know, I did what needed to be done, and for years afterwards, I would get a poinsettia at Christmas time from that woman. I still see her son from time to time.
And she's still alive. She's probably in her 70s now. She was in her early 40s at the time.

And this is the kind of situation Im talking about, in which the first thing youve got to do is restore order. And you do this authoritatively. You know, the residents at St Raphaels, some of them… of course, the gynaecology residents, didnt even know who I was. The general surgery residents did, but not particularly well, because I didnt do a lot of work there, and so the first thing I had to do was restore authority, namely my authority, which was the way of defusing everybodys panic. And then, of course, the first thing I did, they had an incision from the navel to the pubis, because they were working in the pelvis. I just took a knife and whipped open the rest of the abdomen to here, and thats when I realised the blood was coming out of the left upper quadrant, and then I saw the perforated aneurism. From there on in, it was like riding a sled down a gentle slope. It was very exciting.
And I remember coming home that night. It was 3:00 in the morning by the time I got home, because I got in there, lets say, at about 9:30 and there was a lot of cleaning up of that abdomen to do, and then the usual meticulous closure, and I stayed with her in the intensive care unit until she woke up, and a little bit after that. So, I didnt get home until about 2:30, 3:00. And Ill never forget, when she woke up from the anaesthesia, and there I was, standing at the right side of her bed, she looks up at me and she says, Who are you? Of course, she had no idea who I was. Marge Hanson was her name. Wonderful, wonderful lady.
So, you know, sometimes, even for someone like me, who believes in nothing supernatural, you say, why was I at St Raphaels at that strange hour of the night? Why me, of all people, the guy who loves the spleen, has written articles in the surgical literature on the spleen? Probably done more splenectomies than anybody in our little city of New Haven? Was it her devout Catholicism? Was there some great, magnificent, supernatural charm I was carrying in my hand? Well, you know, it was just coincidence, obviously. But of all the people to be there, what a great thing that it was me.
Well, when I came home, lets say it was 3:00, Sarah was asleep. And shell tell you this, because Ive heard her tell other people. She said: he was beaming. He was standing by the bedside. I woke her up, because I had to tell her about this story. She said, it was if his face was bathed in light. It was the most exciting of many, many, many exciting moments Ive had in the operating room. But thats the end of my talking about serious danger. Because, you know, thats the kind of thing that I mean.

I wrote a book on ageing that was published about four years ago. I had become increasingly interested in the notion of ageing, not because I was ageing, but it had to do with other things I've written about, like the structure and function of the human body and death. And I, of course, had written in my How We Die a chapter on ageing. So, I'd always been interested, increasingly, and I thought, gee, ageing, as I see it, is really an art. It's an art form. There are things that are going to happen to your body that are inevitable, but we now know that there are ways to make your life much more pleasant and easy, much more interesting. And not to lose, necessarily, the powers that most people in their 70s assume they're going to lose in the next 10 years. And gerontologists have done enough research on these things, and done enough studies on large clinical groups of patients that we know they work, so I'm going to write this book called The Art of Ageing, in which I tell people the latest information on brain plasticity, on things like pumping iron and exercise, and other aspects of keeping fit. And I'm going to interweave it with case histories of people that I know who are in their late 70s and on up.
And I did that, and some of the people I knew were famous. Patricia Neal, the actress who had had a stroke, I think, in her late 30s, and recovered from it. And she was at this point in her 80s. Michael DeBakey, probably the greatest surgeon who'd ever lived, was in his late 80s when I interviewed him. I went down to Houston and interviewed him. Plus some very ordinary people who were doing very, very interesting things, or discovered new interests that they were working with. Some of them were very simple interests, some of them were very complex interests. So that was the book, and I loved that book. I felt that it had the flavour of How We Die. It had my voice in it, exactly like I speak. And it was, again, one of those books, when I read the manuscript, I thought, geez, did I really write that? How did I know these things? You know, where did I get this wisdom to be able to write about it?
And the editor of the book, not that he had much editing to do, but the editor of the book was my dream editor, a fellow named Bob Loomis at Random House, someone I had wanted to work with for a long time. And I thought, between this book itself and the power that Random House publicity department will put into it, I think I'm going to have another big book. Not like How We Die, that's a once-in-a-lifetime, but another big book.

It was reviewed in The New York Times by a guy named Epstein. Joseph Epstein. Flashback. Joseph Epstein, for 25 years, had been the editor of the American Scholar. American Scholar is the Phi Beta Kappa, the literary magazine. And I had always read the American Scholar and disappointed in that it was going downhill. The only good essays in it were the essay he wrote in every issue. He wrote it himself, it was a personal essay, very well written, and it got to be that's why people read the magazine, and most of the rest of it was not very well done. So, the executive committee of Phi Beta Kappa fired him, after 25 years. He felt this was his sinecure, they fired him, and they hired a wonderful writer and a brilliant young woman named Anne Fadiman to be the editor. And she got a completely new board of editors and she contacted me, because she had read one or two of my books, and she said, would you be willing, in every issue – there were four issues a year – to write an essay, about 5000 words, that in some way deals with medicine or science?
I said, sure, I'd love to do that. And I titled my series of essays The Uncertain Art, because that's what medicine is to me. We learn how to deal with uncertainty, we have to make compromises very often, but the most important thing is some of our most basic information is really uncertain, and we go with that and we somehow weave it into our decision-making. So, I called it The Uncertain Art.
 And sometimes I would write about medical education, sometimes I would write about pumping iron. Sometimes I would write about medical language, sometimes I wrote about medical books. I wrote a couple of issues, a couple of essays, on acupuncture, which I had experienced in China, actually even operated under… no, I didn't operate, I saw some operations under acupuncture anaesthesia. And it was great fun to work with, Anne was great fun and there was great esprit de corps at editorial board meetings. And after 6 years of enormous success with this journal, a new president came in, and I don't know why he did it, but he fired Anne Fadiman, and half of the editorial board, including moi, resigned as a result.

Now I was the only member of the editorial board who had an essay in each issue, just as Joseph Epstein had had when he was… and Joseph Epstein was known to be a man of significant bitterness, significant resentfulness. For all of his wonderful writing, he was not liked by a lot of people because of these characteristics. And I well remember our first few editorial board meetings, in which Anne Fadiman found it necessary to say how nice he had been to her, because we were all expecting him to explode and treat her very badly, but he'd been nice to her, in spite of his reputation for being a real son of a gun.
So, lo and behold, I write this book. This is after… about two years after Anne was fired, and he is in his mid-70s, Epstein. And of all the people they could have asked to review it, Epstein is given the job of reviewing my book. And of course, he knows exactly who I am, exactly what I've done. He's read my memoir, in which I talk about having changed my name from Nudelman to Nuland and so on. And in his review, he says, it seems to me that two people wrote this book. The cool and calm and wise Dr Nuland and this…whatever… I forget what the adjectives were, Nudelman. And he goes through it paragraph by paragraph, saying Nudelman says this, and making fun of it, ridiculing whatever Nudelman wrote and saying pretty good things about what Nuland wrote. I had recovered from my big depression… let's see, 1974. This was now 2007. So, a long time. More than 30 years. 35 years. It never occurred to me I'd have another depression, because I was so well, I'd been so happy for all those years. I never thought neurotic thoughts, I never thought obsessional thoughts, I never got depressed. I was just terrific, having a great time. I read that review… oh, I didn't read that review, sorry. The phone rang on Wednesday evening. The review was to come out on Sunday. I didn't even know the book had been reviewed, I didn't know who had reviewed it. We don't get our Times book review until Saturday. It's a Sunday review. But we have a friend who subscribes to a special service, and she gets it on Wednesday. Her husband, who is actually my great friend of 30 years, I guy I admire a great deal and work with quite a bit, calls me, and in his thick Hungarian accent, says to me, 'Who is Joseph Epstein?' I said, why? He said, 'He reviewed your book in the New York Times Sunday Book Review and listen to what he said'. And he reads to me all of the paragraphs that begin with Nudelman. I was devastated. I couldn't understand. This is this book I had such high hopes for. Why had he done this? What vicious motive did he have to hold me up to ridicule as this, sort of, fool, Nudelman. And it was as if he brought back the difficulties of my childhood. I hung up the phone, and I know this sounds strange, within 48 hours I was deeply depressed, and soon became obsessional, too.

Everything that had been gone for 35 years came back to me. That was in 2007. It took me two years to recover. I had to have electroshock treatment again, I had to go on - I hadn't had any medication in 35 years – I had to go back on medication. I was hospitalized for brief periods, five, ten days. One was five and one was ten. Twice.
And it looked for a while as if I was never going to get out of this. I don't know what I would have done if… it hadn't been for my wife, Sarah, who stood with me through thick and thin, and a wonderful psychiatrist that had been recommended by some friends of mine who were psychiatrists. Two years I lost, and of course I had lots of speeches, speaking engagements that I had signed up for a year before. They all had to be cancelled. Other obligations had to be cancelled. I couldn't teach this course I teach on the history of scientific medicine. I had been teaching it just about every other year, but I couldn't teach it from 07 until last year. I went back to it last year. Just as bad as the original depression of 35 years before had been. Now, when I got out of it, I was not only my old self, but I was a wiser old self. In the first place, I had learned that it's possible for this to happen again. And now I have to think about that for the rest of my life. So whereas I had been sort of devil-may-care in this attitude about the possibility, in my attitude about the possibility of its coming back, I'm very cautious now. I'm very careful about the amount of obligations I take on. I had been working very, very hard up to that point. You know, anybody who wanted me to talk, I got on the plane and I went and I talked, whether it was for a big fee or whether it was for nothing, just because it was a group that I was interested in doing something with. Well, that's all stopped. I had been working so hard that I really feel I had neglected the previous closeness of my relationships with my children, and actually, even with Sarah, believe it or not. I mean, we always enjoyed each other's company, but I think I had neglected the, sort of, nurturing that we have to do of a relationship all through our lives. I came out of that with new priorities, and my first priority was my family. And work became my second priority, but way down the list. And, you know, all four kids have been telling me in the past few years, and Sarah certainly has told me, that I'm a different person.

I live in the love of my four children and my wife. When I say love, I mean it's the love I feel for them, it's the love they feel for me, and as recently as mid-December, we had a huge party.
We invited – get this – 140 people. It was my 80th birthday and Sarah's not-quite 63rd. She was going to be 63, and on the invitation, we said, this is a party to thank all of the friends who stuck with us through our difficult time.
We had also had a difficult time, because my younger daughter was born with hydrocephalus, and she had had a recurrence about two years before I became depressed, and, you know the warmth of so many people and the goodness of so many people carried us through those two episodes.
So, we invited everybody that we thought were good friends of ours, who had been with us. Even good friends of ours who lived in faraway places, and so many people came. We had a magnificent time. The kids put on a show, the four kids, in which they sang songs. I read a ridiculous poem that I wrote. You know, I write poetry that's so bad it's good. You know, it's funny. It's full of puns and references and so on. Sarah gave a slideshow of our family. And among the invitees were this community from our congregation, about 20 of them. And they had written a song… and sang it for us. It was a glorious, glorious evening, and it was as though… and I said it, in my poem, I began it this way and ended it this way: this is to thank all of you for what you've done for us. Yes. Yes.
And so, it had hit me again, and it changed my value system. That's the end of my depression story.

[Q] It seems sort of redundant to ask you this, doesn't it, because you've touched on it, but so you're 80, and you just think well, what… you know, what kind of a life have I had? What do you say to that?
I've had a wonderful life. I've got four of the best young people… well, two of them are middle-aged now, the other two, Sarah's two, are… one's 29, the other's 26. I've got this great foursome of kids. I can't begin to describe my pure luck in discovering the woman I spent the last 36 years with. Just imagine walking into an examining room and seeing some kid of 26, when I'm in my mid-forties, and just because she looks at the Hippocratic Oath and says, that's not a very good translation, we end up being married for 33 years.
I've not had a boring moment, or even close to a boring moment, in 36 years. We've travelled all over this… well, I shouldn't say all over. Asia, many times to Asia. Many times to Europe, three times to Israel. I mean, we've been… you know, we've been in all these places, we have interesting friends in a lot of places, and this community of friends, not just from the synagogue, but elsewhere. My community of friends from Yale, my community of friends who live in New Haven. And it's been a life without an endpoint, in the sense that each of us feels… I'm sure of it. I'm sure I speak for her when I say this, that we've both got a lot of growing to do, that there's not going to be an end to our growing, except with death. The one thing that is of great concern to me is she is 17 years younger than I, and will probably have to go a long time in widowhood, unless she marries again. You know, my experience with people who marry again is that the people who've had the best first marriage, when a spouse dies, they're the most likely ones to get married again. So maybe she will. She's such a fascinating woman, between her acting and the other various things, and her directing and other things she does, she would be fascinating to any man with any sense. But, you know, while I'm alive, she still tells me, I could never marry another man. Well, who knows?
 

[Q] Well, there's something, you know, that you haven't probably talked about that much.
What's that?
[Q] The power of your father over you and your life.
You know, after I wrote Lost in America,  and I wrote it for myself. I wrote that book because I felt there were  things I would never understand unless I wrote about them. I've talked  about the fact that when I write, I find out what I'm really thinking,  as so many people, so many writers will tell you. When I finished that  book, and it was not a huge bestseller. Even to this day, it's sold, I  think, 29,000 copies, which is pretty good, but, you know, it's not a  huge, big deal. But when I was on the book tour, and even now, when I go  to give a talk, there's always going to be someone who wants to talk  about that book. And I've gotten, of course, many letters about it. But  the most common question I was asked at the beginning, and I'm still  asked from time to time, is, 'Do you forgive your father?' And the first  time someone asked that question, I said, 'Forgiveness has nothing to  do with this'. It's not as if my father deliberately did anything to me.  This is the way he was, he had no control. He had no control over his  syphilis, he had no control over how he must have felt, ridiculed,  debased by all of this, how it must have had some influence on his never  assimilating. It's not a question of forgiving him. Now I understand  him. And I never had understood him before. When I began to write that  book, bit by bit by bit, I understood him more, and I understand him, I  think, very well, to this day. To people… who hear about him without  reading that book, but have just heard… he seems like an ogre. And maybe  he was an ogre, but I never hated my father. I loved my father. He did  me an awful lot of damage. And when I crashed, then I began to recognize  just how bad that damage was, including the fact that when I was  recovering, this wonderful psychiatrist, this young man who would later  finish training and became the person I was seeing, said to me at one  point, you know, you're never really going to get completely better  until you come to terms with your father.
And  that's really why I wrote the book, so I could come to terms with what  he was, how he became that way and why he treated me the way he did, and  his wife, my mother, the way he did, some other people that way. And it  was clear that this was not a bad person. This was not an unloving  person. This was a man who didn't know how to express love. This was a  man who felt so debased by life. Imagine going to a public clinic for  his various syphilitic problems and being treated like dirt, as the way  the clerks and some of the nurses and some of the doctors treated people  in those days. I think one of the major reasons that I feel so strongly  about the need for humanism, humanitarianism, for the milk of human  kindness among physicians, is because of my experiences watching the way  my father was treated, in this really inhuman way. And, you know, ever  since I became a doctor, it's always been my feeling that the greatest  thing I can give to my patients is myself. And that's what I've tried to  do. Who knows how successful I've been, but that's what I've tried to  do.

You know, I've said so many times that when I die, if the Times has an obituary on me, the headline, to my great regret… of course, I'll be dead, will say, author of How We Die. Sherwin Nuland, author of How We Die. That's not my greatest accomplishment. My greatest accomplishment is my family. My second greatest accomplishment is what I have been able to do for sick, sick people for so much of my life, starting when I was a medical student on the wards. I actually do feel that there's something distinctive about my attitude towards sick people, growing out of my experience as a child, that is unique. And it's given me huge gratification. The relationships with patients, the sitting on the side of the bed and talking to patients instead of sitting in a chair or standing at the head of the bed. You know, all of these little things, all the time that I took in my office with patients, rather than rushing anything through. Those personal relationships…
I think in my whole surgical career, I've saved about three lives that other people might not have been able to save just as well. One of them was the woman with the splenic artery aneurism, so it's not that. But I think in my entire career, I've brought something to many, many patients that perhaps other people might not have been able to bring. So that's where I feel my greatest accomplishment has been. So, when that headline is going to say, over my obituary, author of How We Die, that's not what I really want to be remembered for. What I want to be remembered for by the people who knew me, and worked with me, was: be kind, for everyone you meet is fighting a great battle.
