stan.lee

The creative genius of American writer, Stan Lee (1922-2018) brought us 'Spider Man', 'X-Men' and 'The Hulk'. They climbed tall buildings and fought the bad guys, but had normal worries too, about love, acceptance and family. Readers loved them and Marvel Comics, with Lee at the helm, went on to become hugely successful. In 2010 the Stan Lee Foundation was founded to focus on literacy, education and the arts. On January 4, 2011 Lee received the 2428th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

December 28th was a very important date for me, in the year 1922. That's when I was born, on the west side of Manhattan, on 98th Street and West End Avenue. I'm sorry I can't remember any more about my birth, but the next thing I remember I was about five or six years old, and... my parents used to like to take photographs of me. They didn't have a camera but there were always people in the neighborhood — professional photographers. I think you'd pay them a dime at that time, and they… they would have a little pony with them, and they'd put the little kid on the pony, and take his photo, and give the photo to the mother. So I have... I seem to remember I had more photos of myself taken on ponies, and she would sometimes dress me in a sailor suit or something and take pictures of me. I think she wanted me to be an actor, I'm not sure. But anyway, I had a fairly normal childhood, I guess. We didn't have any money. It was during the Depression. My father who, was a great guy but he had trouble getting a job, and so he was unemployed most of the time. My earliest memories are just him sitting home reading the want ads in the newspaper, time and again. He had been a dress cutter, and there were just no jobs apparently for dress cutters.
So we lived... after a while we moved to, I think, the Bronx in New York, and... It was funny because I remember that the... we lived in a little apartment house on University Avenue and 175th Street, and the women in those days — the mothers — would have little wooden folding chairs, and they'd come outside with their children, and they would all sit in front of the building on their little folding chairs, and talk to each other and gossip while they were watching the children play. And when I think back, it was very strange 'cause, when I was eight, nine, 10 years old, whatever it was, I used to roller skate and ride a bike, and we never wore helmets or knee pads or elbow things or... we just rode our bikes, and we skated. And if we fell, we bruised ourselves and put some bandage on, and went back and skated some more. When I see people today riding a bicycle with these dumb-looking helmets, and kids roller skating covered up with things that... every part of their body is covered up so that, no matter where they fall, that part is protected, it's just very funny to me. We also played... we played hockey in the street when the traffic wasn't there. We played hockey on roller skates, and on the side street which had very little traffic we chose up teams, and we were always skating back and forth, and hitting the puck. And there would be somebody stationed at the top of the street so if a car came, he'd yell ‘Hey hey! Car coming’. And we'd stop playing for a minute. The one luxury that I missed... I never had a bicycle until I was, I don't know, maybe 10 or 11 or 12... I'm not good at dates or things... but the one thing I wanted was a bicycle, and finally my folks scraped up enough money and they bought me this two-wheeler. And man, I felt as though I had been freed ‘cause now I could go anywhere on that bike. I could ride downtown; I could go across town ‘cause… obviously, we didn't have a car. Fact is, I think back, we didn't have a telephone either. I never missed it because we were used to not having a telephone. I don't think I knew anybody who had a telephone so we didn't know what we were missing.

And then I became a teenager, and I went to high school, and I went to DeWitt Clinton High School. Unfortunately for me it was an all boy high school. It was stupid of me. But anyway I enjoyed it, and I met a lot of... well, I didn't really meet that many people but, there was one guy I remember named John J McKenna junior, and he would come to the class and he was selling The New York Times — he sold subscriptions — and the teachers allowed him to come to the classes and to speak to the class and solicit subscriptions to The New York Times, because the teachers were eager for the students to read newspapers. And I marveled at the way this fellow John McKenna, who was a senior; he was one class above me, the way he could speak so confidently with no embarrassment to the class. And he was really a good salesman. I remember I bought a subscription, and I thought, boy, I would love to be able to get up in front of the public and talk the way he did. He was my hero. And if this was a movie, this would be a dramatic incident because the next year, I... I got the same job as he had, only for another newspaper called the Herald Tribune. At that time there were two big papers in New York, The Times and The Tribune. And I walked around making speeches for The Tribune, and I always... for some reason I always remember John J McKenna junior, who didn't know I'm alive, and if he's still around and hears this he'll say, where the hell did he come from? But anyway, that's, that's about the big thing I remember. My high school years were very uneventful. I think I did some writing for the school magazine, The Magpie, and one time I... the men were painting The Magpie... The Magpie offices, and the offices were like that. It was up in the tower of the building and the ceiling was… came to a point. It was very high up. And one of the painters had left a high ladder going up to the ceiling, and — I don't know why I did this, I must have been crazy — but when nobody was around, I climbed up the ladder and wrote, Stanley is God. Which was a very stupid thing to do. Now for all I know it's still there. I don't know if they've ever repainted it, or if anybody knows… nobody would see it, it's a mile high. And then I became a human being after I left school.

As I mentioned, we really didn't have much money, and even while I was in high school I did some part-time jobs to help bring in some money. There was a drug store in Radio City — Rockefeller Center — called... I think it was called Jack May's Pharmacy... and… I delivered lunches. I would work there and, I was... he had about four or five delivery boys. I was one of them and we'd deliver lunches to all the offices in Radio City. I never... it was called Radio City, it was also called Rockefeller Center, so the two names are synonymous. But at any rate, I made more money than anybody because you really made your money in tips. And I never could understand the other guys delivering lunches. They'd walk slowly, and stop and look in store windows, and talk. Me, I ran. I would run from office to office, and back to the drug store, and back to the office, 'cause I wanted all the tip money I could get. So I was like the highest earner of the Jack May Pharmacy delivery men. And then I finally graduated high school, and I got a job working for a trouser manufacturer. The second largest trouser manufacturer in the world, I was told. They had a lot of different names. The main name was H Lissner and Son, and they had a lot of other subsidiary names. And it was really awful, they paid me very little — I was an office boy — and I was paid from 9:00 till 5:00, but at 7:30 in the morning I had to be at the main post office to pick up a huge bag of mail, and I had to lug it through the street. The post office was on 34th and 8th Avenue, the office was on 27th Street and Broadway. I had to carry it on my shoulder all that way — they wouldn't give me money for a taxi — all that way, so I'd get to the office by 9:00. And that was when they started paying me, so from 7:00 or 7:30 in the morning I didn't get paid, lugging the mail. And there was another office boy too, and they never bothered to learn our names. The offices were filled with salesmen, each had a little cubby hole, and when they would want something... if they'd want more ink for their... you know we used pens and inks in those... if they'd want a new pen point, or a pencil, they… any one of them would yell, ’Boy!’. And whichever one of the two of us was closest to him had to come running and get him what he wanted.
So I had that job for a few months, and I resented the fact that I was only known as ‘boy’, as was the other guy. And again, I think I worked a lot harder than he did. Every time I heard the word ‘boy’, I would race, and I'd get there first no matter where I had been in the office. However, a few days before Christmas they decided they could only afford one office boy, and since they never got to learn our names they didn't know one of us from the other. I was the one who was fired because the other 'boy' had been working there longer than me. So I was the newest guy, they let me go and man, I was so angry. Few days before Christmas: ‘Sorry, you're fired’. So they used to have what they called cutting tickets. For every pair of trousers they had a big ticket. Long, and heavy cardboard. It was flexible, but it was the next thing to cardboard, and it had all the information about the pair of trousers, the size, the weight, the material, everything. And these things were filed in boxes that looked like coffins 'cause they were that big, and it was my job to file them. And I came home every night; my fingers were bleeding because trying to squeeze those heavy things into the coffin things… I was cutting myself. So I was so mad when I was fired that at night, when nobody was there, I turned a few of those coffins over and scattered those boards all over. And I thought well, let the other boy fix them up. And I left, and that was the revenge of Stan Lee.

After Jack May when I was delivering lunches, I got a job as an usher at the Paramount Theater. No, I'm sorry, at the Rivoli Theater in New York. And in those days, the Rivoli was a big, high-class movie house. People wore shirts and ties just to... and suits... just to go and see the movie. Well again, in those days being an usher at a big Broadway theater was almost like being a West Pointer. You were hired for your height. I was six feet so that got me in, and I was fairly slim. I was always skinny. But every morning they would inspect you, and your uniform, and it was a real big deal. And there was one thing… there were six aisles I think, so there were six ushers. When someone came in and… you were supposed to try to get them to come down your aisle. So there was a gesture you had to use. It took me a few… little while to learn it. You had to go like this, ‘This way please’. And it always had to be like that. You went like that to catch their attention, then you went, ‘This way please’. Well, the first week I kept hitting myself in the chin, because it's not easy to do. This way, this way. And after a while I learned how to do it so my hand just missed my chin. I was one of the best. This way… now I just did it again. This way please move that they had. Anyway, one day Mrs Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the wife of the President, was supposed to come to the theater, and everybody was so excited. We learned in advance she was coming. The Secret Service came and checked everything out, and all of us were standing in our aisles wondering who's aisle she'd come down. Came down my aisle. And I wanted to make an impression, and I didn't know what to say. I said, ‘This way please Madam President’. And then I realized I shouldn't have said Madam President… but I didn't… she didn't care. So I started leading her down the aisle, and I'm holding the flashlight, and I had my shoulders back and my head high. I figured I looked just like Errol Flynn, and I'm walking down the aisle… and I tripped over somebody's foot that was sticking out in the aisle, because my head was so high I wasn't looking down. Tripped and fell right on my face. The next thing I knew, Mrs Roosevelt had me by the shoulders and was trying to lift me up. ‘Are you all right, son?’. Oh, I was so embarrassed. But that was my first touch with greatness, and when I encountered somebody important.

I had an uncle named Robbie Solomon, and he worked for a publisher named Martin Goodman. I never exactly knew what Robbie did, but he had something to do with the office. And he told me that at that publishing company, which was called Magazine Management, they were looking for an… an assistant, somebody… they needed somebody for a job. And I figured, gee, I'm going to apply. So I went up there and I found out they also published comic books. They had an outfit called Timely Comics, which was under Magazine Management, and that's where they needed the assistant. There were two guys, Joe Simon and Jack Kirby, who were sort of running the thing. Joe was the editor, a writer and an artist. Jack was an artist mainly, although he wrote also, but Joe was the senior member. And they hired me to run errands, to proofread, to fill the inkwell… whatever had to be done. And I didn't really have any intention, or desire, or I was unaware that I'd ever be working in comics, but it was a job, and since I had wanted to be a writer I felt, well I'll stay here and get some experience, and then after a while I'll get out into the real world. So I stayed there and after a little while they had me checking the spelling, and the proofreading, and I would make a suggestion. Maybe you ought to have them say this instead of say that in the dialogue balloon, and they trusted me to write a story or two. And then I became a staff writer, one of… the only staff writer, 'cause I was the only guy on staff. They were buying some stories freelance, those that they weren't writing themselves. And… let me see, I stayed there for a while and it… it was kind of fun, writing those silly stories. And then Joe and Jack for some reason were fired. I can't even remember why, that something came up with them and… and Martin Goodman, the publisher. Now Martin was related to me in this way; he had married a cousin of mine, whom I didn't really know that… we weren't good friends. But because of that, he was my cousin-in-law. At any rate, when Joe and Jack left I was the only guy left in the department, and I was 17 or 17 and a half, I don't know. And Martin said to me: ‘Listen, I have to hire another editor. You think you can hold down the job until I get one?’ Well, when you're 17 years old what do you know? I said, ‘Sure I can do it’. And that was it. I became the editor and I think he forgot to hire somebody, because I remained the editor. So I was the editor, and I made myself the head writer, and I was also the art director because the editor is the guy who tells the artist how to draw. So at 17 I was really running the place, and since I was my own writer and my own editor, and I'm my biggest fan — I love everything I write — I didn't have much to change so I was able to get these stories moving very fast. There wasn't much editing required.
[Q] What sort of stories were you writing then? Which ones were they?
And of course the stories I was doing were comic book stories. The main character we had was Captain America, and we also had The Human Torch and The Submariner and The Patriarch and The Angel and The Destroyer and... I didn't make up Captain America, The Human Torch or The Submariner or The Angel. I made up a lot of the other characters that came along, I don't even remember the names. One of mine I think was The Destroyer, and I… Father Time, I think I made that up and… I don't know what happened to those strips after a while, they just died out. But I stayed at that job for years.

Some time while I was working in the comics — which I was doing most of my life — it got very confusing because… oh, and I got married, but I'll get back to that. But my wife and I were Mr and Mrs Stanley Martin Lieber, which was my name. But I was writing under the name Stan Lee, and after a while more people knew me as Stan Lee. And when credit cards came out we had credit cards in the name of Stanley Lieber, and yet we'd go to a store and, ‘Hello Mr Lee, how are you?’ and I'd give the credit card, ‘Lieber? Is this your card?’. Or sometimes we'd go somewhere, we had charge accounts in the name of Lee, some of them were in the name of Lieber. We'd go somewhere and, a new store, and they'd say, ‘What's your name?’, I'd say, ‘Lee’, and they'd look it up and they'd say, ‘Oh no, the account is in the name of Lieber’, and they'd think I was a crook. We decided it would be easier to just have one name, and since I was known better as Stan Lee, to make our lives simple I legally changed my name to Stan Lee. Which is really a stupid name. I mean, I love Stanley Martin Lieber. I should have run for… for public office with a name like that. But anyway, that's how I became Stan Lee.

World War II broke out and I… like an idiot, I volunteered. I wanted to be a hero. But I never got overseas, I… I enlisted and they put me in the Signal Corps, and I trained to be one of these fellows that goes ahead of the troops and fixes the wires for communication. I trained… I learned how to climb telegraph poles, and string wires, and put them ahead so they had radio communications… Whatever. I don't even remember what it was, but I was real good at climbing telegraph poles. And I was supposed to do that, and then they found out I had written comics, and apparently they needed somebody. They had an outfit — don't remember the exact name — but they produced training films for the army, and there were a lot of big people there. William Saroyan was one of the people who wrote training films. Frank Capra. And others, I… a fellow named Ivan Goff who wrote the James Cagney movie White Heat — really big writers. I was the token nobody who was in that group; I think there were nine of us. I was the only one who came from comic books.
But anyway, there again, I love to write but I hate to write. I love to dream up stories but actually sitting down and writing them is a bore, 'cause I'm trying to catch up to myself. I've already decided what the story is in my mind, so when I sit and write it, it's like I'm repeating myself. I've already been through this, and I hate doing this. So I don't really like the physical part of writing, and because of that I write very, very quickly 'cause I want to get through with it fast. Also, I had to write quickly when I was doing the comics 'cause we had a huge schedule. So when I was in the film department, the… it was stationed in Astoria, Long Island in New York. That's where they had their film division. While I was there I wrote faster than anybody else, and one day the fellow in charge — who was either a major or a colonel, I don't recall — he said… I was still Lieber then… he said, ‘Sergeant Lieber’… was I a sergeant? I became a sergeant at some point, I don't remember if I was a sergeant then, but he said, ‘Sergeant Lieber, can you slow down a little?’ I said, ‘What do you mean?’ He said, ‘Don't write so fast’. So I figured he was going to say what I'm writing isn't good, and he said… I said, ‘Why?' He said, ‘You're making the other guys look bad. You're turning out your films in a few days, it's taking them weeks. It's bad on the records’. I thought to myself, I'm making Saroyan and Frank Capra look bad? But anyway, I slowed down. Then after a while I got shipped to other posts where they needed training films written. I also did cartoons. I did — I think — a world famous cartoon. Let's see, how can I explain this nicely? There were troops that were being sent overseas, and the enlisted men were getting venereal disease because they had carnal knowledge of some of the women over there. And they had what they called pro stations — prophylaxis stations. The men were supposed to go to these pro stations after they had spent a night with a woman, and in these pro stations, they were disinfected in a very painful way that I will not go in to now. But at any rate, I was asked to do a poster to remind the troops to go to a pro station after a night of bliss with a young lady. Well, how do you do a poster like that? So I finally figured it out. Each pro station had a little… I think a green light over the door. That's how you identified them. So I drew a little door with a green light over it, and I drew a little soldier — a cartoon character — walking in to the door, and he's like this: ‘VD? Not me’… as he walks in. And that was the whole thing, the soldier like that with the dialogue balloon over his head. ‘VD? Not me’. They must have printed 100 trillion of those. They were distributed all over, and I think I probably won the war single-handedly by doing that.

While I was in the service, since I was stationed in the States, I had some free time, so I still was writing some stories for the comic book company. The editor there would… the fellow I replaced… who replaced me… I appointed a fellow named Vince Fago to be the editor while I was gone. He would send me an assignment like: ‘Stan, could you write a 10-page Captain America story for us? We need it in two days’. And I would write it at night. So one day I was told… either he phoned me or wrote to me, I don't know… that he'd be sending me a little request for a story. I should get it by Friday or Saturday, and he needed it by the next Monday or Tuesday. Well, Friday came around and Saturday came around and there was no…no letter from him, and I knew this guy was infallible. So I went to the mail person and I said, ‘Hey, is there a letter for me? Did you lose it or something?’ He said ‘No, there's no letter’ and he was reading a copy of Playboy. He didn't care. So I passed the mail room and I could look through the window. The mail room was always locked, but I looked through the window, and they had these little slots. Each one was a different letter, all the mail for a guy beginning with A was in this cubicle, and B… and then the Ls, I could see there was an envelope lying there, and I could recognize the return address, you know… it said, so-and-so Comics on it. I knew that was my letter. I said, ‘Hey, my letter is in there. They forgot to give it to me’. And this guy said, ’Well, I'm sorry. It's closed now; you've got to wait till Monday’. I said, ’I can't wait till Monday, it's an assignment. I've got to write the story’. So I said, ‘I tell you what. I'm going to just open the thing and take it, okay?’, he said, ‘Ah do what you want’. He kept reading. So it was easy enough, the thing was locked but there was a hinge with the lock, and I just took a screwdriver. I took the hinge off, opened the lock… the lock was closed… I opened the hinge, opened the door, got my letter, put the hinge back, screwed it up again, wrote the story, mailed it, and a few days later… there was a captain who hated me, I think it was because I drove around the post in a Buick convertible that I had bought with some money I made from some stories I had written. And it was a very jazzy… it was a four-door convertible Phaeton. I had bought it second-hand but it was gorgeous. And I had a lot of girlfriends on the post, so I would drive them around and I think the Captain resented that. But any rate, he called me in. He said, ‘Sergeant Lieber, you're going to Leavenworth’. I said, ‘What are you talking about?’; he said, ‘You robbed the mail’. Anyway, this could have been a very serious thing. I was stupid; I didn't know you're not supposed to unhook the… I said, ‘I told the guy I was going to do it’. He said, ‘That's no excuse’. So luckily, this was after I had done that poster about ‘VD, not me’. And I had also written a few other films that were very well received, and the colonel of the post had gotten recognition because of that and he wanted to make General. And I was friends with a few other officers 'cause, I was in sort of a special category. Whatever post I was at, I was the only guy who was classified as a screenwriter, you know, and they were impressed with me so I hung around with the officers quite a lot. You weren't supposed to fraternize with officers so, I would wear a sweater like this where my stripes didn't show, and they would wear sweaters where their bars, or oak leaves, didn't show, and we were like a few guys out together. So we got very friendly. So anyway, this Captain was later told if he makes an issue of this thing about me opening the mail, the next thing he would be a Captain of some post at the North Pole or something. So he dropped the whole thing and… luckily, because I was friendly with these higher-ups. If not for that I… you'd be doing this interview in Leavenworth, I'd probably have gotten a life sentence. So that was some… I mean, there were so many things that happened in the army. But I… I another funny thing I thought was when finally the war was over and we were going to be discharged we received orientation lectures so that we'd be able to go back to civilian life, to make it easy, the transition from army life to civilian. I said to myself, what is this? The minute I take this uniform off, I'm a civilian. I don't need instructions.

I had a furlough once, and I was stationed at Fort Harrison in Indianapolis at that time, and I wanted to drive from the Fort to my home in New York. And I had an old… that time was before I had my Buick, I had an old, beat-up Plymouth that I had bought third-hand. And as I'm driving along in Chillicothe, Ohio, I got a flat tire. The tire just went bad. Now in those days you couldn't get tires. Rubber was rationed because of the war, and you had to know somebody who was high up on the tire rationing board to get a tire. I figured I'm stuck here all my life. But I met a girl in Chillicothe while I was wondering what to do, and it turned out her father was the head of the tire rationing board. So I was able to get the tire and I went home on my furlough, and I've always had a warm spot in my heart for Chillicothe, Ohio. Whenever I have to write the name of a small town in any story, it's always Chillicothe, Ohio.

After the army I went back to the comic book company, started doing what I had been doing all the time. And then I guess the next important thing was… my marriage. Oh, I should mention though, when I was young I did have a brother… I do have a brother who was born nine years after me. Name is Larry. He kept the name Lieber, so he's Larry David Lieber. And he's a great guy but unfortunately I was nine years older, so it was tough to pal around with him. When he was five, I was 14 and so forth, and as he was getting to be a teenager I was in the army so I never got to know him that well, which is a shame. I wish there hadn't been as much time lapse between us. And I'll get back to Larry later. So, I wanted to get married. I loved girls, I loved dating, I was having a good time. When I got out of the army I took a… 'cause I was making a few bucks at Marvel — it wasn't called Marvel then, it was called Timely Comics — but I… I took a hotel suite. There was a hotel on Broadway called The Alamac, and the hotel suite… it wasn't as fancy as it sounded. It wasn't an expensive hotel but I… I took two rooms instead of renting an apartment, 'cause I figured that maid service, I don't have to clean up and so forth. And I lived at the hotel for a while, and I remember I met a girl. I was coming down in the elevator and there was this gorgeous blond in the elevator. Oh, she was really beautiful, and she was carrying a box that said, Saks Fifth Avenue — the department store. She got out of the elevator. I thought I'd follow her a little bit, and I followed her all the way to Saks. She was exchanging the box, and we started talking. She noticed me following her. And I said, ‘Gee, I'm at the same hotel and do you live there?’; ‘Yeah I do’, blah, blah, blah. We talked. And I thought gee, I'm making a conquest and this is incredible. This is the most beautiful girl in New York and I'm doing pretty well with her. And after she exchanged the fur piece or whatever she was carrying, she went back to the hotel. I went with her and she said, ‘Would you like to come up to my room?’… and I thought, I've done well with girls before but never this well. Anyway, it turned out that she was a very expensive call-girl. So I wasn't as good as I had thought. But we did become very friendly, and after a while she would sometimes knock on my door — three o'clock in the morning after a date — and she said, ‘Stan, can I stay with you? I'm all mixed-up and I had a lousy evening. I just want to talk’. And after a while, we had… it was like a brother-sister relationship. We became friends, and I learned more about sex from the stories she would tell me, about the things that men asked her to do. Things I never knew were possible. And it was incredible. I got really some education from that girl. Well, later on, I… I said to myself, I'm dating a lot, taking all these girls out and I'm trying to impress them, and spending money on them, and it doesn't mean anything, 'cause after a few weeks, I'm with a new girl, and I'm starting all over again. And if this were my wife and I was exuding all this charm and personality, I'd be building something. It would lead… it would be good but I'm wasting it just on girls that I'll never see again after a while. So I really wanted to get married. Couldn't find anybody that seemed right.

One day… I had a cousin named Morty Feldman, and he was in the hat business. And he work… he was connected with a company, I forget the name of it but they were on Fifth Avenue and 48th Street. And he said there was a model — a hat model — at this place named Betty, and he thought I'd really like her, and she might like me and… he told her about me and would I go and see her so I said: ‘Fine’. And I went up to this place… now I might add, when I was a kid I used to draw pictures of girls. Most guys who think they can draw, draw pretty girls, and there was one face I always drew. To me, it was the ideal, gorgeous-looking girl's face. So I went up to this hat model place, and somebody opened the door — a model — and I took one look at her and it was the face I had always been drawing. I couldn't believe it. On top of that she said: ‘Hello. May I help you?’ and she had this beautiful English accent, and I'm a real anglophile. I mean an English accent knocks me out. So there was the face I had always drawn, there was an English accent, and she was gorgeous. And I think I said something like: ‘I love you’. I don't remember but it… I didn't know what to say or do, I was knocked out. So I took her out to lunch. I never did meet Betty; I mean this was not Betty. Her name was Joan. And it was really on my part, love at first sight. I found out she was married; she had been married a very short time. In England, she had broken up with a guy she thought she liked and on a rebound she married some American army officer. Then she came over here to stay with his family while he did what he did overseas. When she got here she realized she had made a mistake, she didn't even know the guy and why had she married him? Just to show the other guy, who she had since forgotten about.
To make a long story short, I took her to Reno… I… I sent her to Reno, 'cause in those days you could get a quickie divorce in Reno in 6 weeks. And she said she'd marry me. So off she went to Reno, and I was so happy. And she wrote me a letter once a week, and every letter said, ‘Dear Stan’, ‘Dear Stan’. On the fifth week it said: ‘Dear Jack’. Now I'm not the brightest guy in the world, but I said to myself, I think I'd better fly to Reno. And it's funny, everything in my life… we're never going to get finished because everything leads to a story, but in order to fly to Reno… I had never really flown commercially, I flew in army planes but… I went to a ticket office somewhere and I said, ‘Give me a ticket on the first plane to Reno’, which was a stupid thing to say. I should have said, a plane that will get to Reno the fastest. But the first plane leaving for Reno was a local that took three stops to get out of New York State. And it took me like twenty four hours to get there. Anyway, I finally got there. I told her I was coming and there she was, waiting at the station. But there's a lot of guys with her and they all looked like John Wayne, especially one real big, handsome guy in jeans and a leather jacket, and a sombrero, and boots and a half a day’s growth of beard; I mean, you'd have cast this guy as the hero in any western. And I get off the plane from New York, and I'm wearing a little pork-pie hat, and I got my gloves on 'cause it had been cold in the city, and a little scarf neatly tied, and a suit… and I could just picture how I looked next to John Wayne standing over there, who had apparently been trying to romance her all these six weeks. And Joanie said, ‘Stan, when I saw you get off the plane I thought, what am I getting into?’
Anyway, by some miracle I got her to stay with me and we went to a judge in Reno, and he divorced her in one room and then he let us in to the next room where he performed his marriages, through a little door. So he married us. So finally I had made that… I had beaten John Wayne. But we needed witnesses, so there was another couple, so Joan and I and this other couple… we were all kind of tearful and melodramatic, this was a big moment; we had gotten married. And we said to the other couple, ’Would you be our witnesses?’ and they said, ‘Yes, would you be our witnesses?’. And it was such a bonding moment. And after the ceremonies we said: ‘Every year, no matter where we are, anywhere in the world, the four of us will get together and commemorate this moment’. And then Joan and I went back to New York. God knows where they went. We forgot all about them 24 hours later. We never heard from them again. I don't know who they are, they don't know who we are, and that was our marriage.

We got a little apartment in New York on 94th Street and… between 5th and Madison Avenue. It was gorgeous. It was a walk-up in a brownstone, and the bathroom… it had a terrace which was lovely, and the bathroom was the biggest room in the house. It had a skylight, and we used to say we ought to entertain in the bathroom with the skylight, it was so dramatic. The living room was tiny, the bedroom was even smaller, but it was our pad. And then we met our first celebrities. Downstairs there was an antique shop on Madison Avenue — was it Lexington? it was Madison Avenue – and in those days men wore hats, and one of the biggest hat companies was called Adam Hats. And there was a television commercial where two people — a man and a woman — sang a song, and the woman would sing, ‘I go for a man who wears an Adam hat. I go for a man who wears an Adam hat’. And everybody in America knew that… it was the biggest commercial. I go for a man who wears an Adam hat. The people who did the commercial were called Lanny and Ginger Gray, and they owned the little antique store that was right on our block, and we got to know them. And we were so impressed, they were our first celebrity friends.
Anyway, we stayed there for a year or two, and then we got pregnant… Joan got pregnant and we decided we ought to move somewhere to a house to have the baby, and we moved to Long Island. And Joan needed… she was little reluctant. She said, ‘But Stan, we know everybody here. I know the cleaning woman, and I know the drug store, and I know the… we're friends with so many people’. And I said, ’Honey, someone like you makes friends wherever you go’. And we moved to Long Island and sure enough, she never said that again because she, she's the greatest. I mean, she's the most popular female I've ever known. Beautiful as she is, women like her as much as men which is unusual, because when we lived in the suburbs when we moved to Long Island, all the men, all the other husbands, would always gather around her at parties. And you'd think the women would be annoyed or jealous but they all knew her, and they knew that they didn't have to worry about her. She's an incredible woman. Anyway, so we moved there. We got a little house in Woodmere and little Joan was… we're so vain. We decided to name our daughter Joan, and if we had had a son we'd have called him Stan. In fact, we did have another baby – a girl – we couldn't call her Stan so we called her Jan, but unfortunately she died a few hours after she was born and Joan couldn't have any other kids, which was awful because we spoiled… we spoiled Joan rotten. But after a while we called her JC because my daughter's name — our daughter's name— was Joan C Lee, the C standing for Celia which was my mother's name. And Joanie was Joan B Lee, her middle name, her original… her… what do you call it? The name her parents had? Her maiden name was Boocock so she was Joan Boocock Lee. It's taken me a long time to say that without blushing, but apparently it's a very nice name in England. And so we had a daughter, Joan C Lee, and we lived there… then we moved to another house. We always bought the cheapest house in the best neighborhood because to me, the important thing is living in the right place, and we bought this house that had been like, a gardener's cottage for a big estate in a place called Hewlett Harbor. It had two acres and… oh God, it was gorgeous, and we could just barely afford it. All the other houses were mansions. And we made… we stayed there for about 25 years. Joan grew up. We had a million dogs... I… we love dogs, and I… This is a funny thing too. We had Shepherds, and we had Dobermen — I never know if you say Dobermen or Dobermans — but we had more than one Doberman and we had Boxers, I think we had… we had Rottweilers — big dogs. At one time we had two Shepherds, a white one and a black one, and I used to – one was Simba and one was Blackie – and I used to walk them on a short leash, and I held both leashes in one hand, and I'd walk them like that down the street. And oh, I felt so macho, controlling those two killer dogs. They weren't killer dogs at all. I mean Blackie, I'll never forget when Joanie… little Joan, was six… was three years old, she… I was looking out of the window once and she was playing on the lawn. It was a huge lawn and there was a road behind there, and hedges. She was walking toward the road and she started to go through the hedges. And I started to run out to stop her but Blackie, who had been there, saw her first and this German Shepherd that had never been trained, ran after Joanie, grabbed her skirt and gently pulled her back and wouldn't let her go on the road. Oh man, did that dog win my heart. You know, I never forgot that. But at any rate, we always had these big dogs. Now we live in Los Angeles on a place that's about a half an acre — very little land — and we have nothing but little dogs, thanks to my wife who has now… we have a Yorkie, we have a few Chihuahuas, we have a little stupid cat… little things. And they have names like Winkydink, and… me, who used to own Blackie and Simba. Now I have to say, here Winkydink, here Eloise… I mean, it's very, very embarrassing.

I was writing almost all… almost all the stories at what was now Marvel Comics — changed our name to Marvel — and I remember, I said to Joanie: ’You know, I can't keep up with the work. I'm the editor, the art director, I'm the writer. I'm working seven days a week. It's driving me crazy. I'm going to tell Martin — the publisher Martin Goodman — I'm going to tell Martin I've got to have a day off, like Wednesday, so I could stay home and write when the phone won't ring and there won't be people coming to see me’. She said, ‘But you're getting a salary. You can't… he won't pay you a whole week pay if… for only four days' work’. I said, ‘I've got to ask him anyway’. And anyway, he agreed. So for quite a while I didn't go to the office on Wednesday, but then I still couldn't keep up with the work there was too much of it. I said, ‘I'm going to ask him Joanie, if I can have Tuesday and Thursday off’. She said, ‘Stan, don't you dare do that I would be so embarrassed. How can you say, I want Tuesday and Thursday off?’; I said, ‘Honey, I've got to do it, you know’. He gave me Tuesday and Thursday off. To make a long story short, I ended up… I decided I was only going to go to the office two days a week and I had Monday, Wednesday and Friday off when I would stay home and write. And it was the only way I would turn out almost a hundred magazines a month. And I used to joke about it. I said: ‘I'm able to do it because I'm the editor and I love the stories I write so there isn't much editing to do’. So anyway, I was working that time… and very often the artist would draw the strips… and a lot of them lived in Long Island, they'd come to my house and we'd go over it, and it was wonderful.

We wanted a swimming pool. We couldn't afford a real swimming pool but Joanie who… is the world's greatest decorator; I mean she's got fabulous taste. She bought a little plastic pool, one of these little round made-out-of plastic things that sit above the ground. Wasn't very big, it might have been, I don't know, 10 feet across. But instead of leaving it sit in the ground, she had some people come over and dig a big hole, and we put the thing in the ground, and then she put rocks and greenery and plants all around it, and if you've ever seen any of the old Tarzan movies, it looked like that thing he always used to dive into from a cliff, these natural lagoons. it was gorgeous. And all our friends and neighbors from the mansions around us used to come to our place to hang around this little lagoon. And it was great, 'cause I could swim from one side to the other with one stroke, it was only that big. So I'd go to the office and I'd say, ‘Yeah, I had a swim the other day’. ‘Really?’ Did… ‘Oh, I did about 300 laps’. Yeah, I was a big phony.

While I was working for Marvel, the first 20 years or so I was just doing regular comics. Then after a while I really wanted to quit, 'cause I felt while Martin Goodman was a great guy and a good publisher, I didn't like really what he wanted me to do. He kept… he… he felt comics were just for young kids or stupid adults, and he used to say to me: ‘Remember Stan, don't use words of more than two syllables, don't have too much dialogue. Get a lot of action and don't worry about characterization’. And that was fine. I was doing it and the books were doing well, and I had a steady job, but it wasn't satisfying, 'cause I really think of myself as a reasonably good writer. I like to write. So I really wanted to quit and to try something else, and I remember Joan said to me: ‘You know Stan, if you want to quit, before you do why don't you do one book the way you would like to do it. The worst that happens is Martin will fire you, and so what? You want to quit anyway’.
So coincidentally, at that time he had found out that our competitor, DC Comics — which called itself National Comics in those days — they had done a book called The Justice League of America — a group of superheroes — and it was selling very well. And he said to me: ‘Stan, why don't you do a book about a group of superheroes’. So I figured this is my chance to do it my way. So I came up with something I called The Fantastic Four about four superheroes, but instead of making them heroes who wore costumes I figured, I'm not going to give them costumes, 'cause I always felt if I had a superpower, why would I want to put on a costume? First of all, I'm too much of a show off. I'd want everybody to know it's me I would never wear a mask. And why would I need a costume? If I could jump over a building, I don't have to wear a colorful costume I'll just jump over the building. At any rate, I didn't give them costumes and I tried to make them real characters living in the real world. The hero wasn't just a perfect guy; he was a fellow like me. He talks too much. He's a scientist — quite boring — he was always boring the others 'cause when he explained anything he went on forever, and one of the other guys was always saying, ‘Will you shut up’. And the obligatory teenager in the group, instead of just… like Robin with Batman who just runs around and fights the bad guys with him, I made this teenager a guy who didn't want to be a super hero particularly. He wanted… he was like I would have been when I was a teenager. He wanted to go out with girls and ride a sports car and so forth. And the… and the girl, instead of an obligatory female who always has to be rescued and doesn't know who the hero really is, she was the hero's fiancée. She knew who he was, the all knew who they were, and she also had a superpower that was as good as anyone else's, so she was a fighting member of the team. And the fourth guy was a monster. They… something had happened to him and he became very ugly and incredibly strong, and I used him for both pathos and humor 'cause he was always fighting with the others — not physically but verbally. Always insulting them and yelling at them, and he was hot-tempered, and he was always picking on The Human Torch — that was the teenager — who was always picking on him, and I got a lot of comedy out of them. I called him The Thing, and he became by far and away the most popular member of the group. Well at any rate… Oh, and another thing, Instead of having them live in a… fictional place like Metropolis or Gotham City, I plonked them right down in New York City and… 'cause I knew New York City, I could write about New York City and I figured, why not let them live in a real place? And instead of driving a car like an 8-cylinder Whizz-bang, I had them drive… I had Johnny drive a Chevy Corvette, and I had them live on the East Side, and the… I forget where, near Madison Avenue. And when they went to a theater they didn't go to The Bijou, they went to The Radio City Music Hall. Tried to keep everything as realistic as possible, even though it was just a comic… superhero comic. Well the book did wonderfully. It sold great, but a funny thing happened. I got a lot of fan mail, and we had almost never gotten fan mail before. And all the letters said essentially the same thing. ‘We love the book, it's the greatest, we'll keep buying it forever, you're the greatest writer, Jack is the greatest artist, it's terrific. But, if you don't give them costumes we'll never buy another issue’. Now I'll never understand why. I will never understand why but for some reason, people who like superhero stories like their superheroes to wear costumes. Okay, I'm not going to go against that.

I think the next one I did was The Hulk. Funny thing, I wanted to get a… I always liked Jekyll and Hyde, and I always liked the Frankenstein movie — the old one with Karloff. And in the Frankenstein movie I always felt the monster is really the good guy. He didn't want to hurt anybody. All those idiots with torches were always chasing him up and down the hills. So I thought it would be fun to get a monster who was really a good guy, but nobody knew that, and to take a leaf from the Jekyll and Hyde thing where he could change from a normal person into the monster. And I did The Hulk. Now since the kids seemed to like costumes, I couldn't think of an excuse to put a monster in a costume so I figured I'd do the next best thing. I'll make his skin a different color. I did not think of green originally, I made it grey in the first issue. I thought, that will be scary-looking, a guy with grey skin. But unfortunately when the book came out the grey was a different shade on every page. One page was light grey, one page it was dark grey, one page he looked black, one page it was white. And I realized the printer was having trouble with the grey color. So when you're a cartoon editor and writer you're like God, you can do anything. I said: ’I'll change his skin color’. So in the next issue I made him green. Turned out wonderful, the printer was able to do a good job with green but more than that, it gave me a chance to come up with little cute sayings like… I called him the Green Goliath, the Jolly Green Giant, and Old Greenskin — I love using expressions. So that's how The Hulk was born. And then we were now on a roll. The Fantastic Four was a big seller, The Hulk was doing well, so Martin said: ‘Stan, dream up another one’. So I did Spider-Man. And when you do a superhero strip the first thing you have to think of is, what super power will he have? And I was trying to think of a new power. We already had The Thing who was the strongest guy, and The Hulk was strong. We had a guy who could fly – The Human Torch – we had The Invisible Girl, we had… everybody could do everything. So I… I was… I've told this story so often that for all I know, it might even be true, 'cause I really don't remember exactly, but I think I was watching a fly walking on a wall, and I said: ‘Gee, wouldn't it be cool if I had a hero who could stick to walls like an insect?’. But I think I'm lying. I probably didn't say wouldn't it be cool, 'cause I don't think the word cool was in usage. I probably said: ‘Wouldn't it be groovy’. I want to be nothing but totally accurate here. At any rate I thought, I'll get a guy who's like an insect. So I figured okay, what kind? What’ll I call him? Insect Man? That didn't sound dramatic. Mosquito Man? No. I went down the list. When I got to Spider-Man — Spider-Man —  oh, that sounded dramatic. So I figured I'd call him that, and then we had him shoot webs. That was great. And again, I tried to keep it realistic. In order not to make him a typical hero I made him an average guy who was kind of unpopular. He was sort of a nerd. The kids didn't like him; they thought he was a bookworm. He didn't have enough money, he had to support his old aunt. He was an orphan. He was shy and so forth. And it turned out he was somebody that the readers could relate to, so he became very successful. He became our most popular character. And then came the others, then… I don't even remember the order in which they were, but I was told later — I didn't realize it at the time — but people would say to me: ‘You gave all your characters handicaps’. And I realized I guess it's true I was trying to make them realistic. Everybody's handicapped in some way. I'm handicapped, I talk too much. But the next one I made blind. I thought it would be fun to have a blind superhero 'cause I had read somewhere when you lose your sight all your other senses become magnified. So I thought it would be great if we have a guy, even though he can't see, he can do anything better that anyone else. He'd have a radar sense, a sonar sense. He could tell if you were lying 'cause he could hear your heart beat change — the rhythm. He could read by running his finger over a newspaper 'cause his fingers are so sensitive. Like with Braille, he could actually feel the newsprint on the paper. And he'd be the world's greatest gymnast because you get your balance from your ear. So I loved Daredevil, he became very popular.

Then I decided I would go against… I would try a tough one. All the kids… there was some war going on at this time – either Korea or Vietnam, I can't remember – but everybody was against the war. So I thought, I'm going to get a guy who makes munitions, and I'll make him a real industrialist. Something the kids would hate, you know… what did they call the… the… there's a name for it, I can't think of it. The something industrialist… Military industrialist. Military industrial… something... complex. Complex. Thank you very much. The military industrial complex. The kids in those days hated it. I've never been known for my memory. Oh, speaking of memory. I've been asked why do so many of your characters have the same letter in the first name as the second… Peter Parker, Bruce Banner, Reed Richards, and on and on. And the reason I did that is because my memory is so bad, and was, and is… if I could at least remember one name if gave me a clue as to what the first letter of the other name was. So it would make it easier for me to remember it. See I'd be worried, my memory is bad now, I'd be thinking, oh, I've got to have Alzheimer's. But it's always been bad so I'm not worried about it. At any rate… so bad that I forgot where I left off.
So… oh, the military industrial complex. I made up a guy named Iron Man who was sort of like Howard Hughes. He was an inventor, an industrialist. He made munitions. All the things kids hate, but I said: ‘I'm going to make the kids like him’. And apparently they did, Iron Man was a very successful strip and it's still… they're making a movie of him now. And then I did… let's see, it's hard to remember them all. Iron Man… I did Sergeant Phil… Oh this was funny. My publisher Martin said to me at one point, ‘I don't understand why these books are selling so well’, which was a funny thing to say. And I said, ‘Because the style is different than all the other comics'... I'm writing… oh, and I also injected a lot of humor. For example, one thing I was proud of were the credits I wrote. For example, a lot of the other books didn't even give credits. They never mentioned who wrote it, who drew it, it was just a strip.  Or sometimes they'd put the artist's name down. You know, the artist would just sign his name. That was it. But I tried to make it like a movie. I'd say… and I tried to write the credits in a funny way, so that the kids would read them... for example, ‘Written with passion by Stan Lee’;‘Drawn with… enthusiasm by Jack Kirby’; ’Lettered with a scratchy pen point by Artie Simek’. The last one was always something that was a different rhythm than the first two, you know? And I'd make the credits some sort of gag every time. The kids liked it. And then I started a… a page called the Bullpen Bulletins page, when I'd write announcements of things that were happening. And I wrote a column called Stan's Soapbox where I would philosophize about anything in the world, sometimes nothing to do with comics. And what happened was, I became like the living symbol of Marvel Comics. I was the one guy everybody knew and they thought I was talking to them. The readers thought of me as a kindly old uncle, maybe with a sense of humor. And the reason I did that, when I was a kid I was a voracious reader, and one of the books I read was The Adventures of Jerry Todd. Nobody ever heard of that except me. But the writer… it was a series of books like The Hardy Boys or Nancy Drew. One thing the writer did at the end of the book, he had a couple of pages where he would talk to the reader, and ask how the reader liked it, and tell how he happened to write it. And of all the books I read I felt I knew this writer, because of those pages. I think he wrote… he signed his name Leo Edwards. God knows if that was his real name, because nobody used their real name in those days but, Leo Edwards, I was so impressed with him. So I tried to get that feeling in the comics, and I think… I think it worked because wherever I go, or went, people would feel they knew me 'cause they had been reading the books, you know?
So at any rate, I had the Bullpen page, I had the Soapbox page, and even on the covers, I tried… to put things on the covers that would make the readers think that we're real people and they know… for example, one cover I remember, one book… I don't remember what book it was but I wrote: ‘This may not be the best story you've ever read, but we've given you enough good ones you owe it to us to buy this one too’. Everybody thought I was crazy for writing that, you know that was one of our best selling books. And I got more mail from the readers. ‘We think it's great that you wrote that. Oh man, we got such a kick out of it’. And… oh, another thing I did on the letters pages… and I'm only stressing this 'cause I think it's all these things that set us apart from the competition, who did none of this. After… I loved having letters pages. Letters to the editor, 'cause people would like to read what other kids had to say and liked to read our answers. Now our competition, they would have a letters page and the letter would say, ‘Dear Editor, I like your book or I didn't like your book, signed Charles Smith’. And their answer would be, ‘Dear Charles, thank you, it was nice hearing from you. Glad you liked it or sorry you disliked it. The Editor’. Well I didn't do anything like that. I wanted it warm and friendly, so if a guy would write ‘Dear Editor’, when I printed the letter I changed it to ‘Dear Stan’, or ‘Hi Stan’. And if he signed it ‘Charles Smith’, when I answered I'd write, ‘Hey Charlie, glad to hear from you’. And after a while the readers started doing that. Everyone said, ‘Hi Stan’. And he'd sign it ‘Charlie’. And so there was a warmth and a friendliness in our books that the… the competition had no idea why we were outselling them, and this was funny too.

I had friends who worked at the competition, just like they had friends who worked at our place, and occasionally these guys would tell me, they'd say, ‘Stan, it's the funniest thing. Over at the other comic book company they keep saying: ”Why is Stan's books outselling us?” And some big-brain would pop up and say, “It's because he's got a lot of red on his covers”. So they would start putting a lot of red on their covers. The minute I'd hear that, I would tell our colorist, ‘Don't use any red for the next few months’. Or they would then say, ‘He uses a lot of dialogue on his covers’, so again I would say, ‘Keep all the dialogue off the covers. Let's drive them crazy’. I think we did. Oh, another thing that I think… gave us the edge. This was something that I sort of… I didn't originate it but I popularized it. I gave all our characters a lot of thought balloons where… you know, these little balloons with bubbles instead of pointers where you knew what the character was thinking. Now, I did that to a great extent. Hardly anybody else ever did in comics, but it gave such another dimension to our characters, 'cause if you know… know what somebody is thinking, you really know the person. So instead of just dialogue, sometimes we had pages of a character all by himself, running around doing whatever he does, with thought balloons, and I think that made a big difference too. Oh now, the last thing. Maybe it's not the last, who knows? The… I remember where I left off. Martin said to me, ‘Why are our books selling so much better than anyone else's? It must be because…’ whatever nonsense he said. And I said ‘Martin, it's 'cause we have a different style than…’. He said, ‘Style has nothing to do with it, it must be maybe our characters have better names, or…’. I said, ‘Look, I'll prove it to you. I'll come up with a book that has the worst title you've ever heard about a subject that nobody is interested in, and I'll bet I can make it sell just because of the style we do it in’. He said, ‘There isn't a chance in hell’. So anyway I said, ‘Okay’. And what I did, I put out a book, Stories of World War II, which nobody cared about. We had already had the Korean War, Vietnam… the kids didn't care about World War II. So it was Stories of World War II with the unlikely title Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos. And we did it, and it became a good seller. And why did it become a good seller? Because again, it played — even though there are a lot of action and battle scenes — it played up the characterization. What I did, I came up with an ethnic platoon. Everybody… the leader was a typical John Wayne American — Sergeant Fury. But there was a black character named Gabriel Jones in the platoon. There was Izzy Levine I think, a Jewish guy. There was an Italian, Dino Manelli. I don't remember the others, but there was somebody representing everything. And there was a lot of humor, and a lot of gags, and a lot of action and excitement, and the book did beautifully, Martin never admitted it; we always changed the subject when we got on that matter.

The… the other character that I liked was called The Silver Surfer. I worked with an artist who was the greatest, named Jack Kirby. I don't think my stories would have looked as good if Jack hadn't done some of them 'cause he… he was brilliant. In fact, all the artists were brilliant. There was John Romita and Steve Ditko and John Buscema. I… I was the luckiest guy alive 'cause… I think I could have done a mediocre story, they made them look as though the stories were great 'cause they were so beautifully drawn. But Jack one day… One of the most important things is to come up with villains. The heroes are… you know, you come up with a hero and you've got him, and every month he's the same hero. But you need a new villain every month, and you're always trying to top yourself. So I had done everybody as a villain, and one day I said, ‘We ought to do somebody who's like a demi-god’, and I came up with this character Galactus — really kind of silly but Jack made him look good. He's a guy who travelled through the galaxies and he destroyed planets, and he wasn't a bad guy. He only destroyed planets 'cause they provided him with his nourishment. He would drain all the energy out of a planet to keep himself alive. He was huge and he had this huge space ship, and he didn't want to harm anybody but he had to live. So it's like us catching fish. If we're starving we catch a fish, we eat it, we don't want to hurt the fish but we need to live.
So I had this character Galactus, and Jack drew the story, but in the story, he drew a fellow on a flying surfboard flying from planet to planet and ‘Who the hell is that?’ and he said, ‘Well, I figured anybody as big and powerful as Galactus ought to have a herald who flies ahead of him to find planets for him’. Maybe that's not a bad idea, but I loved the way he drew this character. This character looked so heroic, and so noble, and so dramatic that I gave him the name The Silver Surfer. And instead of just a guy flying around finding planets, I made him a philosophical observer of the world and the universe. And I had him talk in semi-Shakespearean and biblical language, and… he became my mouthpiece for how I feel about a lot of things. I told Jack: ‘I want to use this character a lot’. And he came to Earth and he would say things like – and I don't remember the exact words, I'll just paraphrase it – but he would talk about the fact that we live in the greatest planet we could ever want. It has everything: it has clean fresh air, it has sunlight, moonlight. It has all the water we could need, most of the planet is water. It has beautiful growing things, all the food we could want, room for everybody. Why do we fight each other? Why do we hate each other? Why is there… what's the matter with us? Are we insane? And all the… and the kids loved him. And whenever I would lecture at college… I don't know if I mentioned this but I probably lectured at colleges more than any human being. When I… I became publisher in 1970 or thereabouts, from '70 to '80 I don't think a week went by that I wasn't flying to some city in Canada, America, England… somewhere, lecturing about Marvel Comics. Or life in general. And during these lectures, inevitably — mostly at colleges — some kid would get up: ‘Stan, tell us about The Silver Surfer, and do you equate his Judeo-Christian philosophy with that…’ and they'd get into all of this deep stuff, which I loved. Speaking of that, I had a character called Doctor Strange who was a magician — master of the mystic arts. He was another one who was popular. And when he would do his magical thing I couldn't just have him say abracadabra or something, so I made up incantations for him. Like he would say… if he wanted to throw a bolt of lightning at a villain he'd say, ‘By the hoary hosts of Hoggath so let it be’. Or things like that. ‘By the shades of the shadowy seraphim’, I had dozens of them. Well, when I would lecture at colleges inevitably a kid would get up and say, ‘We've been studying the various incantations of Doctor Strange and it's obvious that you got them from ancient Druid writings’… or from this, or that. And I hated to have to disappoint the kids by saying no, I dreamed them up. So after a while I'd say, well as a matter of fact I did do some heavy research. But I found… you can't write anything that people aren't going to read things into, that you didn't even think of, you know, which is one of the nice things about being a writer. You can often be thought of as being much deeper than you really are.

People often ask me which of the DC characters would I have liked to have written, and it really doesn't matter to me 'cause I like writing anything. I think if I had done Superman I would have done him differently. I would have made him more vulnerable. I think the idea of being able to do anything makes you a little uninteresting. Batman is a good idea. It's interesting, the writer of Batman… the fellow who… created Batman — Bob Kane — was a friend of mine, and he was a funny guy. Just the opposite of me. He would go to a restaurant with me, we'd have dinner. Minute the waiter came over: ‘Do you know who I am? I'm Bob Kane. I created Batman. Here, I'll draw you a picture’. I wanted to crawl under the table. I would never say anything like that. But he was so happy that he… and proud of what he had done, and he… and he was always late. Every time we had dinner with our wives, if the appointment was for 8 o’clock he's get there a quarter after. And we tried to top each other. Joan and I would say at the next dinner, you know what? Let's be 20 minutes late, we'll show them. So we'd get there 20 minutes late but he won, he'd be a half hour late. And we'd say, let's get there three quarters of an hour late. He'd be there an hour late. I mean, I couldn't beat this guy. But anyway I… there was a time about, I don't know, six, seven, eight years ago, when DC comics asked me… they wanted to do a series of books called: What if Stan Lee had created the DC universe, or something like that, and they asked me to write Superman, Batman, the… Wonder Woman, The Green Lantern and… I don't know, 10 or 12 of their books, as if I had created them. So I changed all of them around. I made Batman a black man. I made The Flash a female. Just for fun, just to make them different. I really enjoyed doing it.

I'm not sure that we planned it this way, but we were very much affected at Marvel by what was going on in the world around us. From the very beginning when… when we were in World War II and Hitler was the one we were… he was our Bin Laden at that time. So we had a lot of stories about fighting the Nazis. When communism was the big bugaboo here in America almost all our villains were communists, and no matter what the problem was in society at the time, it sort of would show itself in our books. We… I think we couldn't help it. I'm rather surprised that the other comic book companies didn't do the same thing, but… I remember I did a… Oh, I didn't mention I had done a character called The Mighty Thor, God of Thunder. I enjoyed him. And I had a scene where he comes down to Earth and he's talking to a bunch of college kids. And in those days the kids were all dropping out. And he gave them a little lecture… I don't remember the exact words, I… I really was very proud of writing this… he… where he said: ‘There's nothing wrong with rebelling. There's nothing wrong with wanting to change things, but you can't do it by dropping out. You're giving up. If you really want to change things and make them better you've got to plunge in. You've got to be a part of the process’. Only I wrote it better than I'm saying it now 'cause… And it… I… a lot of the college kids would quote that to me too during lectures. Funny thing about Thor. I'm the least scientific guy in the world. I had The Hulk created by a… a gamma bomb. I don't know what a gamma bomb… I don't know what gamma rays are, but it sounded good. The… The Fantastic Four were created 'cause the cosmic rays hit them in the sky and... I don't know what a cosmic ray is but it sounded good. And on and on. Well, I always used to wonder how Superman could fly through the air with no visible means of propulsion. It's not that he took a great leap. It's not that he had rockets at the bottom of his feet. I mean, if you remember the scenes of him flying he's always like this, and he's just flying. So I wanted to have The Mighty Thor, God of Thunder, be able to fly, but being of a great scientific bent I thought, I'm going to give him a logical way to fly. So he has this big hammer as a weapon, so I put a thong on it which is attached to his wrist, so when he wants to fly he swings the hammer very fast, like a propeller, then he lets it go. The hammer goes flying off into the sky, but since it's attached to his wrist he goes after it. So you see, that's a perfectly scientific explanation. And obviously I know almost nothing about science, but if you can at least give the semblance of a reason for the… for the public, you know, to have fun with, I… I just can't see having no explanation at all and asking a reader to accept it. And yet people do, as the case with Spider… with Superman, which I always got a kick out of, and so many people also have mentioned this. There is Clark Kent wearing his glasses, and at some point he takes them off and Lois Lane says: ‘Superman, where did Clark Kent go?’ I mean, it's ridiculous, these glasses.

You know… there is something called the Marvel Method of writing comics, which is really the Stan Lee Method. What happened was… they had always been written – scripted – the way a motion picture has a screenplay. And I used to write them that way, I'd write the script, give it to the artist and he would draw it. But by the time we were doing Spider-Man and The Hulk and The Fantastic Four and Iron Man and Daredevil and Thor – I didn't even mention The X-Men – and The X-Men. I couldn't write them fast enough. And these artists were so brilliant, and they were so good at story themselves that I would say to the artist, ‘Look, this is the plot I want’, and I would either tell them in a few words what the story was or I would write an outline on a page or two pages, or a few paragraphs. And I'd say, ‘You go ahead and draw it any way you want. It doesn't matter, I'll put the words in and tie it altogether’. And they did that, and it worked out beautifully because the artist wasn't handicapped by… or inhibited by my descriptions. The artist could tell the story visually any way he wanted, and once I got the pages back and I was looking at the drawings, it was so easy for me to pinpoint the dialogue and make it exactly fit the expression on the character's face, and so forth. And I loved working that way. And I was the guy who put in all the sound effects. I would letter them and… and I had a th… a way of working. If the illustration was… see a writer has a lot of freedom. If the illustration was very beautiful I'd put very little or no dialogue in, 'cause I wanted the illustration to show. If we had an area where you had a few panels that not much was going on, and they weren't that interesting, I'd put in as much dialogue as I could, and sound effects, and I spaced… see I laid out the balloons too. I would put the balloons in such a way that they seemed to be part of the design, and they made the panel look more interesting than it was. So, working that way, it became known as the Marvel method, and now a lot of people… I'd say probably as many people work that way as the original way now. There are still people who like to write their own script, and more power to them, but I love this system. You tell the artist what the story is, let him draw it any way he wants to, and then you put the dialogue and the captions in and exactly match the illustration that you have.

It's a funny thing; my wife and I are really so close and yet I'm not sure if she's ever read a story I wrote. She's totally not into comics at all, and she… she loves things like decorating. And she's the perfect wife for me because I spend so much time writing when I'm home. I imagine another woman would be saying things like, ‘How come we never go anywhere?’ and, ‘Why don't we take vacations?’ and, ‘You never take me anywhere’. But Joanie… her house is her toy. She plays with the house. She could spend all her time rearranging the furniture, and rearranging the paintings on the wall, and getting new little bits of furniture, and fixing things up. She can always keep herself busy, which is wonderful for me so I don't feel guilty when I'm in my room writing. In fact it's funny; people, when they ask what we do with ourselves, I mention that the one time I really get together with Joanie is at dinner time 'cause we have our dinner theater. And they say, ‘What do you mean, you've got a dinner theater?’. And I say, ‘Well, we have a little TV in the kitchen where we eat dinner and while we sit and have dinner we turn the TV on and we watch a movie, or whatever it is’. And… and that is really to me one of the nicest parts of the day. We… 'cause we argue a lot about she'll want to watch one thing, I'll want to watch another thing, but we eventually work it out.

Marvel has been very lucky. They've… the movies that have been based on our characters really have been great… Spider-Man and the X-Men especially. The… we were so lucky to get Sam Raimi to direct Spider-Man, and to get Bryan Singer to direct the X-Men, and… those movies could not have been made as well years ago because now the special effects that we have… I was talking to one director the other day who said: ‘Stan, there is nothing you can dream of, nothing you can imagine, that we can't put on the screen’, which is true. And of course we did the movie of The Hulk, we did Daredevil. I… I've had fun, I do little cameos in most of these movies, and… they're going to do another X-Men, they're going to do another Spider-Man, they're working on another Fantastic Four, and they're also going to do Iron Man, they're going to do Captain America. On and on. I mean… every major character of Marvel's will be a movie. You know, I didn't mention the X-Men. There's one thing I could say about X-Men. I wanted to do another group and I thought, how could I make them different? And also, I've already done gamma rays and cosmic rays and radioactive spiders and… how can I give them some power in a different way? And then it occurred to me, I'm going to take the easy way out. The cowardly way. I'm going to just say they're mutants. We know that mutations exist in life. There are five-legged frogs and things like that, so I'll just give them whatever powers I want and say they're mutants, they mutated that way and it’ll save me having to look for the names of other rays. And another thing I tried to do… I tried to show — and this is just a subliminal part of it, but a lot of readers have caught it — one of the themes is – it's an anti-bigotry theme – we shouldn't hate people just because they're different, because our heroes of the X-Men are all different. Different from average humans, and because they're that different, the general public hates them, hounds them, harasses them, fears them. And again, when I used to do a lot of college lecturing so many of the students would get up and say, ‘We feel that the anti-bigotry message of the X-Men is a very strong one’, and of course Bryan Singer — the director — really latched on to that when he did the movie. And… and I was very happy about that.
[Q] And how much involvement do you have with the films? Do you come in at the script stage, or… ?
I have… I have actually no involvement at all with the movies. It's not for me to tell anybody how to make a movie because these people are better than I'll ever be, and also, even if I wanted to I'm not really an executive at Marvel any more. I have the title Chairman Emeritus which, as I'm sure you know, is an honorary title. It sounds great, I love saying, ‘Oh, I'm Chairman Emeritus of Marvel’, but it doesn't mean anything.

You know, one thing I love is expressions because you can remember a character, and you can remember people by the expressions they use. In fact… funny thing about getting to be my age, you become a little bit of a bore because it's hard to tell a straight story, 'cause while you're talking everything you say reminds you of something else. So many things… again, when you get to be 83 so many things have happened in your life. And while I'm telling you this I just thought… when I was a kid one of the books that I read was… there was a series of books called Bomba the Jungle Boy. And it was like a teenage Tarzan, and he was a kid in the jungle and his adventures, but the reason I'm bringing him up, it has to do with expressions. There was one expression that the artist had Bomba use all the time. Whenever he was in danger and something was about to happen to him, the… the… not the artist, the writer… the writer would write: ‘With Bomba, to think was to act’. So he did this, or he did that. Then you'd get to the next chapter, a snake was about to bite him. ‘With Bomba, to think was to act’. So he'd jumped out of the way of the snake. Then the next chapter, a lion is going to get him. ‘With Bomba, to think was to act’. I mean… and I wondered, didn't that editor ever say to him, you're using that expression too much. But I never forgot it. ‘With Bomba, to think was to act’. So anyway… Sherlock Holmes who always said, ‘It's elementary’. The idea of little expressions that you remember and… and you tie them in with the story or the character, I love them. So in everything I wrote I tried to put little expressions in. In The Fantastic Four, whenever Ben Grimm — The Thing — was going to get into a fight, I'd have him shout: ‘It's clobbering time’. I can't tell you how many colleges I've gone to — to lecture — where I was introduced, ‘And now Stan Lee’ and in one voice the audience would shout: ‘It's clobbering time’.
And, let's see, there… there are so many other… Oh, one thing that happened; in Spider-Man I had used the expression that I made up: ‘With great power comes great responsibility’. That has caught on so... I see that all over. Somebody told me someone on Oprah's show did that the other day. At any rate, about two years ago the… Attorney General of the State of Rhode Island contacted me. He was using that… he had taken that expression and made a bronze plaque, and he put it outside the door of his office: ‘With great power comes great responsibility’. He said he's a big fan; he's always loved that expression. Would I fly to Rhode Island for the ceremony when he puts that on his door? Well I wasn't able to, but he came out here some time later and we got together, and he was the nicest guy. But, it's funny how sometimes you can have a little expression and it… it… I'll tell you another thing about expressions. When I used to write Stan's Soapbox, which was the column I put in the magazines all the time, where I was talking to the readers, I didn't like to end it by saying, ‘Yours truly’ or ‘Sincerely’ or in any way that anyone would have done it. So I'd made up little expressions, like at the end of the message I'd say, ‘Hang loose, Stan’ or ‘Face front, Stan’. Little things like that. Or ‘Keep the faith’. No matter what I did, I found later on the competitors were doing the same thing. Our competitive magazines were… were using my expressions. That got me angry. So I said I'm going to come up with something that A, they won't know what it means and B, they won't know how to spell it. So I dug up the word, excelsior, which to me is wonderful. It's an old English word which means, upward and onward to greater glory. So… I found out later it's actually the emblem… the motto on the great seal of the State of New York; I didn't know that at the time. So at any rate, I would end everything with the word, excelsior. Thank goodness nobody has used it yet, in fact I think we've copyrighted it.

You know, none of our characters, none of the characters I created were really based on real people. I've been asked that quite a lot of times. But, it’s… and yet it's impossible to answer any question definitively because, while none of them were based on real people I'm sure that every writer who writes any character… is taking this character from experiences he's had, from people he's known, from other things he's read. Everything we experience is somehow stored in our mind. Even if you have a horrible memory like I do, it's still somewhere in your subconscious. And I'm sure when I write anything at all, if I'm creating a character, in some way it's got to be based on all the things I've seen, and read, and heard, and thought of. But I never specifically say, I'm going to base this character on President Bush, or on Charlie Chaplin or… No. I try to come up with original ones.
[Q] Which character is… would you say is closest to your own character and personality?
Probably the character that's… but not really because he's a scientist and I'm not… but in personality probably Reed Richards in The Fantastic Four, because he talks too much and he tends to get boring after a while but they can't shut him up. And he tries to use big words. Actually I don't know enough big words so I don't have to worry about that too much. But… I don't know. I'd like to think that I'm an amalgam of all of those characters. All of their best features are probably based on me.

I was lucky with Peter Parker when I came up with that character because he seems to have struck a chord with… with so many readers, and I think it's because… he's probably more like a regular person, a normal person, than any other character. And I try to make him that way because I guess, until Peter Parker, no superhero — or no superhero's alter-ego — had ever had to worry about making a living, getting along well with girls, being popular, or… or have all the problems that… I tried to heap as many problems as I could on poor Peter because I feel most people — even people who seem to be happy — have problems and they have worries. One thing I loved from the point of view of writing the stories, it made it easy for me to come up… see, you have to come up with situations that interest a reader, where the reader is going to say: ‘How the hell is he going to get out of this?’. Now, I was always… I always enjoy doing things where Peter Parker had to become Spider-Man and go over there in order to save the world, or the city, or Mary Jane, or somebody, but at the same time Aunt May needed her medicine or she might die and the only place to get the medicine was in the drug store over there. But Peter had to do either the one of those in the next five minutes, and there wasn't time to do them both. And what would he do? And I tried to come up with as many situations of that type as possible. Because of the fact that he had… a regular life away from his superhero life that had all sorts of problems, I think people could relate to it. Even the idea of not being able to… well, for example, I had not read any other superheroes who very often felt they wished they could quit being a superhero because, it's not a normal life, and he's miserable, and maybe he's not doing the right thing. I made him a guy who is very introspective, he questions, why am I doing this? I gave him a guilt-complex; he felt his uncle had died because he hadn't captured this original burglar who ended up killing his uncle. So he was riddled with neuroses, and riddled with worries and doubts, and… there were quite a few stories I wrote where he wanted… In fact there was one story I know I wrote where he did, he threw his costume in a trash can and he walked away said: ‘I'm giving it up’. And John Romida drew the greatest cover of him walking away into the distance, and the trash can over here with the costume kind of hanging over the side. And… you hadn't seen that in Superman or Batman or anyone so… I… I'm rather proud of that. The fact that Peter — like any normal human being — had self-doubts and concerns, and he was just never sure. Am I doing…? Just like me now, I'm not sure. Am I talking too much? Am I talking too little? Do I look okay in the camera? Should I be…? My wife will say, ‘You should have sat straight, why were you hunched over this way?’ We all have these problems.

So that was our life for quite a while, and then the company was sold. And one thing led to another there were a number of changes of management and the next thing I knew… Oh, and by this time — let's see — I had been there many years. I was now… when was it? — again, I have no memory — maybe 1980 or '90 or something, but I had had a lifetime job and they were paying me… I think $1 million a year, which was very nice and I was damn well worth it because I had been travelling all over the country promoting Marvel and… anyway, when the company was sold the people who took over… one of the men said to me — one of the owners of the new company — he said: ‘Stan, don't worry. You're going to be better than ever. You'll make more money than ever’. And he… he negated all the, I…  there’s a technical word for it, I don't know what it is but he abolished, like, all the contracts and he was going to give everyone new contracts. So the new contract I was offered was a half a million dollars a year, and instead of a lifetime contract, a two year contract. Which made me very unhappy. There wasn't much I could do about it, but I… I formed another company called Stan Lee Media, and a friend of mine, a fellow named Peter Paul who was a business man and I thought a great guy… he had… he was a guy who… I met him through… he had an organization, a foundation called the Spirit of America Foundation or the American Spirit Foundation. And they gave out Spirit of America Awards — something like that — every year to somebody. Now Jimmy Stewart, the actor who was one of the most respected people in Hollywood, he was the chairman of this organization — people like that. So the reason I met Peter, he came to see me one day and asked if I would be a recipient, if I would accept an award for the work I had done. I don't know what work he was referring to but it was hard to say no to something that Jimmy Stewart was the chairman of.
So I will never forget that evening at the awards. They had it at the Century Plaza Hotel here in Beverley Hills, and Ronald Reagan was one of the recipients of the awards. He had just left the Presidency; he was now a civilian — a short time after he had been President. And Helen Hayes, the actress, the stage star was another recipient. And me! I was with Ronald Reagan and Helen Hayes. And every star in Hollywood it seems was there. Gregory Peck made a speech and… everybody was… I don't want to throw all the names but it was a big event, as you can imagine. And I'll never forget, when everybody walked in to the main dining room, my wife and I were told to stay behind with the President and Helen Hayes, and when everybody was seated somebody made an announcement: 'Would you all rise for our guests of honor'. And then Mr and Mrs Ronald Reagan, Mrs Helen Hayes — and I think her son Charles [sic] McArthur or someone like that — and Mr and Mrs Stan Lee. I couldn't believe it, everybody in Hollywood was standing up and applauding, you know, and I'm walking in with Joan right after the President and Helen Hayes. Another thing I'll never forget, we sat down at this table… and it was a long, narrow table, and I was sitting here, and President Reagan was sitting here. We were facing each other, and the table was only about that wide, I almost had my nose in… touching his. And all through the dinner I'm sitting opposite Ronald Reagan, and I wondered, what am I going to say to him? So the only thing I could think of in the beginning, I said: ‘What does it feel like Mr President, now that you're a civilian? You must be so relieved to have the weight of the world off your shoulders’. And I'll never forget his answer. He looked at me like an enthusiastic kid. His eyes were wide, and he said: ‘No. I loved being President’. But he said it with that much emotion… I loved being President I mean, I can't… I'll never forget that. And we had a great time, it was a great evening. And after that this fellow Peter Paul, he had another ceremony for the President of Poland who came to America. He had me come there and he introduced me to him, and Richard Gere was there and a lot of other people, and he… he knew everybody and he was taking me everywhere, and we got very friendly. And I thought the luckiest thing in my life is that I met Peter Paul. He's making me a celebrity; I'm meeting all these people.

When the contract that I told you about was abrogated at Marvel, he said: ‘Come on, I'll form a company. The internet is the big thing and you'll write things for the internet’. Yea, that's what it was. So we formed Stan Lee Media. Well, it… it started out beautifully. We had over 150 employees at the peak, and all of the trade magazines listed Stan Lee Media as the most… one of the 10 most successful companies on the internet. But what happened was… all of a sudden Peter was accused of some sort of wrongdoing that had to do with financial manipulations, I still don't understand it all. Check kiting, whatever that means and so forth. And then he went down to Brazil and there was a warrant for his arrest, and he was arrested in Brazil. And our company went bankrupt and… I had never been involved in the finances, I left all of that to Peter and it was a very… very depressing situation. It cost me a lot of money because Peter had… or the company had run up a lot of debts, and since I had been the chairman of the company I ended up being responsible for them and I had to pay them off and… it almost broke me. At any rate, I haven't seen or heard from Peter since. I understand he's been in jail and all kinds of things. I was heartbroken 'cause I considered him my best friend. I mean, I was going to make him the executor of my estate if I had any estate. At any rate, after all of that happened I figured well, now what am I going to do? And then I realized I had had a contract with Marvel where I was entitled to a certain percentage of the profits of the movies and television that they were involved in. And at the time the contract was written they weren't doing much movies or television, but at this point they had done the X-Men movie, and the Spider-Man movie, and I met this lawyer named Arthur Lieberman — became one of my best friends — and Arthur said: ‘Stan, you've got to collect that, it's in your contract’. So again to make a long story short, we had a law suit and they gave me a nice sum of money. Not as much as I think I should have gotten, but nobody ever gets what he thinks he should get. But it was nice.
The law suit is now over, and I started another company called POW! Entertainment. That's P-O-W  exclamation point. The exclamation point is so that it won't read like prisoner of war. And of course it stands for Purveyors of Wonder. And with another friend, Gill Champion who I had met… he had been at Stan Lee Media, he and I and this attorney Arthur Lieberman, we formed POW! Entertainment and it's been keeping me very busy. We've had it for about three years now, and we're working on movies and television shows and DVDs and video games and… I've never been busier in my life. I've never had more fun. People keep saying to me, ‘When are you going to retire?’ And I say to them, ‘I don't want to retire because if you think it through, most people… when they're working they say, “Gee, I can't wait till I retire 'cause then I can do all the things I've always wanted to do”. But I'm doing all the things I've always wanted to do’. I don't play golf. I did years ago but it takes too long. And… I like being with artists and writers and creative people, and I am, and I like being busy, and I am. I have a house on a hill with a nice view. It's got a little pool so I don't have to go to a… a resort somewhere; my home is my resort. I've got this great wife and I've got these idiot dogs — Winkydink and Eloise.

It's a funny thing, I never saved the books. None of us did in the beginning. A lot of people did after that. I never had the room. When the comics originally were done in the early '40s, '50s, they were drawn… the original artwork was much bigger than they draw it now. The pages were really big. And thick, they were thick sheets of illustration board, and in the early days the books were 48 pages when we first started... 60… 64 pages. And we were doing a lot of books and our office was half the size of this. And the printer would send the original artwork back, so from one book the original artwork would be a pile that went up to the ceiling. There was no room in our office, so if somebody came to bring us a sandwich for lunch we'd… ‘Hey kid, before you go back take some of these pages would you? Would you like them?‘ Wow. The cleaning woman… ‘Hey miss could you keep these, or throw them away somewhere?’ and the same with the comic books. The printer would send us all the left-over comics. We had no room for them. So… I don't like to think about it. And if I could tell you how many people have said to me — you know, when I do lectures or just go to comic book conventions — they come over to me and they… ‘Gee Stan, my mother made me throw out all the comics’. I'm the one guy my mother didn't make me throw them out, I could have kept them but I had no place to put them so I threw them out.

You know, it's a funny thing. A lot of writers have an audience in mind. I never did. Even today while I'm working on movies and television it… it's hard for me. People… people at a television network will say, well we're going for an audience of men from 22 to 28, or from 25 to 30 or… I don't know how you write for a specific age. I've never done that. I've tried to write stories that anybody and everybody would enjoy. I've tried to make them understandable enough, and exciting or suspenseful or interesting enough, for youngsters. To hold their interest. And I've tried to make them hopefully intelligent enough for older people. It… It seems to me all of the things that I loved to read when I was a kid, I think they would have been good for any… people of any age. HG Wells, Charles Dickens, O Henry… I mean, anybody can enjoy O Henry stories. At any rate I… so I've never had a reader in mind particularly. And one thing that people have asked me often is: ‘Why… why are women treated the way they are in the comics?’ Usually in superhero stories the woman is just somebody who has to be rescued, although that was in the past. Now, more and more, the women are being featured, the women superheroines. And one of the reasons is, the publishers and editors are beginning to realize that the readership of comics is becoming older, so where previously it was thought that kids eight, 10, 12 years old were reading comics, now we know it's high school and college kids and even older. And we know those guys like girls. Some of them like good-looking boys but most of them, or at least a good many of them — I don't know what the proportion is these days — a good many of them like girls. So the girls… it… it's really kind of funny, almost every super heroine is half-naked, wears high heels and, if you try to think of logic or reason, you figure if… if some beautiful girl was going to go out to fight crime, you'd think she'd want to wear enough clothes that would give her some protection, and she'd wear sneakers rather than high heels. But they wouldn't look as good. So girls really… and I have no problem with this 'cause I like looking at them too… but they're drawn as sexy as possible, as revealing as possible, for the… for the male readers. And you will find much more superheroines, or even incidental characters, but they now try to find some excuse to put very glamorous, sexy, not overly-dressed women in the strips today. Now they did years ago too. When I first worked for the company, when I first went to work for them, they were publishing pulp magazines and they would have these kind of… they called them spicy detective, spicy western, spicy whatever… and there was always an undraped girl on the cover who was about to be ravaged by some monstrous person, and the hero was just breaking in to save her. So I guess… I guess since time immemorial men liked to look at pictures of girls who aren't wearing too many clothes.

It's really difficult to say what I'm proudest of in my career. I think probably because Spider-Man is so world famous, the obvious answer would be that I created Spider-Man. But… I think maybe I'm proudest of the fact that I meet so many people who say to me, ‘Gee Stan, I've been reading your things since I was very young’, of course I hate it when some guy with a grey beard walks up to me and says, ‘I've been reading your stories since I was a kid’. A guy who looks like he's 100 years old. But so many people walk up and say, ‘I just want to thank you for all the enjoyment you've brought’ …and that's made me think of something else. Years ago, when I was writing all these comics, I always felt I was really wasting time. I felt, okay, so I'm making a living with selling comics but, there are people building bridges, and people doing medical research, and people doing things that matter, and I'm writing these stupid little fantasy stories. And it's only been lately, these past 10 years or so, that I've started realizing to most people — and then I realize it applies to me too — to most people, the most important thing is being entertained, getting pleasure out of something. And… and I realize that, for instance, I loved certain television shows, and certain movies and I think of them with such love and kindness and, I wish I could see them again, and they're important to me. And then I began to realize in a way, the people who make the most money are entertainers, whether rock stars, or sports stars, singers and… actors, and I figured, maybe what I'm doing isn't really unimportant. Maybe entertainment is one of the most important things, because there are so many bad things in the world, that if you can entertain somebody for a while it's a good thing. So I think I'm proudest of the fact that maybe some of the things I've done have entertained people. And you know, whether that's Spider-Man, or Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos, or The Thing yelling: ‘Clobbering time’. Whatever it is, I'm happy that some people have enjoyed it.

The only surprises I've had with the receptions I've received travelling around is… how uniformly warm the receptions were, places that I never would have expected it. When I went to China, I was in Beijing, and I think they… they told me I was the first person to make a speech in the Great Hall of the People, and they gave me the title, Exalted Creator. I still can't believe it. In Japan, I… I was welcomed so warmly, and in Poland — I wouldn't have thought anybody would care about our comics in Poland — I was treated like a visiting dignitary. And of course… I remember I was in Mexico, in Mexico City some years ago, and the crowd was enormous, and one of the fellas said, ‘Gee Stan, you could run for president here. You'd be elected’. Sounded good. And I… in Canada I've always been treated… You know it's a funny thing, I had to… I had to make two speeches in Canada, one at the University of Manitoba, and one at — oh my, I forgot the name — Winnipeg. And I never could remember, is Manitoba in Winnipeg, or is Winnipeg in Manitoba. But they were great, in Toronto; they were great in Quebec, and… England of course. I mean, I… I did a speech once at a place called The Roundhouse in London, and it was so wonderful, I mean the reaction of the audience, and I'd been… of course my wife being English, we've been back there so many times, and each time… and in France, and Italy… In Italy I went to Lucca many years ago, and the whole city turned out. It was like Stan Lee Day in Lucca. So, there are a lot of places I haven't been. I haven't been to Africa, and I haven't been to Russia, and I haven't been… I was invited a number of times to Australia and New Zealand, and I would have loved to have gone, but it's just too far away. I never had the time, at the time of the invitation. I remember in Australia they said to me, ‘And we'll have a bodyguard for you’, the… they mentioned some man who was the heavyweight champion of Australia. They said, ‘He'll be one of your bodyguards’ and I said, ‘My God, are you afraid of an assassination?’ they said, ‘No, no, they love you here; he'll keep the crowds back’. But I would have really wanted to go there. But no, as I say, the only thing I've been surprised about — and very pleased about — in all these different countries with somewhat different cultures, they all seem to have enjoyed these stories, these comic book stories, and…and that's a nice feeling.

The universal themes of Marvel's comics, I… the good guy gets the bad… beats the bad guy, I guess. I never thought of it in those terms you know. Each story stands on its own two legs, so to speak. You… you write a story, whether it's Spider-Man, or Iron Man, or Daredevil, or Dr Strange or whatever, and you want to make that story interesting. So… and you want the readers to enjoy it and want to come back and buy the next issue. So the universal theme is, to make it as exciting and interesting as possible. And, as I say, I… I'm not part of the Marvel editorial staff any more, but when I was there — and I’m… I'm sure it's the same now — you want the good guy to be the one that the reader would want to emulate, not the villain. Although the villain should be very colorful, and in a way charismatic, but the stories have to be told so that the reader would want to empathize with the… with the hero.
[Q] And do you enjoy writing for the villains more than writing for the heroes, or vice versa?
I can't say that I enjoyed writing for the villains more than the heroes, but of course it turns out that way. See, in the beginning, writing the hero was very exciting ’cause, getting his origin, that's what the whole series is going to be based on. But once you've created the hero, you've got him, and he's going to be pretty much the same in every story. But each story needs a new villain, so it is more interesting to keep coming up with new villains because each one is a new problem. The hero you've already done.

If I weren't… if I hadn't been doing comic books, there are so many things I would have enjoyed doing. When I was a kid I wanted to be a lawyer, ’cause I saw a movie, I think it starred John Barrymore. He played a great mouthpiece, and he was just making this argument in court, and he swayed the jury, and he was so dramatic and persuasive. As a kid, I didn't realize all of the reading and studying, and the dull work that lawyers have to do. But I think I basically always really wanted to be an actor, because to me, being a lawyer was being an actor, standing in front of a jury and making an impassioned speech. Doing this little interview now is like being an actor. You're a captive audience. I can go on and on, you've got to listen. This is great. I loved lecturing for the same reason. I was so… I'm always so happy when I'm on a lecture platform, and people are always worried that I'm getting tired, or you know, that's enough, we ought to cut the questions and answer period short. I hate them for it. I'd like to stay all day and do those questions and answers. So… and when I do these little cameo roles for our movies, I'm always thinking in back of my mind, don't they see how good I am? Why don't they give me a real role? What's the matter with them? So I… I would love to be, I would have loved to be an actor, and funny thing, I'd still love to do it. Why should Sean Connery get all the good older men roles?

I don't know what the future of comic books is. I… I don't think they'll ever be as big as they were because there's too much competition. I mean, now we have computers and we have videos and we have DVDs and we have video games and there's all these other new things. But I think they'll always be around, ‘cause it's still very pleasant to read a story with drawings, dialogue. You can read it quickly. You can kind of fold the magazine, put it in your back pocket, carry it with you, you can show it to a friend, you can save them, get a collection of them. They're colorful. They're not too expensive. There'll always be comics. And then there's another thing. A lot of the comics now are being published for one reason, hoping that they will serve as a stepping stone to a movie or a television series. We have these comic book conventions here, there's one in San Diego every year. The last one, I think, had an attendant…an attendance of more than 100,000 people, and… I think a great many of them were from movie studios and television networks. They're all coming to see what is the next big thing that we can adapt and make a movie of or a TV show of. So comics are serving now as a wellspring… an area where they provide ideas for movies and other things.

I think probably the appeal of comics is A, you're reading a story, and if it's a story you like — the type of story you like — you're half way home; but B, you can also look at the pictures while you're reading the story. Now, a lot of people say: ‘Well, that's no good. It… it doesn't give your imagination a reason to grow and develop’. I think that's nonsense, for this reason: Shakespeare wrote plays. Should you never see one on the stage, because then you're seeing what he wrote and your imagination isn't visualizing it? Maybe we shouldn't have staged plays. Maybe we should just read his scripts. You go to see a movie. Maybe you shouldn't go to the movie. Maybe you should just buy the screenplay. I mean obviously, on the face of it, that's nonsense. Well, it's the same with a comic strip. A comic strip, in its own way, is like theater. You have the story, you have the illustrations. Steven Spielberg said to me once — incidentally, you may have realized by now I'm the world's biggest name-dropper — but he said to me once: ‘You know Stan, you and I do essentially the same thing, except my pictures move’. There is nothing wrong with reading a story and looking at the pictures. It's a great way to be entertained, and it's a simple way if you don't want to wade through a 300 page book. If you just don't have the time. It doesn't mean… I don't know anybody who reads comics who doesn't read books, because if you develop a facility at reading, you'll read anything. And speaking of that — this is another thing I've lectured about a lot when I've gone to high schools and reading classes — there is nothing better than a comic book to help students learn to read, because today we're living in an age where kids… don't read as much, and don't want to read as much, and feel they don't have to read as much, because they get it all on the screen, whether it's a computer screen, or a movie screen, or a TV screen, or a… a cell phone screen. But a comic book is the one thing they will read. And I've… I’ve done this experiment with teachers. You put a TV show on, and put a youngster in a chair, and put a coffee table between the TV and the chair, and put a comic on the table — preferably a Marvel comic — and, no matter what the show is, after a few minutes the kid'll reach, and take the comic, start flipping through it, and after a while will disregard that and start reading this. Now what happens is, children learn to equate pleasure with reading, when they read comics. The more comics they read, the more they develop a facility at reading, and the more you become a reader, the more certain it is that you will go on to read other things. A person who's a good reader isn't going to limit himself to comics.
So comics are really a hell of a good educational tool, and I have no selfish reason for saying that. I'm not doing comics any more, but I've spoken to so many teachers… In fact, one last point. I may have mentioned, I used to get a ton of mail, all the time, from everybody. I received so many letters from parents who said, essentially… which said essentially the same things: ‘Stan, I can't understand it. Little Johnny, I could never get him to pick up a book or anything, and I'd see him reading a comic and I'd yell at him, but finally I let him read them, they were the only things he'd read. And now I'm amazed. His… his grades in school in English were poor. He's now getting good grades in vocabulary and writing and composition, and for some reason it's since he's been reading the comics’. I received more letters like that, that the kids were doing better in composition and in English after reading comics. And of course, the ones I wrote — I think I was the first one to do this — I didn't limit the vocabulary to young people. I tried to use a college-level or above vocabulary. If I wanted to use a word like cataclysmic, or misanthropic, or whatever, I would use it. And I'd figure three things could happen: the kid would either go do a dictionary and look it up – and that's not the worst thing in the world – or he'd get it by osmosis, by the use in the sentence, or… I forget what the third one was. But either one of those two isn't bad.

I don't remember what age I started reading at, I think I was born reading. I mean I can't remember a time when I wasn't reading, and my mother used to say that… well, when I ate I had to have something to read. If she gave me breakfast or lunch or dinner… in fact, one of the first gifts they ever bought me was a reading stand, a little stand to prop up on the table so I could rest a book against it while I ate. And she used to say, if I didn't have a book to read, I'd read the label on a ketchup bottle. So I… I don't know what age. I… I was no genius. I'm sure I started reading when any kid did, but… but I loved reading. I really did.
[Q] And is it true, when you were writing from home, that you had a stand that you could put your typewriter on…Oh, oh yes. So that you could keep moving?
I don't know how you knew that. When we lived in Long Island… I loved the sun, and I loved being out. And the one thing I didn't want was to become a pot-bellied old man. And so many writers I knew — because they sit at a desk all the time — get that way. So we had a terrace in our house that, the sun was always on the terrace. It was just situated in such a way. The sun rose here and set there, and all that time it faced the terrace. So what I did, I took a bridge table and I put it… opened it up, put it on the terrace, then I took another little table of some sort, or a soap box, I don't know, and I put it on top of the bridge table, and my portable typewriter on top of that. And I would stand and type. Sometimes I'd just wear a pair of swimming trunks if it was the middle of the summer. I would stand and type, and as the sun moved I would just keep moving while I was typing. You know, I'd keep moving the typewriter. And I tried for years, on the nice… in the nice weather — not in the rain or not on a cold day — but when the weather was nice I would stand outside and type. And sometimes the artists would come over and deliver the work to me, and they'd make fun of me. They'd see me out there standing and typing, and say: ‘Why doesn't your wife buy you a chair?’ But… and it was funny because the terrace was right near that pool that I told you that we made — the little plastic pool, put it into the ground — and we always had company. Our neighbor — Joan was incredibly popular — there were always people coming over, and after a while it was like I didn't exist. I'd be standing there typing, and they'd be talking and partying and drinking and kidding around, and any other guy it might have disturbed, but I was so used to working with noise and commotion and confusion around, I didn't even know they were there. Because even in the office when I used to work, there were millions of people walking in and out. Never bothered me, I just kept writing. Wow. Very focused. Pardon me? You must be very focused to channel out all those distractions… all those pretty ladies. When I write, that's the only thing on my mind. But I can't… it's a funny thing, I cannot write if the radio is on, or the television is on. I don't mind if people are there talking, but the television, radio… which I feel bad about because it would be nice to be able to have some music or something while I'm writing… but if there's music, the lyrics keep going around in my mind, or the rhythm, and instead of thinking, I'd going da-da-da-da-da, in my mind and I can't do it.

Mad Magazine was wonderful, and I was friends with most of the people Al Feldstein, Harvey Kurtzman, Al Jaffee, Dave… A lot of them had worked for us, and it was one of the great publications. In fact, I even published a magazine called Snafu, which was my homage to Mad. I wrote it all myself, it was… I thought it was brilliant I must say. And I loved… by the way, I love humor. If I had my preference, I would write nothing but funny stuff. In fact I'm working on a few movies and television bits now that are comedies. To me, writing humor is the greatest thing in the world. But Mad Magazine was just great, and as far as whether it influenced me, it either influenced me or I influenced them. I'm not sure which it was. But I'm sure I was very influenced by it, because their type of humor is my type of humor.

One thing I tried to do in order to make being a Marvelite fun, was have a club. But again, I don't like to do things in an ordinary way. I didn't want to put a notice in the magazine and say, ‘Hey, we've formed a club. Here's a coupon, sign it and join’. I wanted to make it a fun thing. So, I had a contest in my Soapbox. I announced that we were going to form a club. I said I'd give a prize to anybody who could figure out what the name of the club was, and I gave them a hint. The initials were the MMMS. And we got a million letters, they mentioned a million things. Of course none of them could guess the real name, which I finally announced was the Merry Marvel Marching Society. And then I would add of course, ‘We don't know where we're going, but we're on the way’. And I tried to make it fun thing. We had a membership card that would go to the member saying, something… I forget the exact words… this will entitle you to absolutely nothing but the privilege of being a Merry Marvel Marcher. And then, to make it very different, something you couldn't get in any other club, I marched most of the staff across the street to a recording studio, and I remember they were grumbling all the way: ‘Why do we have to do this? We got our strips to do. What the hell are we following Stan for and what's he got us doing now?’ Anyway, we went up to the studio, and we made a recording. We hadn't rehearsed, it was all ad lib. I announced what we were, and who we were, and I introduced Artie Simek, our letterer… I think he played the harmonica for a minute. And I introduced Jack Kirby who said, ‘What am I doing here?’ It was funny, it was really funny, and the… the members loved it. We sent these records… nobody else got a record like that. And we had a little Merry Marvel Marchers badge that we sent to people, and a certificate that looked like a doctor's certificate, or a graduation certificate, but when you read it… it was all nonsense. But it was very official looking. And… it was a terrible thing because our publisher, after a while — Martin Goodman — he said, ‘I don't want the club any more. It's wasting too much of your time’. I said, ‘It's great. Everybody loves it and we're having fun’. He said, ‘No, no, I want you all to spend time doing the books’. We had to drop it.
Years later, I wanted to try another club so I did the same thing. I came up with the name FOOM which, of course, stood for Friends Of Old Marvel, and we got a lot of members, but again Martin wasn't really behind it and… that dropped. They later tried to do a club when I was no longer there. That was a dismal failure because they didn't do it funny enough. But we should have stayed with the Merry Marvel Marching Society… I still meet people today. I meet men who come over to me with their kids — you know, for an autograph or something — and they say, ‘Stan, by the way look. I'm a Merry Marvel Marcher’, and the guy’ll take the card out of his wallet, you know? Great.

As I mentioned I write kind of fast, mostly ’cause I want to get rid of it. I want to get through and there's always something else I have to do. I can't waste time. And I make a lot of mistakes, a lot of mistakes. And in those days we didn't have computers, so I'd be typing. And I… if you want to do something over on a typewriter, you've got to cut and paste and it took too long. I had to let a lot of things go. And again, with my memory, sometimes I'd get a letter saying, ‘I just read the latest Hulk, and don't you remember that the Hulk's name is Bruce Banner and not Bill Banner?’ So… so many of those things and finally I decided I'm going to have fun with these things. And I said, ‘I'm going to offer a no-prize to anybody who finds an error’. I said, ‘We can't afford to pay real, to give you a real prize, but we'll give you a no-prize’. To… and everybody wondered what is a no-prize, so I had envelopes made up, and… we would write the person's name and address on the envelope, and I'd have a little note going diagonally along the front of the envelope that would say: ‘Congratulations, you are another lucky no-prize winner. You'll find it enclosed… enclosed’. They'd open it up, the envelope was empty. After a while, they'd realize a no-prize means you don't get a prize. And it was very funny; they got a big kick out of it. Again, even today I get people who say: ‘You know Stan, I found a lot of things and you never sent me a no-prize’. I have a few at home, so I'll go home and I'll get one and I'll mail it to the guy, just… which he never expects. And then… there was a fan who's quite a big writer now — name Mark Evanier — and he sent me a letter — a fan letter — and he said, what you ought to do is have the ranks of Marveldom, like you ought to have a… and he had a bunch of initials, and I can't remember what they are now, like a Real Frantic One — an RFO — and a… each set of initials meant something. The more books you bought a month gave you letters that would make you a higher rank. And those became known as the Ranks of Marveldom, and I thought that was a good idea. And again, I'd… I'd… I felt like a king taking a sword and tapping somebody kneeling in front of me on the shoulder. I would make somebody an RFO member, or a this, or that. And… I'd get a lot of mail from the readers saying, ‘I'm now at this stage. Can I become, can I be elevated to this stage because I'm buying an extra two books a month?’  And out of the goodness of my heart I would elevate them to the other stage. Everything we did, had to have a silly, funny sense to it.

Publicity is really one of the most important things in the world. You could have the greatest product in the world, if people don't know about it, it dies a'borning. So we… I love publicity, and as long as it's based on something. One day we decided to do a book based on the rock group KISS. I had met… oh it's great, I forget his name, the guy with the long tongue…Gene… Gene Simmons? Gene Simmons. Yeah. I had met Gene Simmons, in fact we had become quite friendly. And I remember, when they first started and he and Gene [sic] Stanley came up to my office, and they said:‘What do you think of our costume?’and they had these boots with soles this thick that made them six and half feet tall, and I'm looking at them and I'm thinking, these guys are crazy. Shows what I knew. But anyway, we decided to do a comic book based on KISS. And some publicity guy got the idea that they would go up to the printing plant where the books were printed, and each of the four members of KISS would take a pin and just prick their finger, and get a few drops of blood to come out, and drop those blots of… those blobs of blood… drops of blood, into the ink… into the red ink. I said, ‘You guys are out of your mind’. He said, ’No, no, it's great. It will get a lot of publicity’. The idea being that every kid, or everybody, who bought a KISS comic book, in some way was getting a little bit of KISS's blood in that comic book. That's brilliant. And sure enough, they chartered a plane, I went with them — like an idiot — we flew up to Buffalo where the press was, and I'll never forget this. The city of Buffalo had been told that we were coming, and there were policemen stopping… you know, two limousines were waiting. Policemen were at corners stopping traffic while we went to the printer, and all I could think of was these… this traffic that was stopped, there's probably some doctor going to save a person's life, there's probably some guy going to his job which is an important job. These people were being stopped while five morons — the four of them and me — are going to go and drop some blood in a printing plant. But anyway, we went there, and they put their little blood in there, and we drove back and… Tell you one thing, Gene Simmons has a photographic memory. On the plane going and coming, he was telling me — he's apparently a big fan — he was telling me, ‘Stan, do you remember that story you wrote in Spider-Man number 23? The third panel on the fifth page when you’… He remembered every… I've never known a guy… literally, a photographic memory. He… I was so impressed with him. He's really a nice guy and a shrewd business man. But he… a drop of his blood is somewhere in one of those comic books, and there it'll stay.
