walter.lassally

Born in Germany, cinematographer Walter Lassally (1926-2017) was best known for his Oscar-winning work on 'Zorba the Greek'. He was greatly respected in the film industry for his ability to take the best of his work in one area and apply it to another, from mainstream to international art films to documentary. He was associated with the Free Cinema movement in the 1950s, and the British New Wave in the early 1960s. In 1987 he published his autobiography called 'Itinerant Cameraman'.

I grew up in Germany, in Berlin. My father was German and my mother was Polish. We lived in a flat in Berlin where my father had also an animation bench, because he was in the film industry after a sort of fashion, not really... not the sort of film industry I'm in, or I was in. But he was trained as an engineer and he used film as an adjunct to his engineering work. So, for studying mechanical processes. He had his own company, making these films which were anything from 20 seconds to two hours long. He made two in the period between, let's say... It started in the silent days, it started, I think, round about 1924/25, something like that, and went on into the sound period. He had a friend who did the sound, once sound started. But most of his films didn't need sound because they were studies of some mechanical process, and they didn't require sound. Towards the end of his career, as it were, there were two long documentaries which were shown in cinemas, but the bulk of his work was non-theatrical. Anyway, to help with this work he had an animation bench in the flat and occasionally, you know, aged at about six or seven or eight, I was allowed to help by cranking the handle, or whatever. So that was fun. And that was my first contact with the cinema, but I don't think it was that that led me to my career choice, I shall call it. It was rather seeing films in the cinema, and I got quite fond of going to the cinema fairly early on. I remember I had a little badge made up from a trade journal, the company called UFA which is Universum-Film Aktiengesellschaft which was the MGM of Berlin, had this little sign and I had a badge made up and I wore it in the playground. When I went to school when I was playing in the playground I wore this little badge which said, UFA.

My father couldn't really work after the coming of the Nazis in 1933. Quite soon afterwards, he was actually prevented from working. They called it Berufsverbot which means prohibition to exercise your profession, because all the professionals had their various professional association, because the Germans are very thorough, as you know, in those kinds of things. So, he had to be a member of this professional association and after the coming of the Nazis they said Jews cannot be members of the professional association. Not Jews, actually, non-Aryans. We weren't Jews we were non-Aryans which meant, in effect, that we were Jewish enough to be thrown out of Germany by Hitler, but we were not quite Jewish enough to be accepted by the Jewish Relief Organisations in England. So we were in this strange category called non-Aryan, Nicht Arier, because Hitler went back three generations, and there were quite a lot of Jewish roots in my family, but they were all long ago. They all went back to my grandparents and beyond, and we didn't think of ourselves as Jews. We weren't Jews, we weren't, sort of, regular churchgoers, but we went to church, to a Protestant church, Lutheran church, for Easter and Christmas and things like that. We thought of ourselves as Christians, but for Hitler, of course, Jewishness wasn't a religion, it was a race, so you can't get out of that, you know. There's no way out of that. If your grandmother was Jewish, then you were Jewish, that was that; or you were not Aryan, not fully German.
Later on when I went to Poland, during my visit to the Polish Film School, I actually discovered some of the details of my family, because my mother was born in Łódź where the film school is situated. And, strange coincidence, a teacher at that film school, one of the professors there, he helped me. He said, if you need some help, I'll come with you. So we went to this archive, this office, and it so turned out that the woman who was in charge, the secretary who was in charge of the archive, actually went to school this man. And they looked at each other and they sort of said: aren't you? Yeah, aren't you? You know, whoever. Anyway, because of that coincidence I got hold of details which I photocopied and got with me now, which, without that particular coincidence, it would've taken weeks, no months, it would've taken months to get that sort of information. Because, first of all, you have to prove who you are, if you're entitled to the information, why, and all that kind of nonsense, was bypassed. Anyway, I'm jumping ahead a little bit, but it was very interesting to find out those details, going back to 1840, roughly. The further back you go, the more Jewish we became. People were called Zsigmund and Mojżesz, which is Moses, you know, Mojżesz. My great, great grandfather was called Mojzesz Warszawski.
So anyway, my father was prevented from exercising his profession after about 1934 and he did bits and pieces and got on as best he could, but he wasn't able to exercise his actual profession any more.

In 1938 [my father] was arrested with a lot of other people. The famous knock at the door, which wasn't in the middle of the night, and he was taken off to a concentration camp, Sachsenhausen, which later became quite famous. But we have to remember that in those days the concentration camps were, well they were called 're-education' camps, and nobody was killed in those camps, there weren't any gas chambers then, at that time. But anyway, they put all the Jews, or the non-Aryans, in there for re-education, and they told them, here you are and here you will stay until and unless you give us proof that you've arranged to emigrate. Because they wanted to get rid of all the Jews and the non-Aryans from Germany. So, on the one hand, it was a simple extortion manoeuvre, because when you left, you just took a little bit of money, no gold, no jewellery, and so everything was left behind, and, of course, the Nazis just pocketed all that money. When you treat a whole group of people like that, hundreds and hundreds of people, possibly, well probably thousands, yes, it comes to money when you collect all that booty, which they did. So, in 1938 when my father was arrested and put in Sachsenhausen concentration camp, my mother had to run about frantically finding a way of getting him out, and it took about two months. In the end she bought a Peruvian visa, which you could buy in those days and, on the basis of the Peruvian visa, we got an English transit visa. In the meantime my father had arranged, had sort of, semi-arranged a job in Canada as works photographer in a factory in Saskatchewan. But the paperwork wasn't complete at the time when we left, so we had to find a way of getting out of Germany before that paperwork came through, so that's what led to the Peruvian visa and the English transit visa. And, so we finally left at the end of June 1939, two months before the outbreak of war. We packed up all our belongings, and they were packed in things that nowadays they would be called containers, but then they were called lifts. They were great big boxes. They were supposed to be sent on to us, the furniture and bits and pieces, but actually the war broke out and they ended up being bombed by the RAF in Bremerhaven Harbour. So we never got any of that stuff, including my little model railway which I missed severely, sadly.

I've actually seen Hitler, yes, once. At one point I, not knowing that he was actually our enemy, at the age of, I don't know, it must have been seven, eight, I once climbed a tree along the route where he was supposed to be passing by, you know. And then when he... and yes, and some bloke helped me to climb the tree and when the procession had passed by and they all dispersed, I couldn't get down again because the chap had disappeared. So I had a problem getting down from the tree. But that was my... it was funny, it was... my contact with that whole business was very fragmented and strange. I have strange, kind of, fragmented memories, like that episode of climbing that tree. And, another one, playing in the... there was a little park nearby in the Charlottenburg area of Berlin, and I played there. And once some children taunted me about being Jewish. Somehow they discovered all that. So I remember that. And, towards the end of, or the middle of '38, I had to be taken out of school. I wasn't allowed to attend a normal school anymore, and they had to, they found a private tutor for me, and for the last 10 months or so before we left, I had this private tutor. But as you can imagine, it all got more and more and more urgent that you should leave. Well once my father was in the camp, of course, it was very urgent. So eventually my mother was able to provide the necessary proof that we would leave, and he was released and we left.

In addition to my memories of climbing the tree to see Hitler and the thing in the playground, I also remember the night they called Kristallnacht, the night of the broken glass, where all the Jewish shops were attacked. There was a Jewish shop in the street where we lived and they smashed the plate glass window, and they wrote, 'Jew, Jude, Jude', and the Jewish stars, what are they called? The pentagram, no, it's not a pentagram. What is that called?
[Q] Star of David. 
Star of David. The Star of David. Pentagram. That comes somewhere else. The Star of David was daubed in white paint on the window. I do remember that. But, you see, that is something that they did to the Jews, and we weren't Jews. So I have this strange sense that it was the injustice of it that bothered me. You know, why do you persecute us? We're not Jews. It's that that bothered me. It wasn't the fact that a sort of general... well, I was too young for a start, you know, at 11 or 12, you don't think about the injustice of persecuting any section of the community. You think: well, why me? Because I am not a Jew!

We got on a train in Berlin to Oostend, to catch the boat for Dover, and it was a train which, in theory, it connected with a ferry to England. But in Aachen, which is also called Aix-la-Chapelle, they pulled us off the train and they made us wait in the waiting room while they went through the papers. Just a deliberate, the Germans call it Schikanierung, a deliberate thing to make you miss the ferry, you see. So we spent the night on the floor of the waiting room in Aachen, then we were put on some other train, having made sure that we were going to miss the ferry, and we had to wait again for the next ferry, and all that. But at least we all... with hindsight, the good thing was that at least we all got out alive, the family, because I'm an only child. We all got out alive which was the main thing. My father's two sisters weren't so lucky, my aunts, and they ended up in Dachau, we don't even know where they ended up, but they were definitely killed in one of the concentration camps. So that was you know, we got out with our lives and that was the main thing. There was a moment when I cried... no, I don't want to go to a country where I don't speak the language, and what am I going to do, I don't know English, and all that. They said, well, you'll be all right. And, of course, it was all right. Funnily enough, because I'd learnt English by rote, in the second year... in the second term of the first year in an English school, I came second in English, because all the others thought, well, we don't have to study that, we know it anyway. I actually came second in the English lessons.
But, when we initially arrived in England we breathed a great sigh relief and first of all we were a couple of weeks, I think, in some hotel in Bloomsbury, and then we found a very small flat, a one-roomed flat in Richmond in Surrey. In that sort of period, before the war, in those two months before the outbreak of war, I think I was sent off alone to a holiday in Hastings. I had this holiday in Hastings in a boarding house in Hastings. I remember that the landlady was called Mrs Tyrrell, because somewhere in my collection, I had started already with, I had a little box camera, which I think... I'm sure I brought it with me from Germany, but I don't remember taking any photos in Germany, but I certainly started taking photos then. One of the photos, which I still have somewhere, is called 'Mrs Tyrrell's Cat'. So, I had this week in Hastings and I went back to England... to London and it was a nice ordinary summer, because very few people were aware that the war was going to break out within months, almost weeks.

The first memories of London are that opposite Victoria Station there is a little cinema, which later turned into a news cinema, but at that time it was an ordinary little cinema, and showing was Snow White and the little... the Seven Dwarfs, which was banned in Germany, because Disney was a Jew. So they weren't allowed to show that. So oh, marvellous, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. So we all went to the cinema before we were even settled into our hotel, we went to the cinema to see Snow White and the little dwarfs... and the Seven Dwarfs. And the other thing I remember is that there was this... I was keen on trains, and underground trains and all that, so I went all the way round the Circle Line, which at that time, was called The Inner Circle.

And then, of course, the war broke out and my mother was very upset she said... she said, 'The war is,' I remember her saying this, she said, 'War is one of the most... it's the most terrible thing that can happen to a country'. Yes, she was very, very upset.
There were no immediate effects, the day after war broke out wasn't any different to the day before war broke out, because it took some time for the air raids to begin, and all that. There was a, sort of a, like a busman's holiday, you know, there was an interval where nothing much happened. But my father was... eventually they started arresting all the aliens, as they were called. And my father was taken off to another camp, but it was rather better than Sachsenhausen. He was taken off to the Isle of Man, just in time to miss the Blitz. So, my mother and I spent every night in the shelter in the Blitz, and he was sitting, very comfortably, in the Isle of Man. And, eventually they had these tribunals and he was released, because when he was given a clean bill of health, as it were, that he wasn't a spy, then they released him and we all got together again, and lived in Richmond, happily ever after, sort of.

I wanted to show you, I still have my Kinderpass. This is my passport, my children's passport. It's just a sheet of paper with two sides to it, and on the back there's a J, there's a red J, which means Jew, and I was given the additional name, Israel. All the men, all the males were given an additional name, Israel. So here it says, Lassally, Walter Israel. And, all the women were called Sarah. So my mother was called Adella Sarah Lassally, and my father, Arthur Israel Lassally. Yet another tag to make sure that people didn't miss the fact that you were Jewish.
Then at the bottom here, it says, upside down actually, it says, 'Permitted to land', I really need glasses, but I know more or less what it says, 'permitted to land at Dover on 27/6/1939 on condition that the Holder', then something is crossed out, oh, yes, it says, 'registers at once with the police', which is crossed out, for some reason, yeah... because I was a child. So, 'on condition that the Holder register at once with the police', which is crossed out, 'does not remain in the United Kingdom longer than 12 months and does not enter any employment, paid or unpaid'. Voila!

Once my father was released from the Isle of Man, which of course the war was still on, it was quite early on in the war, it must have been early in 1940 that he was released, just after the Blitz finished. Then he got a job as a fire-watcher in a laundry. And he spent the rest of the war like that, watching out for incendiary bombs, and then when the war finished, he... he tried once or twice to get back into film-making, but industrial film-making of the type that he was engaged in... in the '20s and '30s, didn't exist in England. It was a category of work that just didn't exist. So people sort of said: well, we don't really know what you're talking about. We don't do things like that here. But during that time, he contacted a chap called Terry Turtle – I'll come back to that later on – who was the Head of Camera in the Riverside Studios, to help him with his work, because he did do two tiny sections for somebody up North, I forget what they were, they were about some plastic product, I seem to remember. Just like commercials, but not as commercials.
But anyway, his main work after the war, which started immediately after the war finished, he became a... he was a translator, working for the government, because they had tons and tons and tons of captured German documents which all needed translating, and they had a whole team of people sitting down in Knockholt which is beyond Sevenoaks, down in Kent, or Sussex. Kent. In Kent. And he travelled every day, commuted every day, from Richmond to Kent, which is quite a way. It involves like three changes of train and all that. But he did that for some years, until this huge pile of documents had been translated. But it's very sad that he didn't... he never... he was never able to exercise his profession again. First of all, the Nazis stopped him and then when he went to England and he was free again to do his work, he couldn't find any work because that kind of work wasn't known about. They didn't know about that sort of thing in England. And so, the upshot of all that is that all that remains of his work as a film-maker is a little sheath of clippings which you can put in your top pocket here, with a logo which says, Film Ingenieur Lassally GMBH, which means, Film Engineer Lassally GMBH, which is the code for company. In the middle is a sort of oval with the letters going round and round and he's in the middle with one of those hand-cranked cameras. He had a very beautiful, wooden hand-cranked Ernemann camera, which I think he later motorised, but initially it was hand-cranked. It's funny how people... for years after the war and for years afterwards, cameras were always represented in a certain way by people who drew pictures of cameramen at work, or something. It was always a square box with two reels on the top, and often with a crank on the side, which hadn't existed for years, you know, that type of camera. But the people who drew cameramen at work, always drew that kind of camera.

So I left school in 1943, the war was still on, and I knew exactly what I wanted to do with my life at that age, at the age of 16. I knew exactly that I wanted to be... not only that I wanted to work in the film industry, but that I wanted to be a cameraman, quite specifically. It wasn't until many years later that I discovered that not everybody is quite so certain at that kind of age, so early on. That came as a surprise to me. I thought everybody was like that. So, quite consciously I started to prepare myself, from that last year in school. During the war... during the entire war the cinemas, as you know, kept going they didn't close down or anything. In fact the Windmill Theatre had this slogan: 'We never clothed', because it was a theatre with nudes.
Anyway, the cinemas didn't close, so I have many happy memories of going to the cinema... Odeon and Premier cinemas in Richmond. There were three cinemas in Richmond at that time. And, I went once or twice a week every week. I remember, while the war was still on, we had... they used to flash a thing up on the screen, which said, air raid warning, which you could hear anyway. If the sirens wailed, they were so loud you could hear them anyway, but just in case, they flashed a thing onto the screen, with the slide projector, which they all had in those days, to say 'Air raid', the air raid warning has sounded, and then people could leave if they felt like it, but very few people left, because the daytime raids in 1942-1943 weren't very serious or very severe, so people knew that it probably was almost like a false alarm, that there wasn't any real danger. That came later with the V1's and V2's where you couldn't have any warning. Anyway, so, once or twice, I remember, there were amusing incidents when the 'All Clear' sounded. Because, again, they'd flash the sign onto the screen, which said, 'All Clear', you see. And once or twice that sort of coincided with the action in the movie. There's a film starring Phyllis Calvert, which is a period film, I don't remember the title, where she's bathing in some sort of pool in the nude, and she comes out, just sort of up to here. She comes out up to here and looks around whether there's anybody about, I suppose, before she gets out, and it said, 'All Clear'. Then she got out of the pool. There were a couple of instances like that. That's the only one I can remember, but there were a couple of instances like that.
Anyway I, as soon as I left school, I started to write letters to the various film studios to see if I could get a job as clapper boy, or any other kind of job, but basically I wanted to start at the bottom of the camera department ladder, which was being a clapper boy. But I didn't have any luck because, as soon as the war finished, all the studios had to reserve places for those coming back from the war. So I didn't have any luck until quite a bit later when, through the intervention of Terry Turtle, whom my father had met and Terry admired my father's... I remember he admired my father's punctiliousness, when he was given a camera, you know, how he examined it and prepared it, and so on. So that impressed Terry Turtle, so he wanted to do what he could for me. So, he finally gave me a job as clapper boy at Riverside Studios in... I think it was 1945, December 1945, something like that.

My first job after leaving school was at a process engraver's called Leonardson's. And, as the war was still on, they... that firm... a lot of the people that used to work there had gone into the army, so that firm was being operated by the owner and two boys, two teenage boys, like me. They were great practical jokers, these two boys. Not only did they used to put ink on the... printer's ink on all the handles of the machinery that the other people had to use, but they also did things like, if you went to the loo, which was a very improvised kind of affair, with a door that didn't reach to the top or to the bottom of the frame. So, when you were sitting there on the loo, they used to come along and pour ammonia under the door. Lovely, lovely chaps.
But it was all good experience. Process engraving is quite an interesting art. It doesn't exist anymore really, in that form. Don't need it now, it's all computerised, but it was quite an interesting art. I find that any job that I did had interesting parts of it, which could teach me things that were useful later on.

The job at Leonardson's, I didn't really fancy that. I thought this is okay, but I can do better than that. So then I... then I went to... I found a job in a photographic studio which was run by a very interesting man called Jean Straker, Jean like the French Jean, but he wrote it Jean and he called himself Jean, although that's really a woman's name in English. Anyway, that was his name, Jean Straker and he ran a photographic business in partnership with two other photographers, one of whom was a Hungarian called Gabor Denes and the other one was a industrial photographer, his name was Collier, Lionel... I think it was Lionel Collier. So between the three of the... Straker was a sort of photojournalist really, but he was a man of all work. He knew many things. They had this building in Berwick Market which, for some reason, the ground floor... during the entire time that I was there, the ground floor of that building was occupied by a job lot... job lot of Arab toilets. You know, the toilet you kneel... you squat on rather than you sit on, and, for some reason, which I've never understood, there were all these lying on the floor; the ground floor was entirely covered. So the ground floor wasn't used, but the building had about eight floors. So it had a studio in it and a lab... a processing lab for stills. I learnt an awful lot from all the three of them. Portraiture from the Hungarian and, kind of, opportunistic photography or journalistic photography from Straker, and industrial photography from Collier, from the third one.
So that was a very interesting time, and it went on for two years. And then I got my first job in the film industry, if you use a very broad definition, which was with a tiny firm called Kinocrat, which we used to call Kinocrap, which made documentary films on... and medical films on 16mm because one of the owners, it was a partnership, two people, and one of the two people was a medical doctor. So they made a certain amount of medical films. One of the first films I remember assisting on was called Complete Laryngectomy and it was an extremely bloody film. I learnt... in that film I learnt to, sort of, watch blood without fainting, because it was an extremely bloody film, in Kodachrome, of course. But the thing about 16mm was that 16mm was considered the amateur... a gauge for amateurs and there were only two companies in London at that time, we're talking about '45 '46? '46. There were only two companies at the time in London using that as a professional medium for their work. And there was a laboratory in London, which for many years, went under the name of Substandard Film Finishers Limited. And the reason for that was that 35mm was known as the Standard Gauge, and 16mm was known as the Substandard Gauge. So they called themselves Substandard Film Finishers because they only processed 16 mm, and it didn't occur to them that perhaps this wasn't necessarily a good title for a company. So after many years they changed their name to Filmatic and it still exists under that name.

It lasted exactly 10 months and then not only that studio, but a lot of other studios closed down. There was one of the perennial crises in the film industry, which... I think there's been more crisis in the film industry than... non-crisis is the exception. Crisis is the normal condition of the British film industry, in my experience.
But anyway, it was very nice being able to get a start and, at that time, I was... oh, I had a... I had an opportunity earlier once, but I was going to evening classes, studying for a BSc basically. Because my father was fairly insistent that I get a good, what he called, a good education, a good basis. And I realised quite early on that a formal education in either arts or sciences doesn't really help you in the film industry. In fact, they're... they're opposed to it in some ways, and so when I told this – I can't remember where that was, but I had an opportunity where they were going to take me on as clapper boy, but when I told them that I went to evening classes, that meant I couldn't do any overtime. Now, they didn't often have overtime, but they said: no, no, no, we can't have anybody that can't work whatever hours we require, not that they worked very long hours in those days. The hours were quite reasonable, and the Unions were very strong and they controlled all that fairly tightly. But they wouldn't take on anybody that, if need be, couldn't continue into overtime. So that failed, but eventually I did get in.
And, simultaneously, various other things happened. I... before that I went round all the studios and tried to get in and it didn't... it didn't happen until 1945. And then, as I say, it lasted only 10 months, but I did get a chance to work with some interesting people, including Otto Heller, who became quite a good friend. He was a Czech cameraman working in England at the time. He would, sort of, pat me on the head and say, 'All right, my boy, what?' And there was a director on my first movie which was called Dancing with Crime, was the first movie where I was a clapper boy, which was actually made at Southhall, but Southhall was part of the same group as Riverside Studios, and that was made there. And the director of that film was a guy called John Paddy Carstairs, and he was very good to me. Because most of the technicians, like in the production department and so on, they were... they didn't want me to be interested in becoming a cameraman, and they said: you just clap those two pieces of wood together and don't you worry about anything else, except be first in the tea queue. That was the most important thing, because the clapper board had a secondary function. Upside down it was also the tea tray. Once I nearly caused a major incident because I was chatting to the electrician, who was in charge of turning on the red and green lights and ringing the bell when the director called for – the assistant director – called for rehearsal, this chap switched on a green light and... which showed outside the stage and rang a bell. That was his only job. So he was sitting there all day, near the door, he had a little pedestal next to him which had three switches on it. One day I was chatting to him and I happened to have my hand resting on the pedestal, when the assistant director called: 'Green light', and I just flicked the switch. And, my God! 'Don't you ever do that again!' Because that was his job, you know. I was in danger of putting somebody out of work by flicking a switch.

It was largely due to the Union's abuses... due to the Union's abuse of power that some of these crises happened where the studio shut down. And... two pictures which were in production just prior to that studio shutting down, were, sort of reasonably major feature film, called Daughter of Darkness, starring Siobhan McKenna, and also in production was a much lesser thing, more like a B feature, but it became famous, or infamous, for being the first, sort of, pornographic film. It wasn't in the least pornographic, but it was called, No Orchids for Miss Blandish, and it's based on a novel by James Hadley Chase, and it had the reputation of being terribly, terribly, risqué. There weren't any nude scenes or anything, but it was... it had this reputation of being very, very dodgy. And those two pictures, one of which, as I said, was almost a B feature, were in production, would you believe, 24 and 26 weeks, respectively. Whereas those kind of picture would now be made in 24 or 26 days. And then it took 24 or 26 weeks, and, of course, the industry couldn't sustain that. It's impossible. It was absolutely impossible.

The big difference between the film crews in studios now and then, was that the studios weren't filled with film buffs, with people who were terribly interested in film as a medium. They were there because it was a good job, it was well paid, it was sort of glamorous, but they were there because they had an uncle or a friend or a father in the business, and they just regarded it as a nice job. Because when... when I became a clapper boy, my salary jumped, in one jump, from £2/10 shillings to £10! My salary quadrupled, because as a... as an assistant in the... at Kinocrat I think I got, initially, £2/10 and then... which is £2.50 in today's terms, and then it went up to £3. I jumped from £3 to £10, just by becoming a clapper boy. But because... what I didn't realise was that the £2/10 job probably could've gone on for years, and the other one was an interval in between bouts of unemployment. That's why those salaries had to be a bit larger, because they weren't guaranteed in any way. But they weren't film buffs. If you'd mentioned to the assistant director or the assistant cameraman, or the focus puller, or any of those people, if you talked to them about Eisenstein or Jean Vigo, they'd say: who, what? Or even somebody like Busby Berkeley who is, after all, quite well known, the famous American choreographer, they wouldn't know who he was. They wouldn't know the names of directors in Europe and America. They wouldn't know any of that. And they wouldn't be interested. They were just interested in doing their job and going up the ladder, because that meant more money, not because it got you closer to being a DP.

Watch the Birdie is a little film that I made while I was at Kinocrat. By that time I had encountered my long-time friend, Derek York, who, alas, is no longer with us, with whom I subsequently made two amateur... semi-amateur movies I'll describe later. Anyway, Derek York and I worked at Kinocrat. Once we got the idea that we would take a 50ft roll of 16mm film and make a little silent movie which would be cut in the camera. So the entire movie would be made on those 50ft of film... 50ft of 16mm is something like two minutes... two minutes of shooting. So, we got this idea that we would show somebody coming in to have their photograph taken, and they'd go to the reception and they'd say, so and so and so, I want portraits, and this, and then they'd go to the studio, and they'd be sat down and they'd be lit, and the man would have a big plate camera with a bulb that you pressed for the exposure. And... and then they would leave and two days later they would come back and collect the photos at reception. So all that story we told, and we ran out of film just... we got it judged pretty well, but we ran out of film just before we finished the scene of her collecting the photos at the end. But all the... all the main part of being sat down and lit, because one of the three guys working there was a... or one of the two guys working there was a quite a good stills photographer, quite a good portrait photographer. And that was their main business, doing that. Film-making was kind of an adjunct. Anyway that was very interesting, and this film still exists, this little box of 50ft of 16mm, which we called Watch the Birdie.

Derek York is somebody whom I met when I went to the Holborn Film Society. Because at that time, in the '40s, '46, '47, that sort of period, I used to go to film societies to see the latest foreign movies, which you could only see in film societies, even before... there were a couple of specialist cinemas in London, but very few, and often you had to go to a film society if you wanted to see something out of the way, out of the ordinary. And at one of those film society screenings, at the Holborn Film Society, I met Derek York and we soon discovered that we had similar interests. We both wanted to become film-makers. He was a writer and became a director. So we got together, and I got him a job at Kinocrat. I was there first and he joined us. Then, we decided to make a rather more elaborate film. More elaborate, that is, than Watch the Birdie. And at that time the squatter's movement happened in London where... it was communist inspired, but not entirely communist in nature. But there was a... there was a considerable housing shortage, but at the same time there was... there were many empty properties which, for some reason or other, couldn't be occupied, or couldn't be let. So the squatter's movement was... they broke into these empty properties and squatted in there to draw attention to the housing problem. When this movement was at its height and they were being pursued by the police and got out, and there was quite a few battles going on. So during that time, we took the opportunity, we quickly borrowed a camera from Kinocrat, I imagine, it must have been, and we filmed some of those events taking place in the West End of London, in a place called the Ivanhoe Hotel, that was one place that was occupied, and the other places were just office buildings or private flats, or things that just happened to be standing empty. And we managed to get some shots of people moving furniture in through the windows, because the doors were locked, underneath it was padlocked. The proper entrance was padlocked. They smuggled furniture in and... so we got three or four documentary pieces, like newsreel, bits. And they formed the centrepiece of this film, Smith Our Friend, where Derek wrote a framing story about a returning serviceman, somebody coming home from the war, being demobbed, they call it, demobilised, demobbed, carrying a little cardboard box, which had a suit in it which was given to you by the government. You see, when you were demobbed you had this cardboard box with a suit in it. And, so this film starts with this guy coming out with his cardboard box and being welcomed home by his wife and child at a very slummy place in East London somewhere, in Stepney, and then you see the house is badly in need of repair, the roof leaks, the walls are damp, and the whole place is very much in need of care and maintenance. And we actually staged this. We took some more actual shots in real... people's real houses who were living under very, very poor conditions, but the main part of the story was staged in a school hall, because Derek's father was a caretaker.

So we had this school hall available. And by carefully using the fixtures, like in one corner there was a stove like this one, and in another corner there was a sink. And by carefully choosing our angles, we had a table in the middle and we made these various angles appear like it was all a relatively small rectangular room, but it was actually different pieces of a large hall. But that was quite interesting and I wrote an article about how that was done... how that was planned and which was published in the Amateur Cine World, which is one of the first articles I ever wrote. Then I continued writing articles throughout my career, for various journals.
Anyway, that film, which was silent, was a mute, a silent film, which ran 15 minutes, I think. Many years later it became an extraordinary document that I was summoned, more or less, to the Imperial War Museum to talk about that film. And then the BBC asked to... use a piece of it, like 26 seconds of it, I think, where he's walking through the East End of London. He's walking through Stepney, he's at Aldgate somewhere, with the bombed out buildings behind him. And years later they kept asking for this material. It was the only material that existed of London in those days, which I can't believe. But only the other day I got a cheque for £400 for the BBC extending their right to use this footage for another 10 years, non-theatrically, 26 seconds of a silent film made on 16mm, in 1946. It's turned into a gold mine.
But the first showing of that film... that was also very interesting. When it was finished we showed it at the annual viewing session of the Federation of Film Societies, which once a year they had a viewing session where all the secretaries of the film societies came to London, and they sat through films all day and all night – it went on forever. Two days, I think, almost continuously, where they could see all the latest French and Italian, whatever was available from the distributors. And it was shown at that session and it was recommended, afterwards, there was a programme – it was recommended in this – I can't remember, in some journal. It might have been, again, The Amateur Cine World, and it says: this is a very, very interesting little film, but it must be remembered that it's strong propaganda for the illegal practice of squatting. And then, when people applauded that film, a gentleman called Mr Cotterell got up. Now, Mr Cotterell was the Secretary, I believe, of the Leicester Film Society, and he got up and he said, in a fairly kind of hoi-polloi accent, he said, 'I'm glad you liked that one. Mr Lassally is a pupil of mine'. Now, this wasn't exactly true, because the only contact we'd had... he was also a mountain climber, and in the summer previously, I had gone on an expedition with him up Snowdon, climbing Snowdon, which was organised by the British Film Institute used to run things called a Summer School, and as part of the Summer School, I went climbing with him. That was the only contact we had. In the movie... in that screening he took credit for – 'he's a pupil of mine'. So, ever since then, I'd be very careful, after my stint in the National Film School and all that, I always think of that incident when I say, 'Oh, yes he was a pupil of mine'. So I'm very careful not to say that too often, not to take the credit for somebody else's work, because he was a pupil of mine.

After the job at Riverside collapsed, I became, willy-nilly, a freelance which we all had to do, and I looked for work as... mainly on documentaries. And for the next two years, more or less, I worked, off and on, as camera assistant on documentaries and focus puller on second units of features, and, in between there were also times when I couldn't even find work in those capacities. It wasn't easy. I had a spell... a whole summer, as developer and printer of pictures they used to take at the seaside. In those days you had little men going round the seaside with their Leicas, taking, or even pretending to take, a snapshot and saying: look I've taken your picture and you can have it for so much, 5/- and it'll be ready tomorrow. And we used to develop these things and we had... there was a lot of it. We had... we had 45 Leica rolls per day, which were all developed in little tanks. And on Mondays we had 90 because of the whole of the weekend. And then they were developed and they were printed there, and sent out to the various people who sent them in. So I did that for a whole summer. And I was also a film repairer in a 16mm film library and also a projectionist for a while, in two different cinemas. Because, even getting... even getting... temporary, you know, getting work as focus puller or as clapper boy - no, clapper boy I didn't do. Focus puller or camera assistant on documentaries, even getting that kind of work was... it was patchy, distinctly patchy.

But I did meet Richard Massingham, who was a lovely man. He is also a medical doctor. But he ran this documentary film company... he didn't practice as a doctor. And they made... this documentary company, his company, made a very interesting film, which, to my best of my knowledge, is the only government-sponsored comedy, intentional that is... intentional comedy, that was ever made. It was a film called What a Life. And it starred himself, because he's a very well known figure. Anybody of that... who remembers him, of that... of that age, will remember him because he had a sort of hang-dog spaniel kind of face. And he used to appear in his films quite often. Anyway, they made this film called What a Life which had a very simple story that round about 1948, I think it must have been made. There was a very... quite a bad atmosphere in the... in England where people who thought now the war's over we're all going to be rich, you know, and everything's going to be fine, and it wasn't fine and they didn't get any richer. And so they were a bit disappointed and a bit depressed, so the government sponsored this film.

So the subject of this comedy was that there's these two people, these two friends, who decide that England isn't worth living in anymore so they're going to commit suicide. So they go down to Southend and they get a little... they get a little tiny little row boat, and he's quite a large man, so you have these two figures, this large man and this rather smaller man, played by Russell Waters, also a very familiar face and very good actor. These two people... they've got a little Union Jack at the back of the boat and they have these... they have something... some sort of weight round their neck so that they really drown when they jump in, you see. So they row out with this little Union Jack fluttering behind them, and they row some way out, and then they put these necklaces on, which are... I think, like millstones or something, they were. And, they kind of cross themselves and they jump in, but the water's only knee deep. So they have a good laugh and they wade back to shore, and that's the end... the end of the film. That was during that period of my focus puller and second unit period.

There were two major disappointments during that time, I got fired twice. Once, on Night and the City, which is a Jules Dassin film, I was focus puller on the second unit, working for a cameraman called Jo Jago, who was the second unit cameraman for Max Greene whose real name is Mutz Greenbaum. but he was called Max Green when he worked in England. He was the main cameraman on the main unit for Night and the City, and Jo Jago headed the second unit. And sometimes we worked alongside the first unit, but very often we worked separately, as a separate unit... doing pick-ups and all kinds of run-by's and odd things. But the camera operator on the second unit was a man called Hal Brittan who drank rather a lot and smoked rather a lot, and, they really wanted to fire him. But there wasn't any easy way of doing this. The union would've objected, there would have been a whole brouhaha, so instead of firing him they closed down the whole second unit. Then, after a decent interval, they reformed the second unit but without him and without me. So that was that. And the second time I got fired, that was... I can't remember if that was before or afterwards, was when I'd just got the job as focus puller on a series of 13 TV films. They were TV films being made for American TV, because English TV hadn't started at that point. And... but the Americans made quite a few features... quite a few TV films in Britain at that point as... because it was cheaper to work in Britain than it was to work in America. So, one of those was... well there were two spells but the one at Riverside, where I got this job for 13 weeks, supposedly, there was something wrong with the camera. We were filming on Mitchells, not BNCs, but ordinary Mitchells, it's called the standard Mitchell, and it was a camera that... you put in a big blimp, so for sound shooting it had to be in this blimp which was about this size, quite a large thing.
And... and the camera had a turret with four lenses on it. And, for some strange reason, which I never really understood, was, that it didn't have a handle by which you would turn the turret. If you wanted to turn the turret to switch lenses, you had to undo a screw which was just there to hold it in place, and then you had to grab one of the lenses, and actually turn the turret by means of the lens. Now this mechanism was very stiff on this camera. So I said, 'This isn't right, it shouldn't be like that'. But the studio had a maintenance department and so I gave it to the studio maintenance department and said, 'Look, it doesn't turn easily'. So they looked at it, they did it, and they returned it, and we shot with this camera and it turned out that they'd got it wrong. They hadn't replaced the turret in the correct position, and there was a very slight out-of-focus-ness about all the shots. They were slightly soft, which we would call slightly soft. And there was a terrible row. And, of course, I ended up getting fired. And I said, 'Look this is not... this is the camera which is being maintained by this camera maintenance department, it's not...' And the producer said to me – it was one of the Danziger brothers who were pretty notorious, or became notorious as cheapskates – he said to me, 'Do you realise I have to live with this picture?!'  So, I said, 'Well, in that case, what can I say'.

So when Smith Our Friend had a measure of success, which was all one could expect, we were quite happy, but we wanted to go on to bigger and better things. So we decided to form a semi-professional film unit, which was called Screen Craft and which we... where we found some 12 or 15 people who were interested and who were prepared to contribute £5 each to the kitty for the making of this film. And £5 at that time was a considerable sum of money. It was about two weeks' salary for me in the jobs I had prior to being a clapper boy. So Derek wrote a new script, which was again about... well, it was about a young bloke who is at a bit of a loose end, he doesn't really know what he wants, what he wants to do with his life. First of all we see him sitting in his bed-sitting room somewhere, sort of looking out the window and pacing about and musing generally, and no dialogue. Then he goes out and he has a series of encounters, which is sort of symbolic, you could say, I suppose. It's a very romantic film and very naïve and very young, made by very naïve people. So he meets an army recruiting poster, a prostitute and a beautiful young girl, in that order. The film was designed initially to run 20 minutes. And then we decided to extend it before we had hardly started... when we'd just started filming, because the filming went on in sections every now and then when we were all free, at weekends, but with big intervals in between. And, soon... quite soon after we started we decided to extend it from 20 minutes to just over 33 minutes, because that was a barrier... that was a limit. If a film was over 33 minutes long, it qualified for quota as a featurette, so you had a, kind of, guaranteed entry into the cinemas because the owners got some money back. There was a thing called the Eady Scheme which, under certain conditions the theatre owners could get a refund. So we decided to lengthen it to 33 minutes and we added two scenes, both quite lengthy. Well, together they were something like 13 or 14 minutes long. One was a scene in a public library and the other was a scene at an outdoor political meeting, where somebody is standing on a soapbox and going on about things. And both those things... both those scenes were predominantly dialogue scenes, whereas the rest of the film, for various reasons, was largely without dialogue.

I need to remind you that at that time sound recording was a hell of a problem, particularly for amateurs. There was no tape. There was no magnetic recording of any kind. There was wire recording, but that was only used for the army for certain things, and was very poor quality. So it wouldn't be suitable. And, in order to record sound for a movie, in those days, you needed a truck... a truck full of equipment, including an optical camera. A camera that recorded sound optically onto a separate film. So by the time you had all that stuff together, you had this truck. And many studios had a garage. The sound department was, in fact, a garage where this truck, which could also be used on location, was backed into this garage, and at the back there were a lot of cable connections. So you plugged in all the various bits and pieces, and they led, via cable, to the studio. And that's why you need a large sound crew. The Unions stipulated that you needed a minimum crew of four in the sound department, as you needed a minimum crew of four in the camera department. But the four people in the sound department each had a specific job to do, there was the sound recorder is on the stage, with that little mixing panel in front of him. There was the boom man. There was a chap who helped generally to run the cables, and there was, very important, there was the sound camera operator who was sitting somewhere else in his little booth, or his truck, recording the sound on an optical sound camera. So sound recording was not something you could do very easily.
So we had decided, first of all, that the...a large part of the film wouldn't have any... wouldn't need sound recording because it wouldn't have any dialogue. And only the last section, which takes place in a café called Velotti's, which was next to the British Film Institute in Shaftesbury Avenue, only that had dialogue, and this dialogue we proposed to post-synch. I can't remember if we had the guide track... we couldn't have had a guide track because what would we record it on? It just wasn't possible. The first tape recorder that I ever operated was a relatively basic affair that we used in 1950... now what year was that? 1952, when I made the documentary Thursday's Children with Lindsay Anderson, '52 or '53. I had this little Philips tape recorder which was one of the earliest ones produced and some of the scenes in that film are recorded with that tape recorder. But in '48 we didn't even have that. So we couldn't do it that way. And then we went into these rather more elaborate scenes in the library and in the political meeting on the soapbox, which I loved. But there again it had to be post-synched. It was all going to be post-synched. And then a major problem arose because Bryan Forbes who was the main actor in this film, who at that time was a small-time actor who'd already started his career, but only just. He used to play, what did they call it, the 'Below Deck Sailors', who were always Cockney and figures of fun, because in those days in the '50s and before, working class people were... didn't appear a lot in movies. If they were there they were there for comic effect, usually. They weren't treated very seriously. So Bryan Forbes had a whole series of parts as a below-deck sailor in some warship or other. Anyway, he agreed to do this film, and he was the main character. About half way through... this film, incidentally, was filmed between '48 and '52, over four years; the filming stretched over four years, and even then it wasn't finished. But somewhere in the middle, somewhere round about 1950, Bryan Forbes decided to get married and he was going to emigrate to America. He did go to America. He married somebody called Constance Smith, who was his first wife, and they went off to America. So, in a great hurry and with a lot of fuss, we managed to get him into a studio in London where we recorded his dialogue, but only his dialogue because he couldn't get together all the people that he was talking to, particularly in the library scene. There were a whole lot of people he was conversing with, so we only had his lines because he was due to leave next week. So we recorded his lines on a big one-inch EMI huge machine that they had in that... it was a post-synching studio in Soho Square, it's still there I think. So we did that and we put them all away somewhere and eventually they got lost actually. We can't find them. But anyway, that was... they were recorded and he went off to America and we went on with the rest of the movie.

So there was this... there was these scenes in his room and there was quite an interesting shot in the... I have a picture of that, I'll show it to you later... quite an interesting shot in this film where you're looking... he's lying on his bed, in his little bed-sitting room, and he's looking out of his window and, in a house some distance away that he can see from his window, because his house is up a bit of a hill, so he's sort of looking down across the valley, you could say. And some little way away there is a house and the sun is catching the window, so it's reflecting back strongly from that one window. Now to get this actually... to happen in practicality is almost impossible. So, as one of our £5 contributor members was an art director, who was already working in the film industry as an assistant art director I think, he constructed a little model house and we made a... we took a window frame, a full-sized window frame with curtains and... window... no, two window... two window panes and curtains and a frame, and we took this out onto a terrace and we propped it up on the scaffolding and put the camera behind. So the camera's looking- in the foreground you have this window frame and some distance behind, some maybe 10ft behind, you have a platform and on the platform is this little model house, which is only that tall, but made in great detail, like a film model. And it has a... it has a glass in one window and you could turn it in such a way that you could make the sun reflect back into the camera. And this shot is in the film and it's very successful, but, of course, it's quite a lot of trouble to get. But it's all good experience. Anyway, so there's that scene in his little bedroom, and then he goes out.
And then there's a scene, under a railway viaduct, just beyond London Bridge Station, where... it was a picturesque location. We were very careful to choose interesting locations. So we have this location where there's a series of bridges, almost like tunnels, very overhanging bridges, and he's walking along there and he encounters a prostitute. And, and again, it's an encounter which takes place entirely without dialogue. You see them from a distance, so they exchange some words but you don't hear what they're saying. Basically you see him saying, it's not for me, kind of thing, and he walks on and she looks after him, because he's quite a handsome boy, you know. So that's one little incident.
And then there's a second sequence outside a dance hall at night where, again, he's passing, he's passing by and he hears all the noise of the dances coming out from this dance hall, and he... he sort of wonders whether to go in or not, and then a newspaper boy passes, a little child selling newspapers. And there's a headline on the paper something about war, Threatening War, or something like that. So, he sort of says... oh my God, and he... gives some money to the... he buys all the newspapers and the boy runs away happy with his couple of shillings or something, and he doesn't use them to go in the dance hall. And then he walks on again, and then just before that or just after that, I can't remember the sequence exactly, but he... oh yes, yes, of course, he wants to... yes he wants... he makes a phone call, because he wants to ask some friends whether they will go out with him. I think this comes before. And he goes to a phone box and he wants to make this phone call. And it's getting dark so it must be before the night scene at the dance hall. And there's a girl in the phone box, and she's very romantically lit. She's got blond- long blond hair, you know. He's waiting... basically he's waiting to use the phone, but he's considerably taken with this image of this girl in the phone box. And eventually the girl finishes her conversation and they exchange a look and then she goes off and he makes his phone call. And he phones a couple, friends, one takes it, and you see the couple in their flat and you see him answering the phone. And then he says something like: 'No, I can't come out tonight, I've got Lizzy with me', and he puts his arm out and the camera swings over and you see there's a girl sitting next to him. From behind you see all this. So there's no lip-synch problems, you see. And he puts his arm around this girl. So it was all designed to be visual as much as possible. So he puts his arm around this girl and says, 'I can't come out, I'm with Lizzy', whatever. So Bryan puts the phone down and... and he goes off and then he goes to the dance hall and so on. And then he goes into a café; and who should be sitting in the café; but the girl from the phone box!

And then the last scene is in the café, where, there's some rowdy... youngsters, young hooligans, not exactly, but they're just being a bit rowdy. And one of them makes a rude remark about the girl, a sort of a sexy remark or something. And, and... Bryan, kind of, saves her from their attentions. He intervenes... there's not a fight or anything, but he intervenes and says, my pleasure, or something. You know, he just stops them getting nasty. That scene which has quite a bit of dialogue was... all the other... virtually all the other people in that scene were actors from Unity Theatre which... Unity Theatre at that time was a left-wing, well you could say communist, it was a communist theatre in North London, just north of King's Cross, where I later did quite a bit of work, I lit some plays there, I got some experience with theatrical lighting there. I used to go there in the evenings and operate the lights box, like a sort of assistant electrician... I got very friendly with the electrician there, the Chief Electrician, a man called Bill Besant. And on certain shows I did the... I operated the light box, which things like blackouts... there were musicals with blackouts and resets and pre-sets and blackouts, and spent many a happy night having sausages and chips at three... sausages... no, sausages, beans and mash at 3.00 am, which was the interval in the... in the preparatory work in the lighting in that theatre.
Anyway, the actors were, in this last scene in Saturday Night, were all from there and some became quite well known. Later one of the girls featured in a... in a scandal, there was some kind of scandal, she was fired by the government for being a communist. Which... because she was working on censored... in some department where there was sensitive... security material. They didn't have... at those times there wasn't things like security clearance and all that. That came later. But anyway, she was considered a security risk so they fired her. And that all went in the newspapers and, that was about that same time.

Saturday Night was never finished because Derek became dissatisfied. In 1952, he became dissatisfied with the scene that he shot in 1948, you see. Which was the first scene that we shot, apart from Bryan in his apartment. The next scene we shot in 1948 was this scene with the boyfriend – the boy and the girlfriend on the sofa, and when he re-ran that he said, 'I don't really... I want to redo that scene. I don't really like that scene'. So, all right we'll redo that scene. But then he kept on being dissatisfied and I could see a process emerging by which, you know the joke where your table isn't quite level so you saw a bit off one leg and then it isn't quite level the other way. So you end up with the tabletop on the floor because adjusting all the legs one by one doesn't work. So I was afraid that this was about to happen to us. And, the film just came to a grinding halt, basically. But it came to a grinding halt at a point where the picture was 99, if not 100% compete, and it exists to this day. Rather sadly, Derek died.
Two, three, four years ago, and I had the very strange experience of going to a room in the British Film Institute where they were equipped to run nitrate film, because some of this film is on nitrate film, which is highly inflammable. It's the nearest thing to nitroglycerine. Nitrate film is highly dangerous. I once saw the aftermath of a fire they had in a cutting room in Wardour Street, and I can tell you it's very impressive. So, we you know, that is something... so in the British Film Institute they have one cutting room which is specially designed and you can... you can run nitrate film there. So I went to this cutting room, after Derek's death. We discovered these reels in his loft. And we went to this cutting room and I had the strange experience of sitting in front of a Moviola and seeing material that was filmed 50 years earlier, by me, and being, sort of, quite detached from it, but sort of saying, 'Do you know, whoever... that young man, whoever photographed that, he does show promise, it's not bad you know, certainly not for a beginner'. But it was a very strange experience seeing that stuff after 50 years.
And then we had a... there's a kind of coda to all this that I came to an arrangement with the head of the... the then head of the Film Institute, I can't remember which one that was. It might have been Tony Smith or the next one. Anyway they agreed to fund a reconstitution of this film. But then we ran into a snag, that we couldn't find any script, or any continuity notes. And there they are speaking all this dialogue and we don't know what they're saying. And we thought of lip readers, and it couldn't be done. It was impossible, so it had to be abandoned. So all these... there are these four rusty tins, with the cutting copy, which is entirely complete except for the sound.

In 1950, late 1950, a man called Leon Clore who was a producer and the nephew of the famous... there's a famous Clore who's a property developer, Jewish. Leon Clore gave me an opportunity to film first a short government announcement, it was like a commercial but it was government-sponsored, which was about Don't Smoke in Bed, that was my first job. And then immediately after that, I did a... I photographed a 10-minute documentary called Every Five Minutes. And Leon very generously... he saw the rushes, he saw some of the rushes of Saturday Night, and that's how I got that job. He saw that I could do it and he gave me a chance. And thank you Leon Clore, even now. Again, somebody who's no longer with us, unfortunately.
But... so I started at Basic Films in late 1950 and we did this little... they were called trailers in those days, but they were really like government-sponsored commercials. So I had the experience of lighting a set in a studio, in a small studio in St John's Wood which gave me my first experience of how do you light through a window to produce that window shadow on the back wall. And, it's not easy, the first time. The carpenters ask you: what size should I make the window? And I gave them a completely wrong size, and it proved to be impossible. And they just stood there. They knew it wasn't right. They knew, but they wouldn't tell me, you see. So, I learnt a lot. I learnt a lot.
And then the next job I had on the 10-minute movie, the 10-minute documentary, Every Five Minutes, that was about a fire station which has a call, on average, every five minutes. And we went to Scotland and we filmed the sequence in the Gorbals, which to me, again, that was quite an experience in many different ways. First of all, it was a degree of poverty which I'd only seen before once in Stepney in some of these slums which we filmed for Smith Our Friend. It was then, by the way, that I realised that being a refugee in a German... a refugee from Germany in England in 1945 or whatever, wasn't the worst thing that could happen. There were people, British people, living in conditions far worse than the ones that we were living in. So it gave me a sense of proportion. And the Gorbals, again, same thing. And we staged a fire in a top floor... you know, Gorbals are six-storey, five-storey tenements and we staged a fire in the top storey of one of those tenements, which consisted just of smoke coming out of the window. And when we'd finished filming, we discovered that the smoke had actually penetrated into the apartment next door where people were having their breakfast. But they hadn't said anything. And that was very interesting, again. They said: well, why didn't you say something? And they said, 'We thought it was official'. Now that's very interesting because the word, 'official', had a completely different meaning. It means something that was done by the government... and it was something official. You don't interfere with that, you know, you keep quiet.
And the other thing that was a completely new experience for me and very tricky to manage was, we went to all these fire officers' homes, you know, the Chief Fire Officer, the Assistant Chief Fire Officer, and every time we went in there we were offered whiskey, not in a... not in a... in a glass like this, you see. And I didn't... I didn't drink at all at the time. I kept looking around frantically, maybe there's a... there's a potted plant that I could pour it into. Not used to being offered whisky at all let alone in water glasses. So that was quite interesting... a quite interesting first location job for me.

In 1951 there was staged something called a World Youth Festival. It wasn't the first one, it was the second one. In 1951 there was a communist-inspired World Youth Festival in Berlin, which, at that time I must remind you, was not yet divided. It was divided, but there was no wall. So Berlin had three Western sectors: French, British, American, and a Russian sector. But it was just indicated with signs. You are now leaving the Russian sector, it said. Or you are now leaving the British sector, or whatever. And I very much wanted to visit Berlin. After all, it is the city of my birth. So I took this opportunity, because we didn't have any money anyway. So this was an opportunity, for very little money, to visit Berlin. So I used to go with my little suitcase, everyday, to a place in Queensgate, a house in Queensgate, where they tried to find ways of getting us to Berlin, because Berlin was, as it were, in occupied Germany and the Americans and the British and their soldiers, did the best to... they wanted to prevent young people going to this communist do. So they placed all kinds of obstacles in the way of people going. And in the end, when the festival was already half over, they put me on a Polish ship, which later became famous for some completely different reason. It was a Polish ship called the Jarosław Dąbrowski and it sailed from the Pool of London, right next to Tower Bridge, through Tower Bridge in fact, out across the North Sea, through the Kiel Canal and the destination was Gdynia.
So I finally got onto the ship and there were 15... 15 passengers, of which I was one. Two of the other passengers I knew because they were also going to the same festival, and they were a South African couple who were known as anti-apartheid activists. Sonya... her name was Sonya Bunting, I think it was – anyway, don't quote me on that – but there was a couple who were anti-apartheid activists. And there were 12 other men, who I didn't know who they were, but they were British. And we didn't have very much contact. Yes, we ate in the dining room, there was a dining room for us and the Captain was there and these 12 people and so on. But we didn't have much contact. We never talked to them much. And then soon after we set out, we discovered that this ship wasn't actually going straight to Gdynia. It was calling at Copenhagen and that meant that we wouldn't even get to the festival before it was finished. So we, together with the crew of the ship, we devised a strange plan that, when the ship went through the Kiel Canal, they had radioed ahead, or rather back, to another Polish ship that was following just behind, some two hours behind, because this other Polish ship was going directly to Gdynia. So they arranged we stopped at a little lock in the Kiel Canal where there wasn't any people, at all. We got off, we sat on our suitcases, totally illegal all this, and we waited and duly the second ship appeared and we got on, and we went off to Gdynia.
That wasn't the end of it because there were further adventures, but before that, I'll just tell you about the Kiel Canal. We had quite a luxurious cabin because the cabins, you may know, the cabins on cargo ships which take 12 to 15 passengers, in those days certainly, are quite luxuriously designed. This is like first class travel. Very spacious cabin with shower and toilet and all that. Anyway, we went to bed having left the Pool of London and sailed down the Thames to Southend. I'd gone to bed, because it was bedtime, and I woke up in the morning and everything was strangely quiet. The engines were stopped and there was not a sound to be heard. So I got up and I went to the porthole and I opened the curtains and there was land. Not a bit of sea visible. What you saw out of the porthole was a field, a green field, and in the middle of this green field there was a cow, going like this, you see, chewing the cud. I thought, this must be... this can't be right, you know, I'll close the curtains and start again, because this can't be right. But what had happened is we were anchored in the Kiel Canal, you see. I'd forgotten about the Kiel Canal. But, there's a coda to that story as well, that... excuse me. Some weeks after my return to England, and having taken up my work, I can't remember what I did immediately afterwards. It was one of those jobs I've described. Anyway, some weeks afterwards, I discovered that the police were investigating me. They had talked to my employer and to the neighbours and to the landlord, and so on. And so eventually I went to the police and I said, 'What's going on? Maybe you want to talk to me?' And they said, 'Well, well, yes, if you like'. They didn't seem to be particularly interested. Anyway I went to talk to them and it transpired, very gradually because they wouldn't reveal what it was all about at all, they wouldn't tell me anything, but what transpired was, that, among the 14 passengers on this boat to Poland, I was the only person on whom they didn't have a file. Because they had a file on these two anti-apartheid activists and the other 12 people were the Central Committee of the British Communist Party. And who is this Walter Lassally you know? Why don't we have a file on him?

So I arrived eventually in Berlin, having changed trains in Poznan first. And, the festival was already three-quarters over. And... but I did manage to meet Wolfgang Staudte and we devised a... there was a sort of a, incipient plan going that I would... I would photograph one of his movies... forthcoming movies, which was going to be, like a children's story, called Der Kleine Muck. But in the end it never happened. It proved to be too difficult.
Oh yes, I even... after coming back from Berlin, I even contemplated, briefly, I contemplated emigrating to... back to Berlin, but to Communist Berlin, as it were. This was before the Wall was built, of course. But they sent me a form, and when I saw that form, the first question was about your parents and so on, and it said, political history from birth. So I said: mmm, I wonder about this, perhaps this is not such a good idea. Anyway it was quite a thing meeting Wolfgang Staudte and we went to the offices of the film magazine and we were there till 7:30am and they got the brandy out, and we said, 'Oh, oh, not this time of the morning'. Then we realised that they were only allowed to get the brandy out for the foreign visitors. And there was a headquarters was in the Alexanderplatz, in one of those big tall buildings in the Alexanderplatz were the headquarters of the organisation of that festival. And... and everybody... they called you, friend, in German, freund. 'What... where do you want to go, friend?' But inside that building it became a bit sinister because if you missed your turning, you were going down the wrong corridor, this guy would appear and he said, 'And where do you think you're going, friend?' It became a bit menacing.
And then I travelled back to... to  Berlin. I stayed... because I only arrived half way through the first week of the festival, I stayed a week beyond the end to make the most of it, and I spent all my money, which wasn't a lot in the first place. And then I made the journey back to England, very much the same journey that I'd made as a refugee in '39, armed with a loaf... a long loaf like a French baguette and a sausage, that was my food for the journey. But I also had with me the first copy of the documentary they were making about the festival. They very quickly produced a 16mm copy, which I had in my luggage. Now at the West German/East German frontier, they stopped the train and a lot of customs and immigration people came along the train, and they confiscated all the symbols of the festival. People had books with the festival... some sort of symbol, there were hats with the symbol on and scarves. They confiscated all that and when they found the film, which is about the strongest propaganda thing that exists as Lenin would tell you, they said, 'What's that?' and I told them what it was, because they'd find out sooner or later what it was. And they said, 'Okay, you can keep that', because they had no instructions regarding films. So I went through there with the greatest propaganda medium of all, I went straight through. With my sausage and my... my sausage, my loaf and my film.

Then began a period of work on documentary films, short films, documentary films, which lasted until I got my first feature. So in 1951, '52, '53, I worked entirely on documentaries. But after I made my first feature, which was Another Sky in '54, I continued to work on documentaries whenever such an opportunity arose, because I didn't consider that the two conflicted in any way. Far to the contrary, there was a sort of cross fertilisation between the two media where things that you learnt on documentaries could come in very handy on features. Such as how to insinuate people into a crowd, insinuate actors into a crowd, how to film unseen although you're not actually hidden. And we developed a technique which I've been using right up to the present day. And that was all developed during those days. And I made... during those days I made a film called Sunday by the Sea in 1951 with Tony Simmons directing, which won some... I think it won the Grand Prix in Venice. And, there was a sequel to that, Bow Bells. Both those two films had... were cut to a sound track of musical songs performed by a famous group known as The Players'... The Players' Theatre Players, and they provided some Cockney songs, seaside songs for the one and just Cockney songs, East End songs for the other. And the film was then edited to those songs.
And, in the same period... in the same period, we also made, Thursday's Children with Lindsay... Lindsay and Guy Brenton directed that. That's the film where I... we had a... it was in a school for the deaf in Margate and for certain scenes... most of it was done right with the children, right in their midst, once they'd got... accepted us... once they'd got used to us, they took no more notice of the camera, and we were able to make a sort of half circle of these six, seven-year-olds, because there were two classes. There was a class for the under 10s, let's say, or under nines and a class for the over nines. The younger class were sitting on little stools in a semi-circle and the camera was right in front of them so it could pan from one to the other in close-up. And, of course, they didn't know when the camera was running or not. Now you could do it on video because the camera doesn't make any noise, but in those days, that was a big problem, because the camera made a lot of noise, so people knew if the camera was running or not, so you couldn't treat, or rehearse... you didn't know... now you wouldn't know whether you're rehearsing or filming because the camera doesn't make any noise. But in those days there was a great advantage in filming the deaf, because they didn't know either. So once they'd accepted us, we were able to film extremely intimately because they didn't hear when the camera was running. So that was a great plus. So that was... one section of that film is filmed like that, and the second section in the more grown-up class, where they're learning to speak, by listening to... they listen to the vibrations like putting your mouth to the thing, and they feel a balloon with the vibrations. And, it's a very nice film, beautiful film. And there, at one point, I was shooting through a little window which was between two classrooms. There was this little tiny window about this big, and it had glass in it and I think it was meant for serving food or something like that. Anyway, so I was filming through this window, through the glass, and, next to me on a table, was this primitive tape recorder. So I was operating the tape recorder with the left hand and filming with the right hand. That was my first synch-sound experience. Slightly before Lambeth Boys, but we also had an improvised synch-sound sequence. But up to the development of the self-blimped 16mm cameras and later 35, you had to choose... synch-sound was a problem. You had to choose between a hand-held... an easily manoeuvrable... like hand-held camera or synch-sound, you couldn't have both. Because in order to do synch-sound, you had to put your camera in a big heavy blimp and a tripod and all the paraphernalia, and in many circumstances in documentary filming, by the time you'd set all that up, your... your subject, or any spontaneity had evaporated. So you always had that problem. How do you overcome that problem that you can have spontaneity or you can have synch-sound, but you can't have both. And in the Lambeth Boys we overcame that by making a blimp out of a sleeping bag. So we had certain sound sequences where you can actually hear the camera running because the sleeping bag didn't muffle the noise totally, but it was sufficient for the purpose. But in '51, '52, '53, I was... I did, Sunday by the Sea, Bow Bells, Thursday's Children, I have to look at the list, but there were several more, until the... until the moment arrived for my... where I got the chance to make the first feature. Oh and some commercials, early commercials in '54; '53, I think, commercial television started in England and Basic Films, this company operated by Leon Clore, they wanted to get into that business. So in order to present themselves as potential producers of commercials, they made this spoof, not spoof, but they made this presentational commercial which was supposed to, look here we are, and we can make commercials. And we made this commercial which is ludicrous.

This commercial was set in the St Martin's School of Art and the idea was that... there's this class doing figure drawing, you know, nude drawing, and there's this model. And, of course, we couldn't show the... the breasts or anything like that, so there was this contrived setup where there's a... there's a one-bar electric heater positioned on a stand in front of this model, so it cuts out the bosom, you see. And then the... the story behind this commercial is that there's a boy in the class, or two boys in the class who, instead of looking at the... at the model, they're looking at the back of this girl with the blond hair who's got this beautifully shampooed blond hair. You see, it was a shampoo commercial, but it was totally ludicrous. It never got them any work. It was counterproductive you could say.

Lindsay was editing a magazine called Sequence, Lindsay Anderson this is, together with Penelope Houston and Gavin Lambert and initially there was another person called Ericsson. And this was a, sort of, forerunner to Sight and Sound; it was a very good critical magazine with illustrations and everything, which Lindsay more or less financed himself, or they between them they financed it. And it wasn't sold on news-stands, it was sold by subscription and in film clubs and various... so we decided that they would give us a bit of publicity for making Saturday Night, and we would try and sell Sequence in the studios. So I went around... a certain period I went around to the studios selling... trying to sell Sequence, I never sold many copies because they weren't really interested, as there weren't any film buffs. And in one studio I didn't even get in the gate, because there was a big sign which said, 'No hawkers or trespassers'. So they wouldn't let me in. But in most of them I got in, I got a fairly friendly reception, I sold a few copies but not a lot. But all of this as you know the studios around London are quite some distance from the centre, so it's all busses and trains and... quite a business. But, that was my first contact with Lindsay really. Then it developed into... we made films together subsequently, several. But that was the... that was the first contact... was... was through Sequence.

I thought I was in there with chances because I'd made a... I'd helped on a film with... on a commercial with Losey, as focus puller not as cameraman, but, I thought I was in with chances there. Or maybe I was the camera – I can't remember. Anyway, when Losey was due to make his first feature in Britain, I think under a pseudonym because he was a... he was a... one of the Hollywood Ten, or associated with that. Yeah... he was blacklisted. So, he was planning a film called Time Without Pity with Ann Todd. And, I thought I was in there with chances, but it turned out that Ann Todd had other ideas. She wasn't about to risk her, slightly aging appearance, she must have been 42, 44, something like that, and she didn't want to entrust herself to a young and untried cameraman. So that got scuppered.
But my disappointment was soon over because I was offered Another Sky this opportunity to make this totally independent film, which I'll talk about separately, which is called Another Sky. It came along and saved me from... from this great disappointment, which happened when I couldn't make Time Without Pity with Losey.

That started out as a different project. The director, Gavin Lambert, who, at that time, had been, and continued to be, editor of the magazine Sight and Sound, got a project together first to make his first movie, and he found this Scottish aristocrat, Sir Aymer Maxwell, who became a very good friend, and he put up the money, all the money, £20,000, and he lost every penny, but that's another story... the end of the story. And the initial idea was to make a film of the Pirandello play, Six Characters in Search of an Author. And they started negotiating with the Pirandello family for the rights, and they found the... the family impossible. They just couldn't agree.
So eventually they dropped the... the Pirandello, and Gavin, of course, was anxious not to lose the opportunity to make the first film. So very quickly he proposed another subject to Sir Aymer which was this Moroccan subject, because he knew that Sir Aymer had a house in Morocco and loved Morocco. And... so he very quickly got together this other subject which, to my mind, leans a little, let's say, on Paul Bowl... Paul Bowles novel, The Sheltering Sky. Anyway, he presented this idea to Sir Aymer and Sir Aymer agreed, and so we set off with this new script for Morocco.

The first trip was an exploratory trip. And it taught me quite a lot about location hunting and the importance of location... the importance of location preparations, because we failed to do certain things. The... the combination of new director with new cameraman isn't the best combination. Because if you have a new director, it's quite a good idea to have an experienced cameraman who could show you certain things and prevent certain mistakes, which in our case, happened because they weren't prevented. And... one of the mistakes was that... we didn't... we didn't explore Morocco sufficiently and he didn't know Morocco sufficiently to realise that you didn't have to go to the edges of the... of the Sahara to get your... your location. It subsequently turned out that the film could've been made... the end of the film which takes place in this... at the edge of the Sahara, could've been made very nicely in Mogador on the sand dunes, with a comfortable hotel just metres away, and all that. But anyway.
So I went on the first exploratory trip with Sir Aymer and with Gavin, in October, I think it was, of '53, and we looked at all the things and possibilities, and then we came back to England and made the final preparations. And we finally set off for Morocco in January '54.

The film was made between January and April of '54, about three months, took about three months. Not absolutely continuously, but about three months. And it was my first experience of the Third World. And to me, I always think of it as being like time travel, because the conditions that we found in Morocco, in... not exactly in the city of Marrakesh where we were based, but when we went further away into the countryside, the conditions we found there, the poverty, the illnesses, the health problems, must have been something like existed in England in the Middle Ages. So to me it was... it was something like time travel. It was going back in time, to see people living in completely other conditions, more primitive conditions. And that experience was then amplified and repeated in my third film which was Day Shall Dawn, which is made in Bangladesh... which is now Bangladesh. It was then East Pakistan. And that again confirmed the... my feeling that going to the Third World was a bit like time travel, that you were going back in time.
Anyway, we settled in, in Marrakesh into a very nice little hotel which was called The Grand Hotel Tazi, which was just metres from the Djemaa el Fnaa which is the main square of Marrakesh, which has all sorts of things going on in it. There's an extensive market, there's all sorts of food on sale, and there are performers. And the performers played a big part in the movie. Because in the movie... the movie has a very simple story that the heroine, played by Victoria Grayson, goes out to Morocco to be the companion of an elderly... of an English lady of a certain age let us say, beautifully played by Catherine Lacey who was, by the way... who played the nun in... or the false nun in The Thirty Nine Steps. And they discover, because she's wearing the wrong shoes that she can't really be a nun. Anyway, she played that beautifully, the... the older English lady, and she has a... younger Moroccan local boyfriend. No, he's not a... I don't know, he's supposed to be... I suppose he's supposed to be French the boyfriend, played by Lee Montague. Anyway, we were based in Marrakesh and living in the Grand Hotel Tazi and working quite a lot in the adjacent Djemaa el Fnaa Square, where is also the... at the edge of that square is also the Koutoubia Mosque, famous Koutoubia Mosque. Adjacent to the square is a souk, or market. And we spent quite a bit of... we did quite a bit of filming in the souk, and it was in that filming, particularly, that the experience that I'd gathered in documentary film making, of filming without people taking much notice, came in very handy, but it was still quite a... quite a business, and, at one point we actually arranged a diversionary activity where we had a little circle in the square and I sat down there and my good friend and assistant, John Fletcher, who did the sound on... who worked on the free cinema films, and he did the sound on... on Another Sky. I sat down there and he pretended to hypnotise me, or I pretended to hypnotise him. And a little crowd gathered around that, and then they sort of, stayed there because they thought more was going to happen, and we sneaked away and did our shot around the corner, which was with a hand-held Arri, and I developed a technique which I was still using 20 years later, or 25 years later, with Julie Christie in the bazaars of... of Heat and Dust, where I have the... I have the hand-held Arriflex behind my... I carry it behind my back, and I say to whoever, the artist, the actor... your action is to be there and walk from there to there, and I will be over there. When you see me arrive at that point and put the camera to my face, to my eye, you start your action. Because if you weren't very nippy, then a crowd would gather immediately. So, by using that technique you can do your take perfectly happily, but once. Because once they realise that something's going on, of course, the crowd gathers again, and you have to go all over again; pretend that it's all finished and pack up and sit down somewhere and have a coffee and they all disperse. Eventually. Then you can do it again. But the best thing is to be prepared, with simple action, like walking across the square, but that way, with simple action, you can perform your simple action even with a... a relatively well known star, which, of course, we didn't have in Morocco. We had that advantage, that at least the people weren't known, so they didn't attract a crowd, like Julie Christie would attract a crowd. Because once they realise who it is. But in Morocco we didn't have that problem, but we still had the problem that film making was something that didn't happen every day. So you had to have a way of coping with that, and there's quite a bit of action which takes place in the natural surroundings with the natural people who are there, you didn't have to clear whole areas and put on your own extras and all that which makes a totally different sort of film. So that's where I started to develop that sort of technique, which had... which is already based on techniques used in... in documentaries, like Sunday by the Sea, where I got used to filming people without them realising that they were being filmed, by just a simple device like carrying the camera behind your back and the moment you're ready and people are distracted, or doing what they're doing, you just put the camera to your... to your face and you shoot, and that way you can get away with shots lasting, I don't know, 20 seconds, 30 seconds, a minute or so. After that it tends to become dicey again. So you have to be well prepared and... and work fast.

The film is... is more or less in two parts. The first part takes place in a house in the city of Marrakesh and there... there we used Sir Aymer's house which was a typical Moroccan house. A little courtyard surrounded by rooms, partly on two floors, but most of the action is on the ground floor. So he just had this little courtyard and off the little courtyard you have the various rooms. And we used that for the... we used that for the film, and that... of course that filming was comfortable because it was his own house and there weren't any great problems with neighbours or... or any great sound... I don't remember any sound problems. John was able to take synchronous sound perfectly normally there. But with quite a... quite a big apparatus. They hadn't invented the Nagra yet. So we had a one-inch- reel to reel machine which... it was portable, sort of, if you were strong, it was portable, but only just. I always think the revolution which has overtaken sound hasn't happened on the camera side. On the camera side, if anything, the cameras are getting heavier again. But the sound recorder, now you can put it in your back pocket if you feel like it.
Anyway, so the first part of the film takes place in that... in Marrakesh in the square, in the souks, in that house, and we were able to work perfectly comfortably and get what we want without... without much trouble. And then in the story, she falls in love. The heroine, played by Victoria Grayson, falls in love with an Arab who is a musician playing in one of these groups that perform in the square, and he was a flute player, I think, or violin. It doesn't matter, a musician who plays in the square and she falls in love with him. Then the very sort of inscrutable Arab guide who, who the Catherine Lacey character, uses as a... as a servant, but not permanently. But he's her man. So he arranges, sort of clandestine, kind of, meetings at a wonderful location near... near the city, which is called the Menara. It's a little pavilion that sits on a pool. And... some of the action takes place there. So he arranges, this Arab guide who is called Achmed, arranges some... some rendezvous between Victoria and the Arab, and the young musician who's called Taieb. And at the end of each little get together, they just sit together and he plays her some music, and she teaches him English, rather... rather nicely. He sort of takes her hand and he says, 'One, two, three, four', then he smiles engagingly. Anyway, and then at the end a little money changes hands, again discreetly, and they part, and... the thing is repeated but she falls... and next week the same thing. But she falls in love with this guy, and then he disappears, and she's very upset. And they don't really know where he's gone. He's had some sort of quarrel with the leader of the group, and he's... he's not there anymore. There's only one clue. They say he's gone back to his village. His village... I forget, the name was in my head, but now I've forgotten it. Anyway, he's gone back to his village and all they had is the name of the village. She's given a piece of paper which has the name of the village on it, and a little drawing of a mountain, a rather sugar loaf-type mountain, and underneath it says, whatever... the name of the village, which I'll come back to in a minute. It'll come to my head probably. It's not important. And she sets off. She... steals some money from her hostess, from... from the Catherine Lacey character and she arranges with Achmed, the guide, to go off in search of this...  boy, who's gone missing. And they get further and further and further away from... they're travelling first by bus across a High Atlas, and then on donkeys and they get further and further and further away from civilisation, and at the end of the film she is left, he abandons her, and she's left in... virtually in the desert. She collapses because she's exhausted, and she just collapses on a sand dune at the end of the... at the edge of the Sahara, and is then rescued by some local Arab and taken in, and that's the end of the story which takes place in flashback, because it starts at that remote village which was called... aha, what was it called? Not El Arish. Anyway, a remote village at the edge of the Sahara. And... they... and she's left there and this Arab takes her in.

So the second part of the film is this journey, first by bus and then by donkey, across the High Atlas, so we had this ancient bus and Sir Aymer's motor car. He had a rather swish Bentley and that was it. And, ever since then I've been thinking, how did they make movies without a walkie-talkie, often thought now, because we didn't have walkie-talkies in those days, and John had a very primitive kind of radio device, and there was... the journey across the High Atlas, we had one radio device in the... one set in the car, in the Bentley, and the other was in the bus, but we... the sooner... the moment the car was more than 300 yards away, we lost contact. It didn't work at all. We were in this bus and John was usually sitting on the floor, so he didn't show... he wasn't visible in the film... shots we took in the bus, and, generally speaking there was no contact. But we managed, and, because every now... now and then they were waiting for us so that... get the long shots of... of us progressing. And once, John said, 'I hear them, I hear them!' And I said, 'Yes, because they've just pulled up behind us'. Anyway, so that was the whole second part of the... of the journey. We had a series of hotels booked in the so-called Gîte d'Etappe, which were government-run hotels. Morocco was still French at that time. It was a French Dependency. It was just before the Independence struggles. We had this series, there were three or four hotels booked, each was separated from the other by a day's journey by car. They were... they were deliberately sited in that way; a day's journey away, so somebody could make a tour of the area, and every night they could stop in one of these government-run hotels, which were very comfortable. And we had a series of these hotels booked and then, at some point there after our first bit of location shooting, of shooting out of Marrakesh, we sent Derek York back to... oh, we had a report from London. Yes, I have to go back a little bit. The... our camera broke down. We had a... a Cameflex which we'd rented from a company in Rabat, and at some point it... it broke down.

We were just getting ready to go on this trip, which was all pre-booked, hotels were all pre-booked along this, I don't know, 300-mile, 400-mile journey into the south, towards the desert, towards the Sahara. We were all prepared to go and the camera broke down. I can't remember what the problem was, but it was severe. And we managed to get a second camera, a second Cameflex from the same company that we'd hired the first one from, but, it was a very clapped out old camera. It had been used for newsreels and, actually later, I discovered that it's better to have an old camera, apparently quite worn, which has been in constant use because then you get feedback as to whether anything really went wrong recently, rather than have a brand new camera from the factory, which is always trouble. Cameras brand new from the factory are to be avoided like the plague.
So, I... we got this other camera and it seemed to be okay, but we thought we'd make sure that the rushes really were okay, because we didn't see any rushes, we relied on reports from the lab, and the lab came back and said that some of the stuff seems to be a bit soft. And there's a gentle... there's a kind of interesting gentle difference between slightly soft and being out of focus. So we sent Derek York back to England and he came back with a very pessimistic report. He phoned back a very pessimistic report which seemed to imply that a lot of stuff would have to be retaken. This was stuff... yes, we had to go off on our journey, we couldn't delay the journey to get a definitely reliable camera because all these hotels were pre-booked and it was quite complicated. You couldn't just take off. There was very few... very little in the way of hotels around that you could stay in. So we... knowing that there might be a problem, we still had to take off. And we took off and we did this journey and we shot on this location... on these locations from Marrakesh towards the south, and then we sent Derek back because the material, they said, was slightly soft. And he came back to us with a pessimistic report saying yes, it's... it's practically unusable, and so we were pretty depressed, but we couldn't really do anything much about it. I can't remember when that... when that issue was resolved or how it was resolved, except that, in the end, it turned out that there were only a dozen or so shots which were really so much out of focus that they were unusable. A lot of the rest of the material was what I would now call pleasantly soft. It was a sort of look that many a cameraman would do quite deliberately, not to have everything pin sharp, which never looks very good anyway. Pin sharp is only good for machinery. If you're doing the sort of job my dad used to do when you're photographing bits of machinery, then you want to have things pin sharp. But in features, you don't want to have things pin sharp, particularly not faces. So that's another long story, which will follow, that... that you don't want pin sharp faces. Nobody wants pin sharp faces. So in the end it turned out that it was... most of it was perfectly usable. In fact, it's all in the movie, except for half a dozen shots, which one managed to cut around. So the problem kind of, dissolved. But it seemed like a very severe, very... very unsolvable problem at the time, because there was no way we could do that journey again and retake all that material. So we just thought, well, we're going to have to live with it somehow, and it... it proved to be perfectly liveable with.

What is most important, if you can possibly manage it, if you're... if you're shooting on a... on a location, particularly a location remote from backup, it's most important to have a reliable guy at the labs who is not prepared to... to speak out. No, he's not prepared to give you an opinion. Only a senior person is prepared to do that. Generally speaking, they will not take it upon themselves to say, this scratch is so bad that you have to retake. They'll say: it's a bad scratch, and they'll say, it's 10 cm to the left, or 3 cm from the top, or it goes right through the artist's face or not, but they will not say... if you say, 'Is it a bad scratch?' They'll say, well, that is a value judgement which we're not prepared to make. It's up to you. So, as I say, in the end it turned out to be perfectly okay. But very often you're at the end of the telephone... excuse me one minute. Very often you find yourself at the end of the phone, from some remote place in Marrakesh, or in India, or in where... have... you, and you're asking somebody, 'Look, how bad is this? Do we need to re-shoot?' And it's very, very nice to have somebody at the other end who can give you a sensible answer, which doesn't go according to the book. Because according to the book, the lab will not make a judgement as to whether something needs a re-shoot or not. That is your problem. So, I had this guy called Les Ostinelli whom I followed from one lab to the next lab and to the third lab. He started off with Humphrey's, then he moved to Rank Denham, then he moved to Technicolor, and I always followed him, in the sense that I put my negative to be developed in the lab where he was there, because it was very valuable to have his opinion.

We eventually got back to Marrakesh and, we'd shot 90% of the film. There were really only some pick-ups to do in a couple of scenes, and the weather turned bad. And during this whole... during the whole filming I had an operator with me because I was still, at that point, I was still reluctant to operate myself, because I considered myself perfectly competent at lighting, but operating is a completely different job. Operating is a physical job which requires finesse in... in the physical sense, and I didn't trust myself to be good enough, so I took a friend, Gerry Turpin, who'd already helped us on the Saturday Night film, and other films, some other documentaries, he was there. And... so he was with us during that whole time. Now, the final month of the filming, which was January of '54. No it wasn't January, it was April... it must have been April, yes, April of '54, the weather turned bad. And I decided, well we have to wait. There are certain things which we do need sunshine for, and there were, like, two weeks of rain. Clouds, rain, no sunshine. And so I decided to send Gerry back, to send the... by that time we'd acquired a Mitchell. Yes, after the problem with the camera we, at great expense, we ordered a Mitchell to come from England, and we finished the film on a Mitchell. And... but by that time I felt quite competent for operating, and in any case, we hadn't got left... much left to do, so both the Mitchell and Gerry were sent back. And I finished the film myself, without an operator, operating myself on a... on a... another Cameflex, I think it must've been. And we... we waited for sun, and we got the... the rest of the film... scenes done that we needed. But by that... by that time I felt, sort of, quite competent to operate myself, provided it wasn't a huge camera.

It turned out that the film was virtually un... unsaleable. It wasn't a particularly commercial film, and none of the commercial enterprises like... distributors like Fox or Rank, had put any money in so they had no interest in... in showing it, because it wasn't an obvious winner. And... so they had great difficulty in getting it shown. And in fact it wasn't shown except for a week in... a week in New York, a week in London...a week in... oh it... it had a success in Paris. And there is in existence somewhere, I think I have it, a very... a very long and very friendly review by a critic... a French critic called Nicole Vedrès, in... in some French magazine. It's not in Cahiers de Cinema, but it's in some French magazine, and she gave the film a very... good review. And I slightly suspect that, seeing a film made in English with French subtitles, puts a different kind of picture on it. Because the biggest weakness of the film was the central character, Victoria Grayson, who was very dull, very lifeless, and... and... there... there wasn't any great interest in her performance. She was a veteran of something called The Granville Melodramas, which was a series running on early British television, and she was the heroine of that series, and she wasn't Gavin Lambert's first choice either. But the whole film had to be prepared and made in a bit of a hurry, so he settled for a third choice. The first choice was Yvonne Mitchell who wasn't available. I can't remember who else was considered. But Victoria turned out to be a bit of a bind, and, and the film was virtually unsaleable. But, I imagine that if you see an English film with... with French subtitles in France, some of the nuances in her performance would pass you by. In other words, there weren't any nuances in her performance. With... with French subtitles, it probably looked a bit... a bit better. Anyway it was a success... it was a success in France, but nowhere else.

So my second film was a British film. It was a second feature, and it was called The Passing Stranger. And it starred Diane Cilento, whom I fell in love with instantly, but who didn't want to know anything about me. And it was all shot in a tiny little studio in... in West London, called The Viking Studios, which...  which was still in existence some years recently. I think it's... it's gone now, but it lasted quite a while. And the... it was a very small studio. So the sets were built right up to the wall more or less. There were... there used to be, typically, a space of like 3ft between the back of the set and the studio wall. So it was a bit... it was a bit tight, but it was a very good lesson. And it was my first really... comprehensive lesson in studio lighting, which was very... which was very good experience indeed. And looking back on it, it's... it's quite well done. It's not bad at all. But it was a... it was a second feature and it was shot in... but even as a second feature we had quite a... I can't remember how many days we had, but it was quite extensive; much more than you would... you would get nowadays. So that was... that was a... that was a good experience working on... on that film.

Trying to get more work, I... I once had a... a meeting with a couple of... a producer/director team. I think it was Cy Endfield and his producer. And, I tried to get work with them, and I showed them the... the Moroccan film, and that was a big mistake. And I discovered that people lost not capable of separating the photography from the rest. So all they saw was the bad direction, and, so I put in my... my book, I put; it... it pays you...it pays to show prospective employers only smash hits, if at all possible. So that didn't lead anywhere showing him that... that film, although there's nothing wrong with the photography, but they just can't separate that that in their mind for... from the inept direction, which wasn't my fault, after all. But as I said before the... one shouldn't have an... an inexperienced director working with an inexperienced cameraman is not the best combination, much better to have an experienced cameraman working for a first-time director, which subsequently, of course, I did. Subsequently, I worked many times with first-time or second-time directors, and I was able to, increasingly as my career progressed, I was able to help those people a lot, because I had the experience that they lacked. But on Another Sky, of course, that wasn't the case.

Free Cinema was never really a movement, although later it was described as such, many times. But initially it was just a title that Lindsay Anderson coined for a programme of films which were very different and which were not produced together, they just happened to come together. And, Lindsay coined this phrase, Free Cinema, and... and there was a manifesto issue... issued, rather a grand title, just a few lines, which was signed.... a manifesto was issued and this manifesto was signed by... the... the four directors concerned, Lindsay, Karel... Lindsay Anderson, Karel Reisz, Tony Richardson, Lorenza Mazzetti, and by myself and John Fletcher. And, it would be quite interesting to quote... quote from that, I haven't got it in front of me here, but we can have a look at it later. And, so, Free Cinema was the showing, at the National Film Theatre, in 1956 I think it must've been... '55, '56, of Momma Don't Allow, O Dreamland, and Together, which, as I've already said, were three very different films, made under different circumstances. O Dreamland was a little film that Lindsay made on his own, off his own bat. O Dreamland was a little film that Lindsay made with his own money and John Fletcher did the photography. At the time when Lindsay and I were together in Margate making the film... Thursday's Children. So, he got interested in the pleasure fair called Marg... at Margate, called Dreamland, and he made this little film there quite quickly with... with John on camera. And, that was the... it was a... when it was finished it was a 10-minute short, and that was... it was very critical of... of the people in Dreamland. It wasn't a very people-friendly film, you could say. But it was very astute and it shows a very very good picture of Britain in the 50s. And, this was the first in the... in the programme.
The second was Momma Don't Allow which was a film made under the aegis of the British Film Institute, at that time it was called Experimental Film Fund, later it was called the Production Board, but initially it was called the BFI Experimental Film Fund. They... they provided the money and Tony Richardson and Karel Reisz directed it jointly, but each one took care of a... of a separate section of the film. They never worked together, except in the dance hall which was really, mainly, Tony's thing, but they were both together in the dance hall. But in the sequences of the... with which the film starts, of the participants in the dance hall, each section was directed by either Lindsay or Karel... by either Karel or Tony, separately. And, I say somewhere that Momma Don't Allow is a film made with a Bolex and a ladder, because all we had for camera was this spring-wound Bolex, which is a very nice camera and quite professional, but it has a spring motor, so the longest take you can have is 22 seconds. And the ladder... the ladder came in handy, which was just erected among the dancers, and the dancers were instructed to dance around us, like we weren't there. So we were able to get these top shots, of which there's quite a few in... in the film. And it was Chris Barber's Jazz Band. And it features... the main dancers are people whose careers we followed... or whose jobs we followed in the introductory section. So we know there... there's four people, I think, who formed a centre group, in the film, two couples. And... we followed them. We see that one is a... one of the girls cleans railway carriages, one is a dentist's assistant, one of the boys is a butcher's assistant, and I forget what the... the fourth one did. Anyway, they were followed in their jobs and then they all come together in this dance hall for a... a weekly rock event. Not... not rock, jazz, traditional jazz. And that film was very successful, not only to my mind, but in the general... that was the general opinion, it was a very successful film. And for years later I used to get cheques for 13/6d because the film actually brought in money. And it couldn't have cost more than about £250 to make. But money kept coming in, in dribs and drabs for... for this film, which... which went on for quite a while and is now a... a real little classic.

The third film in the programme was a very interesting and beautiful film called Together, which in itself is... has quite a history to it. Because Lorenza Mazzetti... it was Lorenza Mazzetti's film, it was her idea, but at that time she had a boyfriend called... called Dennis Horn, a British boyfriend; she's Italian. And he wrote the score and they did the whole thing together. And he became a bit of a nuisance. He made a bit of a nuisance of himself, so later he sort of separated from Lorenza and from the film, but he bent the ear of the BFI, something cruel for years afterwards, saying, he ought to have his share and all that, bigger credit and all the rest of it. But it was really Lorenza's film and Lindsay's film. Because Lindsay discovered Lorenza sitting in the basement of Number 3 or 4 Great Russell Street, where the British Film Institute had its headquarters, at that time. And in the basement there was a... an extremely primitive cutting room. It was really no more than... an old fashioned Moviola, which I think was a thing called an Editola, which is very unwieldy. And, they didn't... they didn't have... even have bins with tooth... they used to stick bits of film on the wall with Sellotape, it was that primitive. Anyway, Lindsay discovered this girl sitting in the basement of the BFI, and Lindsay had quite a few connections with the BFI at that time, through... through Sequence and subsequently, and he saw some of this material, and he thought the material was wonderful, but, it was supposed to be a story called The Glass Marble where a couple of deaf mutes, who live and work in London's East End, in Docklands... in the Docklands, are pestered and pursued by a group of boys who make faces at them and... and generally taunt them. And, she... she thought she'd shot the story, but she hadn't actually shot the story in a way that it could be edited into a coherent story. So while there was wonderful material there, there wasn't a... there wasn't a film there. So Lindsay and... and she put their heads together and gradually Dennis Horn was sort of edged out of the... of the proceedings because he wasn't much help anyway, and Lindsay turned the film into something else. He turned the film into an atmospheric study of London and the Docklands and the people of that period, in the pubs and around the streets, using all the material which... which Lorenza had shot, and then I and John Fletcher and somebody else came in and shot... shot supplementary material, not featuring the main actors, who were these two deaf mutes. Who, again, were very sensitively played by a well known painter and a well known sculptor, Michael Andrews and Eduardo Paolozzi, who became famous, very famous. Even at that time they were well known. Anyway, they... played these parts of these two deaf mutes beautifully. And... so I shot material of barges going down the river, very leisurely stuff, very slow, poetic, leisurely stuff, and this was then edited into the final result, under that title, Together, and it's a... it's a beautiful film. It's... it's really quite unique.
So the... so the first Free Cinema programme were those three films, and then... and they were very successful, the queue ran right... right round the building and up into... onto Waterloo Bridge, so it was a... it was a very successful showing. So they decided to go on and have some more shows of films which weren't specially made for that programme, but they... they came together under that umbrella. Yes, that's what it was, an umbrella under which film... films could be shown. So there was a second Free Cinema, a third Free Cinema and it went up to number six. The third Free Cinema had as its centrepiece, Everyday Except Christmas, which is, again, the film I made with Lindsay, and the fourth... the sixth one, the last one, the final Free Cinema had as... as it's centrepiece We are the Lambeth Boys, which I made with Karel Reisz.

I got that job because Alan Withy, the man who made the model for the Saturday Night film, was working at MGM, and he got me that job. And, that film contained my... virtually my only severe mistake, which called for retakes. And the... the producer was furious. A lady called Nicole Millinaire, was the producer. And the film had to be made in quite a hurry, but... it was little more than a B feature, really. I think... and yeah, it was designed for cinemas in Britain and American television, with the result that we saw our rushes on a square. The rushes screen was completely square because it showed only the piece which, British cinemas, which were wide-screen by then, and American television had in common, was this square. But it didn't show all the other things that were being photographed round... round, so it was not a... it was not a guide at all to the... to the actual frame that was being photographed. It was... was quite bizarre. Anyway, there was a... there was a... a night sequence in there where... which was done back projection. The first, and I think it's the only time I've done any... any real back projection. It was a taxi driving along the embankment in London.

So we filmed that with back projection and I made a big mistake in directing the electricians as to how to dim the lights. Because to get the effect of you going along the street with street lamps, you have to... you have to put several lights into the cab, back light, side light, front light, and they have to go up and down, but gently, a...- as to pretend as... and I... I asked them to do it much too  violently, and the end result looks like a fireworks display, and of course, the producer was very cross and the whole thing had to be retaken, and there wasn't time, so they resche- they rescheduled the retake in the next week while I was working on... on a set next door. They rebuilt the back projection scene in the set next door, and to my great surprise, the person who came to photograph it was Georges Périnal. So I had the experience... I snuck in there, you know, very quietly, and watched him at work, and I learnt something. I learnt a lot. But the electricians, they... they must have known what I was doing wasn't right. But they... they weren't about to tell me that... that wasn't quite right. I was a young whippersnapper, you know, a bit... got a bit beyond my station, and they weren't going to put me right, so... but as it led to the encounter with Georges Périnal... as an... as an encounter it hardly didn't happen, but I watched him work and I saw that this is how you do it, you know. Because I... I did it all from my... out of my head. I had never done it before so I had to imagine how you do it, and I knew the... the things that had to be... I knew the... the things you had to have. You had to have these lights set and you had to move them up and down, balance the front and the back. I knew what you had to do, but I had no experience of actually doing it, so... so that came in very handy. But that film never saw the light of day. But it also gave me the opportunity to do some star lighting. Because the star of that film was Laraine Day and other than viz-a-viz the experience with Ann Todd, poor Laraine Day had no choice, you know, I was... I was the cameraman and that was that. She was a little bit worried as well, but she had no reason to worry because she came out looking very beautiful. But the film was never shown. I don't know if it was ever shown in American television. It certainly wasn't shown in British cinema, so I don't know. I don't know what happened to that.

It starred Adam Faith and it was about the... the London Beats who didn't exist and who were portrayed as a sort of gangster... as a sort of gang, like the Teddy Boys, and you had these fights between the... or set-to's between the Beats and the Teddy Boys. And the only... there's no line of explanation as to who... who are these Beats? They were supposed to be a London version of the American Beats, who didn't exist. So... so, the audience is left in the dark, and they're as much in the dark after the film as they are before, because the only bit of explanation in the script, where somebody says, well, who are these Beats? And some... and they say... the answer they get is, 'Oh, you know, it's that new gimmick from America: hopeless and soapless'. And that's it! You don't find out anything more about them. But that film... that film was directed by Edmond T Gréville who was a French director of some... quite some renown. And he had a speciality. He didn't like straight set-ups. He was always photographing under the legs, out from under a table, or through somebody's armpit, or something like that. Had a strange... a strange idea of what makes a... an interesting composition. But that was also quite interesting for me to watch. But anyway, he was... he was satisfied with my work, and the... and the end result was satisfactory as far as I'm... I'm concerned, and as far as the people that employed me were concerned. And, that was another film that was a sort of lost film. It just disappeared after a while. Until many years later, 30 years later, it surfaced in a programme at the National Film Theatre where they were doing a programme about early rock movies, and this film was... was not a rock movie, featured, because it was the first movie that Adam Faith appeared in. And they found a 16mm copy somewhere and it... it played in that festival of rock... rock movies. And I was able to take it away. It was at the time I was working in the Film School, in the 80s, late 80s. And I was able to take it away and have it copied in telecine, so I've got it on... on tape now. But the other... another feature of... of that film was the... the lighting of the... not the star, but the mother of the... no, the stepmother of the star. The star was a... a girl called Gillian something, who was very young and was accompanied by her mother everywhere. And when there was a scene where she was supposed to strip to bra and panties, it caused about half a day's discussion as to whether she would agree to do that. Gillian Hills, that's right. Gillian Hills, who later worked on a film with Franju, strangely enough. But, her stepmother... her father remarries and he marries a very beautiful French girl, and, I'll think of her name in a minute, the actress. But it's not important. Anyway, this beautiful French girl who is called Nicole in the... in the movie, I did some... some very nice close-ups of her, and, again, I had the same sort of experience seeing that thing again after 40 years, you know, on... on tape. I thought, yes, those close-ups are really rather nice, you know. It's quite good. But it's a very strange experience, catching up with things like that, that resurface out of the void, after... after all those years.

The film had some censorship problems because it contained a... a scene where they... what do they call that in English where you... a dare, a dare where people put their heads on a... on a... on a railway line and withdraw them at the very last minute. And when... we filmed that... again, with some quite interesting, not back projection, but blue-screen technique, which I discovered, that we just laid these people down on a blue surface, and all the rest was done in the lab. It was in the special effects, and they... you know, they produce the railway line and... and, by special effects, and they... it looks, in the film, as though they were lying on the railway line, when in fact, they were lying on a... on a blue background. But that sequence met with opposition from the censor who said, we're not going to encourage young people to play that kind of game. So they forced them to cut that whole sequence. And it was also the beginning of my cave period in that period... in that film, in Taste of Honey and in the first of the... one of the second Greek films. I had a... I had a cave shoot, so I look upon those years, '60, '61... '59, '60, '61, as my... my cave period because I had three shot... shoots in a cave. In different caves. And, I didn't mind that, but in my documentary days I'd always refused to go down the mine. Once or twice I was offered movies that were made down the mine, and I would never do that because I thought, I don't fancy that. That's something I... I thought was claustrophobic and undesirable, but caves are something else. And I learnt things again... interesting things like the... the temperature in caves all over the world is like +12° Centigrade, something... something like that.

This was also quite an interesting film, both to make and to see. It started out as a... it was going to be a 20-minute film. And, Lindsay had found the subject which was the Covent Market... Covent Garden Market in London, and he had proposed this to the, not to the BFI, but to the... the Ford Motor Company because, at that time, Karel Reisz had got a job as Films Advisor to the Ford Motor Company who had, sort of, an outfit going. They had a film library and they had quite a... there was a place there, anyway, for a films officer. So Karel took that job and whilst he was on that job... in that job, he sponsored Everyday Except Christmas and The Lambeth Boys. So on the beginning of Everyday Except Christmas it says, 'Ford of Britain presents', and then comes the... the film. And, Ford of Britain left... left us alone. They just said, rather... rather sort of plaintively, that in the... in the market scenes, 'Will you... will you... if you go into close-up onto the bonnet of a... please, you know, do it... if you're doing the close-ups do some Ford trucks and not the competition'. But that... that was about the extent of their interference.
Anyway, so we shot for four weeks. The film was made in four weeks and there were two weeks of night shooting, and two weeks of dawn shooting, or dawn and day shooting, because the film starts at midnight. Or it starts before midnight when the first truck arrives from the countryside. In fact, it starts in the countryside and there's this ride through the suburbs of London on this vegetable truck, which is coming in from Sussex with mushrooms, and stuff. And, again, very controversially and uniquely, Lindsay chose to play God Save the Queen during that, because it's the... you hear the voice of the radio at that time, Home Service, it was called, I think. You hear the voice of the radio commentator, very... it's so typical of the period, you know, it's very relaxed, very slow. It says, 'Those of you who are working through the night, I hope you have a quiet and peaceful night, and to the rest of you who are now going to bed, goodnight, goodnight'. And then they play God Save the Queen, which they played after every cinema performance, and at the end of broadcasting, it was the habit of playing God Save the Queen. So Lindsay put this over this journey, so you have this... travelling shot, long travelling shot, or a series of travelling shots through the southern suburbs of... of London at night, when this truck arrives with the... vegetables, on the way... this truck is on the way to Covent Garden and you hear God Save the Queen. And that... that of course, caused a lot of problems later when the film was about to be released they said, 'Well, you know, that's... that's very... awkward because when people hear that they're supposed to stand up, so all these people in the cinema they're all going to rise to their feet'. Of course, no... no such thing happened, but they were afraid it might happen. And then the truck arrives at Covent Garden and then the film goes through the... very meticulously through the process of what it takes to unpack and display the fruit and vegetables, ready for the first buyers who arrive at six in the morning.
So it takes you through the night with a group of people that we get to know quite well, who are the porters and the... the Covent Garden Market workers, who... who we get to know quite well. And, there are some quite interesting sequences in there which... where I follow a simple process really, where they're... where they're throwing cabbages, one... one to the other, and he... and he takes it... he... they're unloading things one by one, and they put the boxes out and... and they have a sort of rhythm to their work. And I found, that, by studying this rhythm and sitting on top of the racks, on the top shelf, as it were, with my hand-held Arriflex, I... I could follow the... you know, it... it turned into a sort of rhythm which I could follow back and forth quite... in quite big close-up. And that also teaches you something about operating, because when you're operating, you're always supposed to leave room ahead, or if a person is looking to the left, you're supposed to leave some room ahead to the left, so the distance between the back of the head and the frame edge is less than the distance between the nose and the frame edge so it's, what they call leaving air ahead, which is the principle of operating. That came in handy many times later. But when you're doing it in close-up it involves some manoeuvres, which again, came in very handy later, where you learn to follow somebody, and knowing that he's going to turn around and go back the other way, you kind of anticipate that, and while he's more or less static- static, you pan him from the left side to the right side, ready for his new departure, leaving again, air ahead. So it has some interesting sequences from that point of view, where... where you follow a work process closely. And the other aim of... of Lindsay, and not only Lindsay, but the whole group, was to do something different in the... in the way of British documentary, which up to then, was really the Grierson School and not much else. And, the Grierson School focused a little bit on people, but not all that much. Very often you... you saw documentaries where the camera focused on what was going on, but not on the people doing it particularly. So Lindsay was very keen that that should be... the focus should be the... the faces. Whilst showing clearly what they were doing, you then concentrated on the faces, so you get to know the people. And that is very successful in that film. That... that was done very successfully, I think.

Then we have two café sequences where they have a break and they go to a nearby café, because Covent Garden was surrounded by all-night cafés, especially open for the... for the workers, for the market workers. And there were some bars, which were open outside of normal hours, again, for the market workers, as a concession, to work outside of normal pub hours. So there are two café sequences. One is a night sequence and the other one is an early morning sequence, a daytime sequence, but very early morning. And they're both quite interesting in their different ways. The first one was shot mute. And all the... it has no dialogue anyway. There is dialogue but you don't hear it. And... a queer guy comes in, a homosexual, comes in, which we used to call queer in those days, and they, they kind of... you know, the... the burly market workers, sort of go... get him, sort of thing, you know. And he's queening away, and he's brushing his hair, and he's going... 'Hi, hello to you', you know. That's a lovely moment. You see him in the mirror, and it's all done completely mute, but you understand completely what's going on without hearing a word of dialogue. And the radio's playing so in the... in the finished version you have this radio. The proprietor, the café owner fiddles with the radio and some innocuous tune comes on, which is then used as a... a cover for the whole... which covers the whole sequence, but there is no... no word of dialogue.
And in this café, because it's open in the middle of the night, there are some characters who are not market workers. And it says in the commentary, well... who are they, where do they come from? Because they're there almost every night and they're relatively sad people. And one of them turned out to be a busker. I... I saw him... I filmed him, again, quite by accident in some other film, and he turned out to be a busker who... who was playing some instrument along the theatre queues. He was busking the theatre queues. And he was in there nearly every night and there's some sad little old lady, and various people. Like it says, where do they come from? Who are they and where do they come from? So that's a lovely little sequence, very self-contained, quite short, but very... very powerful. And the second café sequence, the daytime café sequence which is part of the early morning bit of the film, was actually shot with synch-sound. We had a blimped camera hidden behind a curtain, and it shot across the counter to the people ordering their food. And... and some very large lady, bit of a gypsy, comes in and... and orders... and a cup of tea, and then she says, 'No sugar!' Like that! You know... And that is quite different from the other sequence, but again, very effective.
And there we had the chance, by having the camera some way back and by being an aesthetic set-up, you could afford to be an aesthetic set-up, which you could not afford to be in the café, in the other café, because you wanted to be free to capture these things. But in that other café, because people have to come up to the counter and order their food there was an opportunity for having a... a set up and they just enter the frame one by one and order their food and then you see in great detail how a bacon sandwich is made, a sausage sandwich, excuse me. How you make a sausage sandwich is documented in great detail, although it happens in about 15 seconds flat. You take the piece of bread, butter the bread and then you cut the sausage in four pieces, and you put it there, and there, and there's your bacon sandwich... there's your sausage sandwich. It all happened very quickly, but very efficiently. And the rest of... the film finishes on the... focussing on the buyers and also on the only woman porter. It says at one time all the porters in... in the flower market, in the flower market, were women, and there's only one left and she's called Alice. And she forms one of the four, sort of, characters that we, that Lindsay focussed on in that film. And then you follow Alice and what she's doing and the various buyers who come in, and, again, that whole sequence is finally constructed in the editing. Because, again, for obvious reasons it had to be shot mute, and... and John was taking sound track separately, and it was then... it was made into a sort of fugue in the... in the... it was orchestrated in the editing, which took months. The editing of that film took months, many months. And Ford was indulgent and there was no... there was no particular pressure, which, again, is very unusual. Certainly in today's terms it's unheard of. The freedom that Lindsay had to make that film... it was supposed to a 20-minute film and it turned out to be a 40-minute film, and he had five months to edit it, and could do what he liked. It's just unheard of freedom. That's why it's called Free Cinema, because it gave... it gave people the freedom to do what they wanted.
And, so the... the final section of the film is all these buyers coming in and taking their... telling the porters where their car is parked, and then the porters put the stuff on their heads, mainly, and they carry it out, and it finishes in the Strand where they get lost in the traffic on the way to... on the way to the vehicle that... that is taking the... the stuff to the shops. And there's also a band that features in that section. So there's always music, there's always something to cover it. You don't miss, not for one moment, in the 40-minute long film, with the commentary, of course, but not for one moment do you miss the absence of... of synch dialogue. There are snatches but you don't miss it because it's been so nicely edited with music, background and... and... and commentary. But the commentary's sparse. The commentary's not... doesn't go on all the time. And the commentary, interestingly enough, is what's dated, what aged. The film is as fresh as it was when it was made, but the commentary is dated, because when you hear the commentary nowadays, it... it sounds patronising, bits of it sound patronising. Sort of, 'This is the world of work and work is something that will always be with us', that sort of... that sort of commentary. But the film itself is very fresh, very fresh indeed. And then it won the Golden Lion, I think, in Venice.

Free cinema, in the meantime, had two other showings where the centrepiece was not necessarily a British film at all. There was Lionel Rogosin's On the Bowery. Lionel Rogosin was one of those people that was working with similar ideas and with similar aims, quite independently from us, as were the... the beginnings of the free... of the New Wave in France, also had similar ideas and worked in a similar kind of way. But we were not influencing one another. We knew about one another, but it was... it happened simultaneously, so you couldn't...  you couldn't talk about influence in any... in any real sense, because it was all happening simultaneously. But if people come... have the same kind of outlook and the same mentality... same idea, be they in France, America or England, they end up making the same kind of film. And it looks as though one might have influenced the other, but it wasn't actually so. They... they happened simultaneously. So there were... there was... Free Cinema Two and Free Cinema Four were... were foreign- there were some foreign films and it... it wasn't particularly British, and then the... the showpiece of cinema... Free Cinema Six, the last Free Cinema, was We are the Lambeth Boys, which is the film I made with... with Karel Reisz.

So we always had to make this choice. Is it more important to be hand-held, have the freedom, improvisation, or is it more important to have synch dialogue, because you couldn't have both. You had to choose. So in The Lambeth Boys there's one sequence where we wanted some of the dialogue to be usable, and I devised this blimp, portable blimp, which was made out of a sleeping bag. We just cut up a sleeping bag and we made various pieces. One went around the hood, one went around the motor, one went around the whole body. There's a picture of me somewhere operating this camera, which was bulky but... but not heavy. And, so you could get synch-sound... pseudo synch- sound, I'll call it. But it's in the film. It's perfectly effective. And then there's a proper synch-sound sequence in that film where the group of young boys featured in the film... because it's all... it's all centred on a youth hostel... on a youth club in... in South East London, Lambeth. And, so this one sequence where... where they all get together for this weekly discussion. The day we did it the theme was capital punishment and they were... my God, were they for it! They were all, to a man, for capital punishment on... on the basis of an eye for an eye, that is it you know. Yes, that's the way you should be, definitely. It was quite frightening. You see these 14- and 16-year-olds being so, so definitely for capital punishment. So that sequence was a natural synch-sound sequence where it doesn't hurt if you have a... a camera on a tripod and lighting set up. But in many situations, if you... if you need to set up a camera and lights, by the time you've done that, your subject has evaporated. It's very often the case. So you have to have two techniques available, and you have to choose between the spontaneity and the ability of capturing that spontaneity, or synch-sound. You couldn't have both. Now you can have both, but then you couldn't. And there's a very interesting sequence in The Lambeth Boys where they go to play their annual cricket match with a... with a very high-nosed school in North London. And there's a nice lorry ride... ride on the back of a lorry on the way to this cricket match. And then you have the cricket match itself which, again, is... is... there is no commentary at all on the cricket match. It just sets the scene. It tells every year they go to this place and they have a friendly cricket match with these high... with these public school boys, with these public school boys. Because, in England, as you know, public school is a private school.
Anyway... and that is a very interesting sequence because you have the... you have no need for commentary. You have these two groups and they sort of eye each other warily, and then they play this match. The Lambeth Boys are in street clothes and sort of thrown together bits and pieces, and the... the public school boys are all in... and they've got their proper whites and their knee guards and their... one small pause for refreshment. So that's... seeing that sequence is quite instructive because it shows that one of the parts of the Free Cinema manifesto has a... has definite meaning. Because in that manifesto it says, the image speaks, sound amplifies and comments. And that ought to be framed and hung up in every producer's office across the land and across the world. Because the- nowadays, the... the sound speaks and the image might just as well be turned off. A lot... lot of films these days are like illustrated radio plays. All the information is in the dialogue. And there's a coda to all this again, where many years later the BBC made a film, 20 years later, roughly in the 80's I think it was. The... the BBC made a series called The Lambeth Boys, which was about the... the making of this film and what happened to the people in it. And it was in three parts. Each part was an hour long and it was in colour, because the BBC had gone into colour by then. And, the first part... the first programme was a re-showing... a re-showing of the original film. And then they... the second part was following... they'd done some research, and they'd followed up on what happened to those boys who are now grown-up men. And they showed... they... they found half a dozen of the people who'd been in that club in that film, and they showed what they were doing nowadays. And then the third  part is... the third programme was showing what that club, which still existed, was... was like now. And in the interval between '58 and and '84, say, the club had turned 100% black. It was now a black club because Lambeth was a black borough, very much so. And, so that was the biggest difference, it was now a totally black club. And they interviewed the people there and, for me, the most interesting thing was not the actual content of the film, but what the...  what the technique used in the... in the programme... how the technique used to make that programme differed from the technique used to make the film. Because, once again, in the programme, it's a Talking Heads programme. You have all these people, they appear on camera and they... their natter away, and that's it. But its in the actual film a lot of it is... is silent, and the... the... it's the image that speaks. And... that is the kind of film, to me, that is a must, that any... any half-way decent film, it has to be the image that speaks, not the... not the sound track. The sound track is secondary.

I've got here the... the Free Cinema manifesto which I dug up from my files. I thought it was worth just reading it to you. It says: 'These films were not made together nor with the idea of showing them together. But when they came together they... we felt they had an attitude in common. Implicit in this attitude is a belief in freedom, in the importance of people, and in the significance of every... of the every-day. As film-makers we believe that no film can be too personal, the image speaks, sound amplifies and comments. Size is irrelevant, perfection is not an aim. An attitude means a style, a style means an attitude'. And it's signed by the four directors. And also rather nice is, at the back of this, is the Free Cinema programme from the first Free Cinema... presentation. And at the back is... is a little quotation from Dylan Thomas, from a poem called... called Envoi, where Lindsay's written, 'Epigraph for Free Cinema'. No, 'Epigraph for a free cinema'. 'This is the world, the lying likeness of our strips of stuff that tatter as we move, loving and being loth; The dream that kicks the buried from their sack and lets the trash be honoured as the quick, this is the world. Have faith'.

The only down side of Free Cinema which was a big success in its own right, was that it had absolutely no effect on the British... on the mainstream of the British industry whatsoever. And, as history shows, it took several years, several years, before any of those people had made any... any feature films. Lindsay... Lindsay's first film, Our Sporting Life, was in 60 something, '61, '62; '62, I think. And, Tony a little earlier and Karel a little later, I think.
Anyway at the time it had no effect whatsoever, which disappointed us a little bit, although it was... it was inevitable. It was... we could've... we... we should've guessed that it wouldn't have any effect. But it was its own little success in its own little framework, so that was...  that was all right. And eventually it did lead to other things. And it had quite a lot of... quite a lot of attention was focussed on it abroad, so, to this day people talk... come to me and say, you know, you were part of Free Cinema, and would you tell us about it, and so on. I've made endless interviews and documentary things and... about... about Free Cinema.

So my first real entry into the British film industry came with Tony Richardson and Woodfall, after the somewhat abortive efforts of As Dark as the Night and Beat Girl. And Taste of Honey. He asked me to do Taste of Honey in 1961, but Taste of Honey was actually ready to be filmed one year previously, when I wasn't asked to do it, when he had, I think, Freddie Francis marked down as cameraman, and, having already made The Entertainer and... and, Look Back In Anger. But the... Tony wanted to make Taste of Honey as an all-location movie which Saturday Night and Sunday Morning wasn't. Saturday Night and Sunday Morning was, in that sense, a conventional movie with a studio section and a... and a location section in Nottingham. And, the distributors, the money people, wouldn't let him make it as an all-location film, because he said... they... he said, 'Well, you say', they said, 'you say you don't want sunshine, you... you... you're going to film in the rain and all that. You want a grey atmosphere for... for Manchester and all that', and they wouldn't believe him. And they said, 'Ah, yes, well you say that now, but later on you'll be stuck up there and you'll... you'll see well after all we would rather have sunshine and we'll be... we'll be carrying the baby'.
So that was... so... he found it impossible. But then subsequently, Saturday Night and Sunday Morning, which was shot in '59 and released in '60, I believe, was such a big success. I think it ran on both the cinema circuits which was quite unusual in those days. There were three main cinema circuits and one was sort of linked to Fox and Warner Brothers and... and what-have-you, and the other were linked to Paramount and MGM, and so on. And they all had their set suppliers as it were. But Saturday Night and Sunday Morning actually ran on both of the circuits, one after the other. So there was a lot of money available, and Tony could afford, by cross colat... cross... I can never say that word... cross-collateralization of the profits of Saturday Night and Sunday Morning against any possible loss on Taste of Honey on... yes on Taste of Honey, he could go ahead. So we went ahead and made A Taste of Honey as an all-location film. And it was offered to me because, by that time, Freddie Francis was being... doing something else. But it was the start of a very... very successful collaboration, albeit a brief one. Because the three films that I made with Tony for Woodfall, were all made within the space of 18 months. And then he went off to America.

For Taste of Honey, we made some quite interesting key decisions. The new Ilford film material called, at that time, HPS, which was 400 ASA, had just come out. Well it'd come out... I'd used it on... on Everyday Except Christmas and a little bit of the early experimental version on Another Sky. So the new Ilford HPS material was freely available now and the strategy for Taste of Honey was that we would use three different film stocks. We would use HPS, the very sensitive, but very grainy film stock for the first flat that the heroine and her mother stay in, and, then we would use the very much less sensitive, but more fine-grained FP3, it was in those days. That was the equivalent of Plus-X, which was 80 ASA to daylight, and we used that for the exteriors. And we used yet another material, which was in between the other two, which was then called HP3, which is still available and is now called HP5, I believe. And which was a sort of intermediate material. It had a finer grain than... than HPS, but not as fine a grain as... as FP3. But by linking the film stock to the particular sets, or décors, we made the granularity of the film stock be part of the art direction. Now that was something quite unheard of. Nobody had ever done that before. And the labs of course they all advised me against it, and so I said: well, never mind we're going to do that, and you'll see it'll be okay. And it was okay in the end. And they said: well, you can't inter-cut those things. I said: we're not going to inter-cut them in- inside an individual scene, we're going to... when we cut from a scene inside to a scene outside, at that cut, there's absolutely no reason why you shouldn't change film stock. It... will pass completely without notice. And that proved to be the case, of course. So, the beginning of Taste of Honey is filmed on 400 ASA which enabled us to work with very small lights and very few lights, used mainly by reflection, as reflected light. Like in that first flat where... where Doris lives with... I was going to say Doris Day, what's her name?
[Q] Jo.
Yes, but what is the actress' name?
[Q] Rita Tushingham.
No, the other one.
[Q] Dora Bryan.
Dora Bryan, yes. So in the first flat where Dora Bryan lives with Rita Tushingham, which was supposed to be a bit of a slum, we had a rather dreary wallpaper and we used this very grainy stock. And we had... in the bedroom we had one light reflecting off the ceiling in one place, and another little light, just a 500 watt... spot photo flood, you know, a flat-fronted photo flood was used reflect... in reflected light mode. And in one case there is an additional direct light only when there's some drawings being shown, which didn't catch the reflected light properly, so I... I put an additional little spot in. But most of that scene, most of the scenes, all the scenes, in fact, in that flat, both day scenes and night scenes, are shot at an aperture of F2.8 at a level of something like 20-25 ft candles. So very, very low light level indeed. And the other interesting feature of the HPS stock was that normally, as a stock increases in sensitivity, it also loses contrast. So if you... if you compare, for instance, the two equivalent Kodak stocks, Plus-X and Double-X, you find that Double-X is softer. It has less contrast. It's twice the speed of Plus-X, but it has less contrast. So Double-X requires a... a healthy strong studio-type lighting, whereas HPS didn't. HPS... you could light very softly with HPS and still maintain a minimum of contrast, which, of course, in black and white, is absolutely essential. Colour has the ability to cope with very flat lighting conditions, because the colour makes up the difference. But if you... if you use very flat light, or predominantly reflected light in black and white, you run the risk of the whole image turning muddy, because black and white requires a minimum of contrast in order to be viable. And HPS had this built-in quality that it was... it went against the rule, and although it was a very sensitive stock, it had quite a degree of built-in contrast, which enabled you to light with... with reflected light, which you could not have done with Double-X. Double-X had a quite a different characteristic. And anyway, I tended to prefer the Ilford stocks. Although Plus-X is a- Plus-X is a perfectly reasonable film, and the HPE- and the FP3 equivalent was very similar to... to Plus-X. It... it was in the other regions, in the... in the sensitive stock regions, in the very, very sensitive stock regions where... where Ilford had a considerable advantage.

The film was made entirely on location. Partly in Manchester and partly in London. And in London we used, for the second décor, for the flat that she moves into with the gay boy, with... played by Murray Melvin, that was actually filmed in the... in the carpentry workshop, or the scenery workshop, of the Royal Court Theatre. That loft-like building is the... was the scenery workshop of the... of the Royal Court, which they made available to us. So that... that worked out very successfully. And the... the location stuff in Manchester also worked very well. We were able to film, very successfully, in... in grey light, but it's not easy. You have to always be careful, you always... always have to be careful that you maintain this minimum of contrast, I've been speaking about. So we... we wetted down the street sometimes so we had a bit of glisten. We always had some black. We avoided the... the bleak, grey sky as much as we could. We had low angles which... I mean high angles looking down which avoided the sky. And the scene like - the scene where they walk through the graveyard and there are flagstones in the... in the floor with... with names on them and they come across a dead bird, and it... it all forms very much forms part of the dialogue. It plays... part of the scene plays like that. The atmosphere was excellent. It was a very, very conducive atmosphere for that scene. Filmed in entirely, so called, unsuitable weather, because the... the received wisdom was that, for black and white film, you needed sunshine, and this is not the case. But, you have to know what you're doing, because it is difficult. And each scene has to be very carefully planned so that there is some contrast in the scene, which, if it doesn't come from the light, then it has to come from the content of the scene, with some black in the scene and some white in the scene and some mid-tones in the scene, and... not only mid-tones, which would come out muddy. We used the canals very effectively; the disused canals, which have since been refurbished in some... in some cases. We used those canals to great effect, so the film is a very atmospheric film. And it's also a very poetic film, which is... is something that Tony has, to a less extent than Lindsay Anderson... I think Lindsay Anderson is, as such, a more poetic director. And yet, Taste of Honey is a very poetic film. So I was always very cross when it was just lumped in with a number of other films that had working class, everyday subjects. It was lumped in under the... under the general heading of Kitchen Sink... Kitchen Sink Drama, and I always thought that that epithet, that label, was particularly unfair to A Taste of Honey which has that sort of subject, but it's treated in a highly poetic manner. And that was later. All that was acknowledged by the critics, but not immediately. The film didn't, again, didn't have an immediate impact, but if you look at it with a little bit of hindsight, you see that there was a... there was a lot of poetry in that film. And the Kitchen Sink label was really very unfair.

In the Blackpool sequence, which was all shot in one day, we had a severe weather change. It started fine and... and then it clouded over and... and became rainy. And, we... we could see this about to happen, so we decided to... to shoot the... the first part of the sequence is show... is shot second. So the... the first thing we shot was all the hand-held stuff of them... of them walking along the... the Promenade in Blackpool, and we just had a few extras who we put behind the... or crowd artistes, I should say, whom we put behind the main players. But it was used in the technique of insinuating players into the real... into the real background, which I'd already used in Morocco and in other documentaries. So that all came in very handy for Taste of Honey, and it's a very effective sequence, which is largely improvised, and which is shot very quickly. Also we... we came across that extraordinary performance where they... they show a woman being garrotted and that sort of strange stage show where the... a half-nude girl is on the bed and... and the... and the commentary, actually, was faked. It was done afterwards because they didn't want to use the original voice, and used a rather gravelly, sort of, funny sort of woman's voice for the commentary. But that... he stumbled upon that and he said, 'Oh let's... let's do that, let's grab that'. As is, of course, the hall of mirrors which isn't easy for camera, again. But it... it was managed. I managed that. And then, the rest of the... the sequence, which in the movie comes first, is... is on the pier and was actually filmed in the rain, well, drizzle. And there's a line put in somewhere about, you know, it's going to rain again in a minute. Do come on, it's going to rain again in a minute, something like that. Which they often did... that kind of dialogue is often inserted in movies to cover a weather change. But there's one other interesting weather change happens in that film where I made use of the... of the weather change. We were shooting in a place which is called Under the Arches, which is a disused railway bridge and there's a huge brick arch... very tall brick arch, with landscape behind. On one side there's a sort of rubbish dump, but on the other side is open landscape. And, Murray and Rita are off on their excursion into the Pennines and, the scene starts in greyness. So the bit where she's leaning against the arch and she says, I don't want to have this baby and all that, you know, this baby's going to be born deaf and daft, and stuff like that, and it's a bit of depressing dialogue was... the scenery was depressing and the light was depressing, and there was one instance where she had to be silhouetted against the background, and it was impossible in that particular situation, even if you put the camera right in the ground, right on the ground, it was impossible to get a silhouette against sky. Sky being at the other... at the other end of the arch. But I couldn't silhouette her entire figure. I could only silhouette her up to about the knees. So below the knees I needed something light so that she would pick up in silhouette against that. So I had a lot of light-coloured sand put down. So that's a piece of lighting with sand. Instead of lighting with light or with lamps, that's a bit of lighting with sand. So she appears as a... as a whole silhouette. And then the weather came to our rescue, or rather we adapted. I could see the weather was breaking so there's a scene where her mood changes and, and she says, We're extraordinary people, you and I, and they run through the arch. And when they come out the other end the sun is shining, and that transition is beautifully managed. They always say, well, scenes like that you may have to re-shoot the whole thing because you can't go suddenly from in the middle of a scene from... from grey light to sunlight. Which is untrue in reality, because with... with... on a day where those clouds are scudding by... scudding by, you go continuously from... from sunlight into cloud. But there, in that particular instance it was... it was nicely incorporated into the story.

During the Blackpool sequence there happened what I called the dinner jacket and tie sequence, where it was getting late. Oh, that was right, that was not on the day we filmed in Blackpool. That... one evening, one late afternoon, we went to Blackpool quickly, because it's quite near Manchester, for... for a sort of location scout. And, when we had finished scouting we wanted to have dinner, but at that... that time in England, if you hadn't had your dinner by... by 6:30, you could starve to death because everything closed. You were lucky to get some fish and chips, if they were still open. Anyway, we went into this Grand Hotel and there was one last couple dining in the... in the dining room. They were... they were waiting to go home. The waiters were waiting to go home. And, we said, 'Look we're... you know, can we just have a quick meal, you know'. 'Oh, the kitchen's closed'. 'Just something, you know'. And then he wouldn't let me in the dinning room because I didn't have a... a jacket and tie, you see. So our production manager, who was actually a... a Lord, Lord Marley, but he went under a... under a straightforward name, Leigh Aman, Leigh Aman was his professional name, but he was actually Lord Marley, and he argued with the waiter and persuaded him to... oh, I had to borrow... yes, I had to borrow a tie, and they let me in... they let us in. And that led me to develop an idea, which I've always wanted to... sorry, one more time. And that led me to an idea which I always wanted to develop subsequently, it's a sketch for television or variety, where you have two people appear at the doorway of... of one of these swish restaurants, and one is dressed very smartly in a... in a turtle-neck sweater with a... with a silk scarf or something like that. And the other person is dressed in a... in a comical long comedian's check, very loud comedian's check jacket going down to his knee... below his knees, and some ridiculous over- overdone bow-tie, and, and of course, according to the rules, the... the smartly dressed elegant man is kept out and the comedian, because he is wearing a jacket and tie, has to be let in. That would form a nice... a nice basis for a...  for a sketch.

It went to Cannes the same year as Electra went to Cannes, so I was in Cannes for Electra, and I was also there when the... the ensemble cast of Taste of Honey won... won a sort of joint prize for the whole ensemble. And, and for some reason they had to leave before the certificates could be presented. And, I was staying behind anyway, so I said, well, I'll collect the certificates when you... when you, you know, I'll deliver them to you in London. And, when I finally got hold of the certificates, they were unsigned. They were supposed to be signed by the festival director and they weren't signed. And I thought: Oh my... so I signed them myself. With a squiggle.

The whole work with Woodfall and Tony Richardson was what I call in my book, a brief honeymoon, because it... the three films, Taste of Honey, Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner and Tom Jones, were all made in the space of 18 months. And, when we came to prepare Loneliness... all the spade work really, all that technical stuff, had already been done, for Taste of Honey, so we went into Loneliness... with relatively little preparation, except for the things that were demanded by the subject itself. And, we were based in an old NAAFI facility, an old army facility in Esher and that's what we turned into the... the set for the... for the Borstal, as it were. And, we thought very carefully about the... about the running bit... the bits. Each... each of Tom's... Tom Courtney's runs has a special character. I think there are three of them, or four of them, if you count the final race. And one of them takes place at dawn and it was really... it was actually filmed at dawn, at least in part. And there's a scene on, Blackheath I think it was, somewhere around there, where the sun is just rising, and in the top right hand corner of the pictures, is the setting moon, or is a crescent moon. Some critic wrote something like... what consultation of ephemeredes there must have been to capture that precious moment. Which only goes to show that critics don't know a great deal about how movies are made, because you can't... you can't possibly plan a thing like that. It would take forever, and fall out... well outside your schedule. So that, of course, is a piece of fortuitous luck. But we had two cameras set up, and, one with a wide angle and one with a long focus lens and Tom did his run, parallel to the camera, and across camera, like that. And the... the two cameras followed him. The... the wide angle was almost static because it only needed a little adjustment. But the... the close-up was on a fairly long lens and, in the... in the cutting, it... it's very nice because they long... they use the long shot all the way, except for the actual moment where he crosses the sun- the disk of the sun, then it cuts into big close-up and he runs across the large disk of the rising sun. It's a beautiful shot. But the moon, of course, is... is a piece of luck. And, then there's some very nice misty stuff in the... in some river valley. Again, I can't remember where that was, but it's early morning and there's a mist, which was a real mist, not... not created by us. And that worked out very nicely. But it was, again, one of those... one of those occasions when, in... working in black and white, you have to be very careful because it's... it's a fairly contrast-less subject. It hasn't got much inherent contrast, and with the mist and the... and the grey sky above, there's a danger of it turning muddy. So one has to be very careful that there is always some dark trees or something in... in the frame that gives you a little bit... a little bit of contrast. But that also, that worked out beautifully. And it starts off with a nice shot in the... in the dormitory where he's woken up, or he wakes up by himself at... at pre-dawn, as it were. There's just a little bit of light filtering in through the windows. And then, as he... as he gets out of bed and gets dressed, the... the camera tracks back very slowly, heart in mouth, as it were, timing because it was designed to work in such a way that, while the camera is tracking back, he finishes... he finishes dressing, and by the time he's got into long shot, he runs past camera and out... out of camera. That kind of shot doesn't work every time first time, but I think that... that time it did, because the timing has to be very precise, if you want to do it all... all in... all in one shot. And, it was very nice, of course, working... working with Tom. That was my first experience of working with Tom. Later I worked with him again on one of the Cacoyannis films which was not such a happy experience. But quite recently, jumping forward many years, I was asked to do a programme for, I think it was Channel 4 or Channel 5, which is called Script to Screen, or something like that. Behind the Scenes, one of those titles. And, Tom refused to participate because he said he'd had it up to here about... that film is in the past and he wants it to stay there. He doesn't want people to think that... that... well he wasn't specific, but they've asked him so many times to talk about that movie, which was his second movie, I believe. Billy Liar comes first, I think.
[Q] No. 
No? Billy Liar comes second? So that must have been his first one then. Yeah, right. So he didn't want to participate in that programme. And we gathered together all the... all the people that are still alive, which is not that many.

We had some real Borstal boys for all the extras that Tom Courtnay and James Bolam mixed with quite effortlessly, and the mix was so good that you couldn't... unless you knew that this is an actor and this is an extra and this is a Borstal boy, you... you couldn't tell. The only time you could tell was at lunchtime, because they were absolutely ravenous. It looked like in the Borstal they were never properly fed because they were always looking... if you'd finished your dinner and you'd left something on your... on your plate, they'd say, 'Can I have that?' That's the only way you could tell the... the Borstal boys and they... of course they participated with great glee in... in the riot, which was interestingly staged. It's... it's largely improvised. We had one camera that was tracking up and down the... one of the aisles at the edge of the.. of the... hall, the dining room. And the other camera was hand-held, operated by yours truly, of course, and sometimes the... the fixed camera comes into the picture, but so what, you know, you cut that bit out. No point in taking care... not that it doesn't come into the picture, but it doesn't matter. The thing that matters, as with all... as with all scenes of that nature, is that you maintain the spontaneity and, if at all possible, you don't have to do it more than once. Matching in any case would be difficult, but also the spontaneity gets lost very quickly. So using my usual technique, which hasn't really varied through the Greek films, was to... to go hand-held at the moment... at a precise moment where the action turns violent, or... or lively, and to stop again the moment the action stops being violent or lively. The choice, I think, of that moment, where you switch from tripod to... to, or dolly, to hand-held, is very important. And that's what I have against things like the Dogma movement recently, is that everything has to be hand-held, tripod is anathema. It... it goes against the... the grain. It... it negates the whole point of going hand-held. Like in... in music, if you... if you have a climax, if it's preceded by silence, then the climax, of course, is much... is much more emphatic... much more effective. But if you... if you have climax all the time, it gets lost. So for me it's always been very important to plan the moment. Of course, in... in close collaboration with the director. But if you have a good relationship with the director, then you... you plan the moment. At this moment we'll go hand-held. In the case of the riot it was a mix of the two cameras running, as I've just said. But often only one camera is in use and the moment where the hand-holding begins and the moment where the hand-holding stops, is in... in itself very...very effective.

That was the only time I worked with Michael Redgrave, who is a lovely man. Super... he's a... he's one of those typical Englishman, you know, super polite and very... a very good actor, but very low-key, very low-key. And he was... I think he was perfectly cast in that... in that role as the... as the headmaster of the... of the Borstal. So the whole... and his assistant's very good too, I forget his name, the rather stout actor, very good.
[Q] Oswald Blocks.
It's also James Fox's first film, I think, I believe. Do you know one thing... something happened that is... is very interesting. That... having worked... having looked at John Thaw's work, throughout his career, particularly when he played... he played that detective, Inspector Morse. Wasn't that John Thaw? Yes, right. So, very much later on in... in my career I suddenly realised that John Thaw is in Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner. He's one of the... he's one of the Borstal boys. I didn't realise that. I said, 'Oh, that's John Thaw'. Sometimes things like tha... things like that happened. And, it's an interesting comparison with... that film form... forms an interesting comparison with things that happened later to me in Germany where we had tremendous difficulty casting a... a gang of youths such as the Borstal boys in... in the... in Loneliness, who can mix effortlessly with... with the other actors, because there... there's no tradition of that in German acting. And they tend to be either useless or... or terribly theatrical. So we had a hell of a job casting the film called Iron Angel, Engel aus Eisen, which in England, it would have been a doddle. It would be terribly easy. Any number of people would be available that you could cast, but not in Germany.

There was a... an incident when Ossie Morris, who was already preparing Tom Jones with... with Tony Richardson, came to visit us on the running track where we were doing some of the practice runs. And, and I was using... there were two cameras, again, in use and one- one of them was hand-held by me, the other one was operated on a little... a little... back of a little mini-van, I think, by... by my operator, Desmond Davis. And, Ossie Morris looked at the... the Arriflex, the hand-held Arriflex and he said, 'Ooh, I wouldn't know one end of those things from the other'. Which wasn't exactly true, but it did represent something of the mentality and something of the spirit which later, very, very soon afterwards, that led to the separation of Ossie from Tony, that... that Ossie was trying to... for Tom Jones, Ossie was trying to pull Tony back into a more or less studio-based, organised, conventional, you could say, set-up. And Tony resisted. And Ossie said, well you know Tom Jones is a big epic, it's in colour, you can't make that like you... like you made... with the same technique that you made Taste of Honey and Loneliness. And Tony kept thinking... well why not? So they parted company quite amicably, and I was persuaded to take on Tom Jones, which I, initially, didn't want to do.

Initially, I didn't want to do it, because I saw it as a big epic. I didn't mind the colour, but I minded it being not an intimate film. In that sense, Taste of Honey and Loneliness are very intimate films, and Tom Jones seemed to me like an enormous epic, costume and period and colour and huge cast. And so I was a bit afraid of it. And... But Tony took Kate, my agent and friend, aside. Kate had started, by the way, acting as my agent. Kate was a friend that I met in Greece, as a matter of fact, when she was on holiday there with her husband. But she became my agent. We became very good friends and she became my agent just ahead of Taste of Honey, and she went in there to negotiate with Michael Holden, not Holden. No, I can't think of names. The chap who was in charge of the money. She went in there to negotiate and he said... we have in mind... he gave her a figure, I can't remember what it was, and she said, 'Oh, no, no, that's not what I had in mind at all, you know'. She started to get up and leave, and he said... Michael said, 'Just a minute, just a minute, is it not negotiable?' She said, 'I'm not a horse trader'. But they came to an amicable arrangement, and for each film I think my salary was £80 a week on Taste of Honey, which was the... that was double the ACT minimum. But the ACT minimum was a totally meaningless figure that... quite unlike the what they call scale in America. There's Nabet and I think the other union as well. They have something called scale, and if you're a low budget producer you get your crew together, your potential crew, and you say we're paying scale. Then they can either say yes or no. But if you got an English crew together and said, you're all on minimum salary, they'd go... you can think about that one again, because it was a totally unrealistic figure, that only somebody fresh out of film school might possibly accept, but not even then. So the minimum salary for quite some years for a cameraman was £40 a week. I mean, this was at a time when a fiver would buy you a steak luncheon for two with wine, so it wasn't that unreasonable, but nobody would work for that kind of money. So my salary on Taste of Honey was £80, on Loneliness it jumped to £120, and then for Tom Jones it was £200. And Kate negotiated all that, but from that first encounter, which she did entirely by ear. You know, she did it on instinct because she had no experience of being an agent. But she probably did it better, because the agents are always a little afraid of the big people, like, if it was Fox or MGM or things, they're a bit cowered by all that. There was one occasion when somebody had a quarrel with Kate and said something like... you may need Columbia again. And Kate said, 'We don't need Columbia at all. Columbia needs us!' So by being an amateur, as it were, she managed beautifully. All through all my career she negotiated the contract through all the careers, throughout all my career.

Tom Jones had a lot of careful preparation. And... Tony wanted to make it all on location and I said, yes, why not, I see no problem there. And... we had a basic discussion. We formed a principle that if the art direction and the costumes were impeccably in period, 18th Century, was it 17th or 18th? I can never remember. Anyway, if they were impeccably in period, then the camera style could be very modern. That was a very interesting and fundamental decision which worked extremely well. Because if you look at Tom Jones, alongside any major epic, say the Roman Empire or any Hollywood-made film, or even the British spectaculars, there were a few made before, just before Tom Jones, the look of Tom Jones is completely different. And that is partly due to... or it's largely due to that decision, that it uses few lights, it uses reflected light, it has a very mobile camera style with hand-holding, with a mixture of helicopter and little low tracking vehicles for the chase, for the hunt, I mean. So that decision was fundamental and it worked extremely well. Then Tony had one of those big eve-of-shooting party before we all despatched off to Somerset and Dorset, and he said, 'Now, let's all go and have a lovely 14 weeks holiday in the West Country'. I can't do his accent, because he had a very specific way of speaking. And it was a... It was a lovely shoot. It wasn't all easy. Sometimes it was very taxing. But we had fun, and that's the big difference between films of that period and film making in that period, and film making nowadays. Because nowadays, all the fun has gone out of it. The pressures have increased so much, and the lack of time is so mordant, that you, sort of, think, well if a film is 50% stress and 50% fun, okay. But if it's 90% stress and no fun at all, then why do it. Why do it? It's such a pity that you can't find a comfortable way of making films. Not working 18 hours a day and having no time to do anything. So, Tom Jones was a very pleasant shoot, I would say, with some very hairy moments and some very difficult things. Once I actually refused to do something, which I regret to this day. Because it was raining and the rain came on suddenly, and I was... it was summer so I was dressed like I'm dressed now, very lightly, and I was cold. I was freezing, in fact, and Tony said, 'Oh, let's go and do some improvised stuff with Susannah and Tom... no, Albert, with Susannah and Albert Finney, all wet'. And I said, 'Oh, you'll never use it, you know'. And Desmond did it, my operator did it, and it's in the movie, and I always felt very sorry about that, because I shouldn't have chickened out like that.

Tom Jones had some technical challenges. The first... the first challenge was the lighting which had to be sufficient to expose colour, which at that time was 50 ASA. The Eastman colour of the day was 50 ASA. It started at 25 ASA and then in 1954, I believe, and then some years after that they developed the next generation which was 50 ASA. Because the old Technicolor, people don't remember this, but the old Technicolor, with the three-strip monster camera, was the equivalent of 8 ASA, as was, in fact, Kodachrome. Kodachrome was 8 or 12, depending on whether it was daylight Kodachrome or tungsten Kodachrome. But in the days of the three-strip camera, those actors were virtually fried, you know. In fact, there's an illustration somewhere in some journal about the lighting of, I think it was, This Happy Breed, and it's a two-shot, a close two-shot, and each one of the two people has an arc on them which is at a distance of something like 6 ft. It says somebody was arced with two layers of silk in order to stop Celia Johnson burning up. This doesn't mean burning up only photographically, but it means literally burning up, because they were nearly fried. If you can imagine those huge Hollywood sets for the musicals and all that, all lined with arcs all the way round. At that time they didn't have brutes, they had a smaller arc which was just called the 175, whatever, according to the amperage. But the set was lined entirely with arcs, so the heat must have been phenomenal. They must have had very efficient ventilation, because otherwise the place would be red hot, right away. So in Tom Jones we had the opportunity to work with a 50 ASA material, but that was about half the speed of the black and white material of the time. So you had to have double the light. And, if you wanted to use the light mainly soft, mainly reflected, then again, that means that you had to use certain units. Because by the time it's reflected, there's less coming back, of course. I had already developed, I can't remember now. I developed a box light. It's just a great crate, like this. It was about that high and that wide, and it had 12 flat-fronted photo floods in it. And, we used that for some of the location stuff. That was specially made for us. And then we had some smaller, similar lights made, but smaller with six photo floods in them, which we used in the interiors later on. And initially the company that made these up, sort of said, well, we're afraid you'll have to pay for the... because nobody else wants this kind of light. And some years later, of course, I went to their storeroom and it was full of those lights, because everybody realised that they were quite useful for certain things. So we had this rather large soft light. Because if you had flat-fronted photo floods, first of all you had the choice of using spot floods or flood floods, there were two, there were milky fronted ones which were soft, and there were glass fronted ones which were, transparent glass, which were spots. And by mixing those you could achieve certain effects. Like in the interiors which we filmed in Londonderry House, which no longer stands, in Hyde Park Corner, next to the Hilton, I used a box of six of those lamps above each of the windows, I think there were four windows. And I put spot photo floods in the top range, so there were three spots in the top and three floods in the bottom, so the floods lit the area near the window, where there was also a certain amount of daylight coming in, and the spots lit the area further away, all in one go, as it were. So, the only place you can see that that doesn't always work terribly well is near the far wall, where somebody went... once Albert Finney comes in and he's got about 15 shadows behind him, which I didn't fancy. But that only happened when somebody was really close to the wall. Most of the time that worked very well. But for the natural interiors in Dorset and Somerset, we had this large soft light, you could call it a soft light. In some cases, like the scene where George Devine, playing the Squire Allworthy, is supposed to be dying, on his deathbed, that was the principle light source. It's a kind of three-quarter backlight and it just had that and a little bit of film. It makes a very nice atmosphere. And I used, I don't know if I used the 5k occasionally, but most of it... the largest light in most of those interiors is either a 2k or that particular large light, which I only used once or twice, and there's quite a lot of reflected light, just off polystyrene boards. Very simple, but very practical, because in some of these locations you're in a quite a small space. And, if it doesn't have a white ceiling, which is very handy for reflecting the light, sometimes you paint the ceiling white or you put white board up on the ceiling so you can use it for reflection, as we did in Taste of Honey in the various interiors. Then you can use- you can position little 2k or 1k, they call them inky... what do they call them? Redheads. In England they're called Redheads and Blondes, here they call them something else. Every country has it's own name for those things.
Anyway, you can have lightweight stands, a small light with barn doors so if you want to control the reflection, you just close the barn doors, open the barn doors and you get more or less reflection. It's a very simply way of working, but every effective, which I've used ever since; ever since that point.

The other technique that I've used, well there's two other techniques that I used in Tom Jones, and I've used ever since. One is to find a filter, or a series of filters that will soften the colour and diffuse the image a little bit. Because this is a principle which applies right across the board. If you photograph something, in colour, and you project it on a screen surrounded by black, you have two factors going which increase the contrast. First of all, the film itself increases the contrast against what you would see with the eye, or what you would perceive with the eye. Because, don't forget, with the eye, as you look across from a light space to a dark space, your iris opens and closes automatically. God was very clever in that respect, it doesn't need any adjustment, you know, it's all built in. In the camera, of course, you have to do it.

If you project something on a screen surrounded by black, that is also a factor which increases the contrast, and in the original Telecinema... The original National Film Theatre was called the Telecinema and it was in the South Bank site, built as part of the Festival of Britain in 1951. And that had an experimental screen surround which was lit with dimmers and the dimmers were linked to the brightness of the projected image. So, if you had a very bright image, the dimmers went up and the surround lit up, and if you had a very dark image, the surround went down, possibly to black. So that mitigate... I don't know why they felt that that was a good idea, but they experimented with it and it was soon dropped because it didn't work very well. The synchronisation didn't work and it was irritating because your eye was drawn to something outside the image. But the principle, of course, is correct, that if you want to lessen the contrast then you have to do something about the black surround. Because it's the black surround that gives an impression of more contrast. So I wanted a filter to cut that down a bit. And at the same time I wanted to diffuse the image, certainly for the close-ups, but possibly also for the long shots, to give a certain softness. Because the human eye, first of all people don't have 20/20 vision, very few people have 20/20 vision, but even if you have 20/20 vision, you see... you do not see things like a camera sees things. Particularly a camera with modern lenses. Modern lenses are very, very sharp. If you photograph a face, direct with a modern lens, it comes out not very pleasant looking, because you see every beard stubble, every pore, every... in much too much detail. The human eye doesn't see people like that, so it's not aesthetically pleasing. So throughout history of cinema people have used diffusion. Cameramen have used diffusion. The net that I got from Georges Périnal is, is... was one of... some cameramen had a whole booklet full of wonderful nets which were hat veils of different sorts, silk stockings, all kinds of things, because they all found, quite early on, that an undiffused image is not very pleasant. So I settled on a net which Desmond Davis had, my operator, had, and he had obtained it from George Périnal, not directly, but it went through various other hands on the way, and this was quite a small piece. So we cut it into two pieces and one piece was framed in a 3x3-inch frame, and that was used for the wider angle stuff. And then we had a... no it's the other way round actually. Then we had a smaller one which was put in a circular frame and that went directly on the lens. The other net went in the filter holder, which all cameras have in front. The whole film is photographed through those two pieces of net- every shot. Except for certain shots that the second unit did, which Manny Wynn, my focus puller, who also became the cameraman on the second unit, which is a certain amount of work on location. And to this day, even on television, I can see the insert... if I'd warn you, you'd see it too. If I prepare you, as it were, I'd say, watch that and tell me if you see an image that doesn't quite match. And you will see the image where the... what do you call the spur?  Spurs.  Spurs. The image where he digs the spurs into the horse and there's some blood on the flank of the horse. That was one of the things that the second unit did, and that is unfiltered, and it stands out. Immediately you get a sudden increase in contrast, the colour is brighter than the other... the surrounding scenes, and to prevent that kind of thing I used this net. But the production company, United Artists, they would've gone spare if they'd known that the entire look of the film was based on these, was absolutely dependent, on these two tiny bits of very fragile net which were totally irreplaceable.

The day-for-night never pleased me in colour. I always hated this blue effect that people used in colour for day-for-night, and the blue effect is borrowed from the theatre. It's a stage effect. On the stage, in certain plays and in certainly romantic musicals and things like that, they always used a steel blue, because I've done some theatre lighting I even know the names of the gels that they use in theatre. There's a gel called steel blue which is a faint but distinct blue, and that was always used for the night scenes. So, somehow this idea got transferred to the movies, and the conventional technique, which is in use to this very day, is to add blue, or to photograph it in such a way that blue is already incorporated in the original negative. And those blue night scenes never pleased me very much. Not only that, but it restricts you severely in the countryside where, in black and white, you could do very effective day-for-night work by just using a certain filter, red filter basically, that darkens the sky and the clouds stand out nicely against the dark sky. You can see it in almost any black and white film that has extensive countryside scenes in it, all the westerns, for instance. In black and white, day-for-night is not only a handy and practical working technique, but it's also an aesthetically pleasing technique. And that is not true, both ways it's not true in colour. First of all, it's not very handy to work, because you always have to keep the sky out because there is no way... every way you have of darkening the sky has problems. If you use a neutral density filter, a half... what are they called? I can't think of the names. There's a filter which, no, there's a filter which is half... it doesn't have a hard edge, it's got a soft edge and the bottom is clear. So you have a filter which... it could be 3 x 4-inches and the top half is grey, and then it gradually becomes clear and the bottom half is clear. So you can use that to darken the sky and the bottom half is... you photograph the landscape, and that's fine. But you can't pan with it, you can't tilt with it; very limited. So in most colour day-for-night scenes you see, frequently, the camera is placed artificially high in order to reduce the sky to just a tiny strip at the top of the picture. Now with the system that I developed, for Tom Jones, and that I use to this day, you don't have to do that and it's very effective. But it's completely different. It gives you a look that much more... that resembles natural moonlight much more than this blue thing. Because moonlight is not blue. Moonlight is reflected sunlight, but it only reflects certain lines in the spectrum, so it's... you could say it's monochromatic. Because I knew that it was basically monochromatic, I said, just a minute. The filter that we used to view, it's called a viewing filter, and the filter that we used to view scenes in black and white films, is a monochromatic filter which is sort of... it's a yellowish/green in colour and quite dark, and it helps you to see a scene in black and white. It doesn't turn it into black and white, but it helps you to see it in black and white. Anyway, I said, just a minute, this filter is a monochrome filter, I'll make some experiments. So I made some experiments with shooting through that filter in combination with a pola screen.

Now with a pola screen, you can, you can darken the sky quite a bit, and with this filter, which is basically yellow, again, on a blue sky, the sky is darkened. And the, the final result, uncorrected, is a fairly unpleasant shade of yellow/green, but in the lab it's quite easy that, on your grading machine, which in those days was called a Hazeltine, you just turned the green down, and you get to a point where it jumps to magenta, it jumps to the opposite. But there is a point in between where it's sort of neutral, and that's the point that I wanted to use. In Tom Jones it's quite effective, but it still has some faults, which later I managed to correct. Nowadays the correction facilities, via computer and digital means, are infinite so you can do what you like. But in those days you had to rely on what you could do in the lab with the available technique then, and as the technique was completely new, I kept getting notes back from the lab saying, this is completely unusable. And I said, look, haven't I sent you a special note about that? Oh, yes, yes, yes! You know.
Anyway, so with my technique, which I later described in the journal of the... what's that called, the technical society?
[Q] SMPT? 
Yes, the other one. The British equivalent. I described this method which consists simply of using this monochromatic filter which I had made up into 3-inch, because it doesn't exist in that size, it only exists as a viewing filter. I had it made up into 3-inch squares and I used it in conjunction with a pola screen and it worked very well. And then, in the lab, you have to inform the lab that all those scenes need to be corrected. The green needs to be taken out to the point where it changes over into magenta, and then you have the result that I want. And, it was every effective and I've used it to this day. You can shoot against the sky, you can have a face up against the dark sky, almost black sky, with some flesh tone showing through, which you can't do... you can't do that with the conventional blue technique, it's all impossible.
[Q] This must have created makeup problems. 
Not really. It was... you required... the only difference was that you needed a lipstick with a little bit of blue in it. Otherwise the lips came out a bit pale. But it didn't create any major problems. It was very effective. Although there are one or two shots which are severely underexposed, I'll admit to now. And, we used it in the mixture also. It's very interesting that, in many circumstances, you use a mixture of day-for-night with other techniques. Like when we were shooting in the woods, with poor Diane Cilento who had lots of her scenes cut out, because Tony, at the end, decided that the film was much too long and it didn't hold and it wasn't funny. He was terribly worried and then it became one of the biggest successes ever. But he didn't see it like that. So, poor Diane Cilento had quite a lot of her scenes cut, but we did scenes with Diane in the woods and Albert, and this was shot in a little wood near Pinewood, where they're still shooting... Burnham Beaches, they still shoot stuff there. And... as long as you're under trees and there isn't any sky showing, you don't need to use a technique that's designed to darken the sky. So in those circumstances, we used another technique of just shooting the thing slightly cold, not blue, but slightly cold by using... instead of using the 85 filter, which you had to use in those days, which was an orange/pinky filter that corrected daylight to the film material which was designed to be shot with artificial light, with tungsten light. So you needed this 85 filter on everything you shot with daylight. And instead of using that on those night scenes, we used the 3N5 and that I learnt from somebody else, I think Ossie talks about it somewhere that he used that as well, that technique. It was quite a common technique, 3N5 being... 3 which is a yellow filter combined with an N5, a neutral density 5, and so that darkens the scene and it also makes it a little bluer than it would've been with the 85. And that produces a perfectly reasonable night effect as long as you're under trees or in some circumstance where you don't have the sky. So that is an inter-cut, when he's caught and the... Hugh Griffith chases him with the blunderbuss, you know. And then there's a long run, which is filmed with the day-for-night filter because it has, it has a sky background. Once or twice there's some very unpleasant canary-yellow tones that come into the sky, which I later managed to avoid, but nevertheless, it's, it's... I think it's better than it would've been by any other... using any other system.

Initially we were based in Weymouth then we moved to Taunton, then we moved... I moved out of Taunton and I moved into a little place above a pub in Williton for all the shooting that we did in Somerset. And we shot in Cerne Abbas and we shot in Cranbourne for the Cranbourne Manor, which is the first house that... Squire Allworthy's house is actually Cranbourne Manor. And then for some of the other scenes... I can't remember which scenes they were, for some of the other scenes we requisitioned a girls school in Somerset, in Northern Somerset, near Williton there, Wachet. Wachet, Williton, they're two adjacent villages. We requisitioned that school and the dormitories, which were painted white, I believe, had to be painted some other colour for Tony. This is what the art director wanted.

So the art director wanted it a different colour so they were all repainted. And then we got behind schedule and we got close, perilously close, to the day when the girls were due to return from their holiday. And this problem was presented to Tony and he said, 'Oh, well, I'll do my best to finish it'. Then he said, 'Otherwise they'll just have to have their dormitory puce'. But we managed. We finished... that film was finished a week over schedule, and at the very beginning, the production manager, the people who did the budget, said, this film needs 18 weeks. But Tony said, well, we can only afford 15 weeks, so we're going to make it in 15 weeks. And we started and we made it in 15 weeks, and we were a week short, and the completion guarantee people came over to supervise the extra week, but they couldn't do anything because we had to do those scenes, and it wasn't a waste of time or money. And, of course, afterwards the film earned a bomb, so in the end it didn't matter. But at the time, it was a problem. But it only went one week over schedule, to 16 weeks.

We had a wonderful cast. If you just see the first frame, you know, in the credits, where you have Edith Evans and Michael Redgrave... no, it's not Michael Redgrave.
[Q] George Devine. 
Yes, George Devine, Edith Evans, Joan Greenwood, Rachel Kempson who was married to Michael Redgrave, some wonderful people. And there was a scene in, in... there was a scene in the latter part... I should've said, the filming that we were in... we were in Yorkshire. We were in Somerset and Dorset for three-quarters of the schedule, then we moved to London. For the last four weeks, I think, we moved to London. And we shot the London scenes, partly in Lincoln's Inn Fields, partly in the back of... there's a street of warehouses in Stepney which we used, which was used many times for movies. And... and then we shot the... there's a sort of garden party which we shot in, which was supposed to be the Vauxhall Gardens, which was a famous entertainment centre of the day. And we shot that in Holland Park, which conveniently was just across the road from where I lived. But it was a night scene, and there's a scene where Edith Evans and Hugh Griffith were both in costume and he was wearing an elephant trunk. They're walking around this little pond which is about that deep, has some goldfish in it. And they're walking around this little pond and Hugh, who was slightly drunk probably, kept fluffing. And in the end... after about the third take, Edith took him to one side and said, 'Hugh, if you don't get it right next time I shall push you in the pond!' But he did get it right.
But Hugh Griffith, he was an irascible character, to say the least. Initially, I used to accept lifts from him. He had a chauffeured car, of course, and we were driving down the Somerset lanes at 7.00am, and they're very narrow and they have very high hedges. So you can't see round the corners, I know you can't see round corners, but you can't see ahead, so he kept... we got stuck behind a milk float or something, and he kept pushing the chauffeur in the back, and saying, 'Go on, overtake, overtake!' So I stopped accepting lifts from him. There was one occasion when he was in a bit of temper and he...  and Tony had a Thunderbird motor car, and it had a removable top. So there was an occasion when he was angry... he was annoyed with Tony and this Thunderbird top was lying in the grass somewhere and he fired a shotgun at it. And the best... the best occasion with... the funniest thing with Hugh Griffith, and it's all in the film, is where he has a meeting, an altercation, with the other squire. Who was playing that, the other one?
[Q] George Devine.
Of course, with George Devine. He has an altercation with George Devine and he's supposed to jump on his horse and wheel the horse around and ride off. And when he did that, he pulled the rein much too violently and the horse started turning in ever decreasing circles, and finally collapsed, with him, on the ground. They left it all in the movie, but when it happened, he said to Kate, who was standing next to me, he said, 'Go and see if he's dead, darling'. But he wasn't even injured. But that was lovely. It's lovely. It's in the movie and it seems, sort of, quite natural, because he's supposed to be you know, a temperamental guy who is in a temper.

Well one of the scenes in Tom Jones that has caused the most comment is the hunt scene. And there again, there was very careful preparation and the hunt scene falls into two parts. There's the hunt meet, which is the preparation for the hunt, where they all gather together and have a stirrup-cup, I believe it's called, and then there's the hunt itself. Now, the hunt meet, we decided to stage as an event and to cover it with three cameras, some of which would be hand-held. I think nearly all of them were hand-held. Because, at that time, hand-holding was still a choice to make against synch-shooting, you couldn't have both, Tony decided, which the sound man was very upset about that, but Tony managed to persuade him that, in this case, it would be okay. The sound man, by the way, was Peter Handford. He became a very good friend, who is a train enthusiast... that's another story. So we decided to cover the hunt meet with three hand-held cameras and then they take lots of sound, and it was done in the cutting room, you know. You just... you don't see people speaking sound-synch, but you hear, like what's going on next door. So it's perfectly okay. It worked out perfectly well. Then the hunt itself is also very interesting. That was a combination of very low-angle shots on a Mini-moke, on a truck version of the famous Mini, van or... no truck. It's a low truck where you can get the camera to about 2ft or 2ft 6 off the ground, which is very good. And, the scene, for instance, where the horse bolts under Susannah York and he rescues her, that was filmed with one fixed camera, fixed on the back of this little truck and I was crouched in the front compartment, in the passenger's seat, with another Arriflex with a long lens, with a 75, I think. And it shakes an awful lot, but that's fine for the scene. It goes with the scene. Then the moment he jumps on and they both fall to the ground, it becomes steady again, tripod, blimp, tripod, dialogue. At that moment it changes. Like the moment when it begins is the moment when the horse bolts. Up to that moment it isn't hand-held. And... so the hunt itself is a mixture of that low truck, little truck, and helicopter work. And sometimes it's so cleverly inter-cut, that sometimes you think you're running along the ground, then suddenly you're jumping along... over the bushes and rising into the air. So that was very effective. It was a very, very effective technique, and it's caused a lot of comment afterwards. People are always asking: how did you do that? We were very lucky with the weather. Like I always say, luck is an essential ingredient in any movie enterprise. That was shot midsummer, July, August, I can't remember. We'd just finished when the weather turned, and there were days and days of rain, and that particular area, where Susannah York is rescued, turned into a mud bath. So it could never have been done again. Only a week later it would've been impossible without changing the location and having a whole rethink. So luck plays a part. But... the scenery is terribly nice there and we used it, I think, extremely well.
Also, we were accompanied throughout the film with a menagerie of animals, that we used at various times; the horses, donkeys, sheep, Afghan hounds, which I knew something about because we had Afghan hounds at home for years. Sometimes the shooting was actually interrupted because they'd kennelled these Afghan hounds, of which there was a dozen or so, and they'd kennelled them something like three miles away, but we had to stop the shooting because they were howling. You see, you could hear them three miles away.

The other scene, I would say, that's caused the most comment afterwards was the eating scene, which was not in the script as such. In the script it was just that they become amorous towards each other and they're having a meal together and become amorous. That's really all that was written. I don't remember any dialogue being written, as indeed there isn't any dialogue in the scene. And, Albert and Joyce Redman developed that as they went along. It was lovely. It was very, very effective. It was very quickly done and it was entirely in the hands of the actors, you could say. Tony just set the scene, as he often did. Tony, Tony's method of working was really to get the actors together, to say we're doing this and this scene this morning. Show me what... how are you going to do it? You know... what do you want to do? So the actors would show him the scene. In cases where we were in studio conditions, like interiors, very often they were still in their street clothes and they just played the scene roughly. And then they changed into their costumes and I lit the set, and the operator discussed with, Desmond Davis, discussed with Tony whether they're going to be travelling or what, with me just lending an ear. It's often like that in England, and I imagine in America, but more in England, that the operator plays quite a large part in the decoupage, in the blocking. And it's very convenient... it's very often convenient, if the DP is so inclined, to let the operator do that. That I have no fixed ideas that I absolutely want to do a tracking shot here. If the director can decide that with the operator, all is well, just as well, and I can spend, can concentrate on the lighting. So often it happened like that. On films where I had an operator, particularly in England, it often happened like that. The American operators aren't quite so used to doing that. They're more like the right hand of the cameraman, but they don't often work so directly with the director, as they do in England. And the actors also are involved because experienced actors... think Susannah York talked about this once in some interview, where she says that, at the end of the scene, if she wanted to know if she was okay, she'd go to the operator, because he's the one that's looking through the lens, and they develop a relationship. Very often the artists develop a relationship with the operator, as well as having a good relationship, hopefully, with the others, but it's the operator they'll turn to if they want to know some... you know... I did something, did you see that, was it okay? You know, some little detail. So... I think that's a very effective way. It's very practical. Very efficient way of working.

When we finished shooting which, as I say, was after... we had 16 weeks of shooting, the last week being supervised, so to speak, by the people sent in by the completion guarantors, but they didn't have very much to do. Then we had a giant party, end-of-picture party. Tony always had a start-of-picture party and an end-of-picture party. And we all went to out... our various ways, and Tony started editing. The editing, of course, took quite some time. Towards the end of the editing, towards the end of the editing, Tony had got very depressed. God knows why, but he started to jumble things up, to cut two scenes together, to stop them in the middle and inter-cut them with another scene. And, in that process a lot Diane Cilento's scenes got cut, which is a pity because she's a very good actress and she had some nice scenes which all ended up on the cutting room floor. Because Tony started thinking: oh, it doesn't work, it isn't funny, it doesn't hold, and it's in those kind of circumstances that a strong producer comes in handy. But Tony was his own producer. So you don't have anybody to come to the cutting room. There's always a point in the cutting, towards the end of the cutting process, there often comes a point when a producer should get hold of the director and gently remove him from the Moviola and send him to the Bahamas for a couple of weeks, you know, so he can, he can recover and he can get a little distance from the work. Otherwise you're up in it... or up against it all the time, and you don't see it anymore. You think nothing works. That happened to Tony, I think, each time, and each of those two, three films, I think, certainly in Taste of Honey and in Tom Jones, the first rough cut was better, in my opinion, than the final cut, because it didn't have all this buggering about in it. It was more straightforward. And... and in Tom Jones it got so... he got really very depressed just before the premiere, having done all these things. Having put in the pixillation, for instance, which is very funny and works very well, but it wasn't really necessary to have this pixillation in the inn scene, where young Lynn Redgrave runs through the inn shouting rape, rape, rape, and then there's all this rushing about. So that pixillation was added because Tony thought, it's not fast enough, it's not funny enough. So all sorts of little bits were added, but the biggest damage, I think, was done in inter-cutting scenes that should've been allowed to run straight. That happened mostly... the first... I would say the first 20 to 25 minutes of the film are severely cut down and inter-cut, and just generally messed about with. But, of course, it is a film running two hours 20 something like that, and it probably was a bit over-long in the initial version. Anyway, Tony was almost suicidal and he was convinced that it was going to be a terrible flop, and then it was this tremendous success. Everybody breathed a sigh of relief, and Tony then... Tony made a very generous gesture, which is probably unique in the annals of motion picture history, he gave six of us, six of the principal technicians, a half of one percent share in the profits. Which, in my case, turned out to be £20,000. So that's... it's not bad. But Albert Finney had 10%. So he became a millionaire overnight. But he reacted quite well to that. It threw him off balance for a short while, but he's a very basic person and he recovered quite quickly. Which was not the case with... in the case of the... was it the editor? One of the people who received, it really upset his life. It killed his marriage and, you know, there was all sorts of trouble, because not everybody is good at handling a sudden, unexpected sum of money that comes in like that. In fact, when Tony announced this, we were taken aback, of course, and Tony said to Kate, you better come in the office, you know, I'll explain this to you about what it means in cash terms. So half a percent... doesn't seem like very much, but it turned out to be £20,000, and I went straight out and bought a 16mm... a complete 16mm movie outfit. I bought an NPR, an Éclair NPR, I bought a Moviola, I bought a Nagra, and some lights and we had a very compact travelling film outfit that I used on the two documentaries that I made Dan and The Greeks, and it all fitted in the boot of the Citroen. It was very compact and very effective. Anyway, that was very generous on Tony's part.

To my great regret, the honeymoon, like I said, with Woodfall was very brief and soon after the première of Tom Jones, Tony's next job was in America, and he went off to America to make The Loved One, then he made The Sailor from Gibraltar, also abroad. And, the Genet subject in France, Jean Genet. When he finally came back to England, sort of two years later, the whole nature of the company had changed. He got together with some rather unpleasant people, I won't mention any names. But the whole atmosphere had changed completely. Woodfall had a wonderful family... a bit like Merchant Ivory in it's early days. Everybody was one of the family and the same people worked for him again and again. But, after he came back from America the atmosphere changed and it became rather more hard-nosed and not so friendly at all. And apart from a test for Ned Kelly, which I shot with actors who all became famous, Ian McKellan, Ian McShane, Maurice Roëves, and in the end, of course, it was played by Mick Jagger. That also... the money soon ran out. The money... the enormous amount of money that Tom Jones gathered was cross-collateralised with so many other projects of Tony's that after, I think it was two years, they got onto us and they said in theory you still have some money coming to you but in fact this is the end because it's all been used up. But I don't mind, I was very happy with the result.

Certainly I lost my entire crew, they were all kicked upstairs. My operator, Des Davis became a director. My focus puller, Manny Wynn, who also did second unit became a cameraman, and even the clapper boy was promoted. So my next film which was a strange movie called Psyche 59, originally it was called, I had to find a completely new crew, which posed severe problems, because I made the mistake of employing some young and relatively inexperienced people, and they lasted exactly one week. In fact, the focus puller didn't last through the tests. He was fired immediately after tests. But that was... yes, everybody... everybody had a... their careers were advanced by Tom Jones. Poor Manny Wynn, of course, died very young, unfortunately. He died soon after that. He made a couple of films with... he was Des's cameraman for a couple of films.

While Ossie Morris was still preparing Tom Jones with Tony in that period when we were shooting Loneliness, at one point he came... they came to the set, Ossie and, as I already said, Ossie and also the art director, Ralph Brinton, who everybody called the Admiral, because he was in the Navy in the war. They had gone to Technicolor many times in order to devise a system of softening the colour, because I wasn't the only person that thought that the colour needed softening, the contrast needed lessening. So, he went to... they went to Technicolor and they tested various versions of the system of pre-fogging the film, which Houston had used on Moby Dick and, and the tests weren't satisfactory. So Ralph Brinton recounted to me the last visit to... what happened on the last visit to Technicolor, and it was already the ninth time that they'd been there and, again, it wasn't satisfactory. And they stormed out and Ralph said to Tony, 'Do you know the trouble with them is they're not artists, they're chemists!' This is a very astute remark which gets right down to the bottom of the problem, that there has to be, somewhere, there has to be an interface between the artistic bit and the industrial bit. And the chemist bit is the industrial bit. The laboratory is not full of artists. The laboratory is full of chemists, so they try to give you what you want, but they don't know really. They don't have the same idea in their head as to what the final result is, they're just trying to do what you want them to do, and it doesn't always work. So that... I think that was a very interesting instance of the buck stops here. That I was very glad to have found, finally, this little net which did the job of three or four filters. Many cameramen use filter packs, up to five filters thick in order to get the same result that I got with one filter. Just this, just this net. And many years later... well, the next year, the year after Tom Jones was made, my father died and we went through some old trunks of my mother's and lo and behold, in one of those trunks, was a piece of the same, self same hat veil material which was this size. And it was like a treasure trove. You know, it's like finding a treasure. And I was working for the Canadians in that year... in 1965 I was working for the Canadians on the National Film Board project for the Montreal Festival of '67, and I had it cut up into small pieces and mounted in circular rings, which I used for years after that.

I first went to Greece in 1955 when I was hired, sight unseen, by Michael Cacoyannis who had had a bad experience with his Greek cameraman on the film Stella, where I was told the end had to be re-shot three times, I think. And, Cacoyannis was in Cannes with the film, Stella, and he met Lindsay Anderson and they talked about the problems, and Cacoyannis was already preparing the next film which was going to be The Girl in Black, A Girl in Black. And he asked Lindsay if he knew anybody and Lindsay said, 'Yes, why don't you take Walter?' So he sent somebody to London to hire me, and make a contract. He hadn't seen me or he hadn't seen anything I'd done. He just took Lindsay Anderson's word for it. So I arrived one sultry August evening at Athens Airport, in August 1955, and waiting for me on the tarmac there were the three principle.... well, the two actors and Cacoyannis, Ellie Lambetti, Takis Horn and Michael, and they were all in evening dress. They were... I don't know what they were waiting for. I don't what they were expecting. They were expecting, I think, some sort of English gentleman, and off the plane stepped this schoolboy. Because at the time I was 28, looking, at the most, 18, and I can still remember they all stared at me like... that, that boy is going to photograph our movie? Anyway, the next day we made some tests and after that it all went swimmingly.

Cacoyannis had a very interesting way of working. His script was written almost like notes to himself. It was written as though it were a storyboard. It was the storyboard in words. Each shot, not each scene, but each shot was precisely described, and in a way that worked. So reading the script, which he'd translated into English for me, because Cacoyannis speaks perfect English, he's a Cypriot and studied in England and acted in England. So he translated the script for me and, when I read this script written in shots, as I said, the shots immediately turned into pictures in my head. And very good pictures they were too. So the thing about Cacoyannis was that by this fortuitous circumstance, his way of looking at movies and my way of looking at movies, what is desirable as an image in movies, were very similar. After the first days, one could almost say, there was no longer any great need for much discussion. He said, now we're going to do the close-up, now we're going to do the two-shot, and it was already in the script. This is then they turn into close-up. It was very precisely described. For instance, like you have an over shoulder and then the person at the back moves out, and the person in the front turns, and it turns into a close-up, and then they move to the edge of frame, and out of frame. Written precisely as that, in the script, which is very unusual. I've never seen another script written like that. Usually scripts are written in scenes, not in shots. So, when I talk about directorial styles, I often compare Cacoyannis' directorial style with Tony Richardson's, which were complete opposites. Tony Richardson, as I've already said, used to have the actors... bring the actors together, say... we're doing this and this scene, and he said, show me the scene. Then they'd do the scene and he makes some suggestions, and he said, 'OK, that's all right, you go away and get dressed now'. Because often they were in street clothes, and then there were these discussions between the director and the cameraman and the operator and so on. Cacoyannis, on the other hand, the, not only the dialogue and the plot was described in the script, but the exact positions of the actors. So they were almost... it was almost like puppets. The actors had pre-planned positions into which they were placed, almost as though they were puppets, which has the bad... it has a disadvantage, of course, that there isn't any room for the actors to make any suggestions because it's all pre-planned in his head anyway. And in many cases, certainly with American actors, they wouldn't agree for one minute to work like that, they want lots of room to make suggestions. My God, sometimes it takes up all day. Anyway, so that's the contrast between the two directorial styles, and later also, I discovered that the Greek directors, not only Cacoyannis, were used to working in a very efficient manner when it comes to film stock ratio. Because there wasn't the money to have hundreds of takes, so the Greek films that I made, and the Greek films that were similar, were contemporary with the films that I made, had shooting ratios of something like 3:1. Because they couldn't afford... so every scene... when I worked... I discovered this really subsequently when I worked with other Greek directors, that they all, they also had a pre-planned idea, it may not be in the script, but it was in their heads, as to how a scene would progress. So they would do, let's say, the first section of the scene in long shot, then they would stop, and they would have a tiny overlap and said, now we're going to go into two over-shoulders, but there wouldn't be more than 30... no, not 30 seconds, five seconds overlap, and there wouldn't be any alternative. So the film is also pre-cut in the camera, virtually. Because they just couldn't afford to shoot so much material, as to leave the final choice to the editing. It was all pre-cut in the camera. That was common to all the Greek films at that time. They didn't shoot a lot of negative because it's expensive. The smaller the budget and the smaller the film, the larger proportion of the budget is taken up by film stock. In a Hollywood film, film stock is perhaps 0.0, I don't know 1% of the budget, but there it would be something like 25% of the budget, would be the film stock. If you count the developing and processing as well. It would be a large item.

The Girl in Black is filmed on the island of Hydra and the interiors are done partly in Hydra and partly in Athens. So we had a method of working where we filmed in Hydra for maybe five days, maybe three days, maybe a week, and then we stopped and we went to Athens, we had a look at the rushes, and we came back to Hydra. There wasn't any pressure, you see. It was a way of making films without pressure. You could afford to stop. It wasn't like most movies nowadays where every second... once you start shooting every second costs so many thousand dollars, so you can't afford to stop. So there we could afford to stop. We could afford to work reasonable hours. We never worked more than eight hours a day. On a later Greek film we worked, that was the nicest one, we worked six to eleven, and three to six. Beautiful. But in Hydra we filmed Girl in Black is filmed in September/October, September/October/November, first part is on the island, the second part we were in Athens for some of the interiors, and it was very comfortable and very leisurely, but very efficient. Very efficient. With a low shooting ratio and it was all shot mute. That's another story because from the second film onwards, we worked with this studio called Finos Film, but the first film was not made with Finos Film. But Finos Film which was named after the owner, Mr. Finos, he had an idea, unusual in Greece, which he didn't like non-synchronous shooting. For him, everything had to be shot synch-sound, even if there were considerable difficulties. He said, no, no, we must find a way of doing it synch-sound. But that wasn't the case in The Girl in Black. I'd asked for a camera and they got an Arriflex camera from Germany, and it arrived shiny, brand new in one of those metal boxes that you now see everywhere, silver metal boxes. And it was blimped. It was a blimped camera. And I said, 'Oh, God no, I can't operate that'. It was like a monster. Because I was used to operating these little hand-held cameras. So we deconstructed the beautiful new shiny blimped camera back into a hand-holdable camera, and for that we needed a lens hood, a door, and, what else, a motor, because they were different in the blimp version. So we scoured Athens where there were lots of old Arriflex's around, very old Arriflexes, and we found- some unfortunate producer was persuaded to part with his hood, door and motor, which immobilised his own camera, and we put those on the brand new camera. Because the Arriflex is a very, in those days certainly, it was a very versatile camera, that in about 10-15 minutes you could turn it from a hand-held camera into a studio camera in a blimp for dialogue. Very handy. So we deconstructed the camera to be hand-holdable again, although the film isn't hand-held, the film is mainly shot on a tripod. There were just certain bits that were shot hand-held.

So I'd asked for an Arriflex to film The Girl in Black and what arrived was the first brand new blimped Arriflex. It didn't exist before. And it was like a huge trunk, and it was like a monster. A huge camera. To me it was huge. It was relatively small, actually, for a blimped  camera, but I said, 'I can't operate that!' So we deconstructed it. We searched Athens for somebody who had an old Arriflex because we needed a hood, which is different in the blimp, and a door which is different, and the motor is different. So we needed three items to turn the camera back into a hand-holdable camera. Then the film is filmed entirely with that camera. That's to say, entirely without sound. There isn't any sound, there isn't any dialogue, there isn't any guide track, it's filmed completely mute, and that was perfectly okay with Cacoyannis and perfectly okay with the actors, because they were extremely well used to post-synching their dialogue. So that didn't cause any problems whatsoever, and we ended up with a very manoeuvrable, light outfit. In Girl in Black there are two, or maybe three, hand-held sequences where there is a fight outside the house where she lives, the heroine, lives and then there's the main incident in the film where a lot of children are drowned by accident involving the main male character. And, for those sequences I used hand-holding, again, being very careful to start the hand-holding at the moment when the action turns violent, and to stop the hand-holding at the moment when the action stops being violent, and that is very effective way of doing it.

So there's the big scene where all the villagers gathered at the waterside to await the boats that are coming in from having rescued the children, and when they get near to the shore, of course a great panic breaks out, a great shout goes up, and that moment I start the hand-holding, and then there's a tremendous amount of shouting and screaming that goes on, orchestrated by Cacoyannis, egging on all the villagers, because all these parts are played by people from Hydra. There's no actors apart from the main actors. It all went very, very well, but afterwards, when it was all finished, I had some... there were some English tourists watching and they came up to me and they said, 'You're English?' I said, 'Yes'. He said, 'Don't you mind all that screaming and shouting?' I said, 'No, it's wonderful. I'm not actually English, you see, so I'm not used to these, never raise your voice, ideas. It's not actually natural to me. I love the screaming and shouting'.

So the film Girl in Black is made with very simple technical means and with a very small crew. Quite a lot of the crew also doubled as actors. And there's an actor there called Vengos who became one of the best-loved and famous comedians in Greece. He'd made many, many, many movies. He's a lovely man, a sweet man, and he was the assistant director and he also played the village policeman. And then there's another one who is helping generally out. He plays a part in the film. There's quite a few of them. The technical means were also very modest. We had a few small lights. We had a 5k and a 2k, I remember. And when we got to the island of Hydra, they said that the island has a generator, but the generator is only used at night, for lighting the island. So, in the daytime the generator is entirely at your disposal, so I said- oh, that's wonderful. So we had a scene to do in an hotel room overlooking the harbour. Inside the hotel room, it's about 2.8 and outside it's about 22 diaphragm. It's about an eight stop difference. And there's this scene where the chap is standing at the window facing inwards and talking to somebody behind the camera, and you have to balance his face. His face can't be black, obviously, and outside can't be- it can be a little overexposed, but not eight stops. So, a little balancing has to go on. I put the 5k and the 2k both on him, one from the left and one from the right, like key light and fill light, you could say, and I switched the 2k on first and that was fine. And then I switched the 5k on and they both went down to half strength, because we had exhausted the- we were past the limits of the generator. That was because it was a DC system, direct current system, and the generator was a mile away and, of course, all the power goes off in heat on the cable. So that was, that was interesting, but we still managed it. In the night scenes we had a few 500 watt spotlights and some small stuff, and we had a relatively simple plug board. When it was fully in use it had about 12 like Schuko plugs on them, and when it was fully occupied, when it was fully working, it used to make a sort of, little sizzling noises, like eggs frying. But as we weren't shooting sound that wasn't a problem. It's primitive, but it worked. But the great thing about that method of working was that, whatever the crew lacked in numbers or what we lacked in equipment, they made up more than fully by their enthusiasm. They were a wonderfully enthusiastic bunch, and they had adequate film making experience, in their own way, which I could adapt to, and they could adapt to me, without any problems whatsoever. If, on the other hand, you went to Greece with the attitude of a Pinewood... conventional Pinewood cameraman, they would say... I can't... you know, where's the barn door, where's the ceiling, where's my backup, where's my... supposing some... a light blows, I can't work with a generator that goes on it's knees when you switch on the second lamp. They would've just given up the ghost and left. But fortunately from my documentary experience and from my previous experience in Morocco, and afterwards elsewhere, there's always a way round it. And, of course, the director has to be... you have to be in agreement with the director. They don't ask for impossible things. But that never happened. We were fully within our capabilities and the available people and the available equipment was fully adequate to do the job.

For the interiors I unearthed a very old fashioned light which came into... it came into popularity, again, for colour films later, a version of it, because it was called a cone light. And it was a large circular container, hood, as it were, and inside the hood was a 5-kilowatt bulb facing inwards. It had a shield behind it so no direct light came out. The light was thrown into the cone, which was painted white, and then reflected back out. So it's an early form of soft light. And this light I found thrown away, virtually, in a junkyard. There was a studio which had closed down, but which still had certain facilities. We had certain equipment available. But this light had actually been thrown out and I discovered it by accident, lying outside in the landscape somewhere. The studio had been a dancing centre, an entertainment centre, and was in turn a studio and then it stopped altogether. But that light was the principle light source for the interior scenes. It was ideal for the scenes where I wanted to have an interior room with the shutters closed and just a little light filtering through the shutters, creating a soft, virtually sourceless, light. So this cone light was ideally suited to produce that kind of atmosphere, and I added a couple of small spots, like 500 watt spots to it and all the interiors are shot like that, in this one house in Athens which we used for the interiors of the house where the heroine lives in Hydra. We only shot exteriors there, but the interiors we shot in this house in Athens, in the second half of the shoot. The first half was on the island, the second half was, was in Athens.

During the second half of the shoot, we were doing a night shoot on some steps in Plaka, going up towards the Acropolis, and suddenly there was some sort of fuss, and the police arrived and it transpired that we'd been denounced. Cacoyannis and I were both foreigners, because Cacoyannis was a Cypriot, and in theory we needed work permits, which we didn't have. So somebody denounced us, actually it turned out to be a jealous technician who had not been offered a job on the movie. And he denounced us and we were arrested for working without a permit, and we were carted off to jail, and we actually saw the inside of the jail, but only for half an hour or so, because Cacoyannis said, 'Well don't worry, I'll...' you know, but unfortunately, it was the night that Field Marshall Papagos died. Field Marshall Papagos was the head of the government in those days. It was a sort of semi-dictatorship in '55. A democracy in theory but not in practice. And, because Papagos died that night everybody was running around in small circles wondering what's going to happen next, so Cacoyannis couldn't immediately contact the lawyer who couldn't immediately contact the police chief to get us out. But we were got out. But not entirely, we were half released into the custody of the police, who said, look, unfortunately due to the circumstances we can't let you go home, so very regretfully, they said, would you mind spending the night on the floor of the police station, we will give you some mattresses and so on. So we spent the night on the floor of the police station. Then a couple of days later, or the very next day, I can't remember, there was a wonderful trial. We were all brought to court and Cacoyannis had hired his lawyer, or it was his lawyer who came, and he made a wonderful speech saying... with gestures and shouting and sort of saying, 'Mr Cacoyannis and Mr Lassally, they're not workmen, they're artists! Artists don't need work permits!' And we were released.

Then I took part in the... the film was edited in Athens, in a fairly conventional manner with Cacoyannis, which he always did, he edited the film. He had an assistant but, even if there was a credit as editor on the film, it isn't really more than an assistant editor because Cacoyannis always edited his own films. And in any case, they were cut in the camera. Sometimes, in England certainly, they produce a thing called a Release Script which is useful for post-synching and for legal purposes and all sorts of things. And, the Release Script is taken from the movie. Somebody sits and watches the movie and writes down all the dialogue and that forms the Release Script. If such a script had been produced for A Girl in Black, which it wasn't, it would've been identical with the shooting script except for three shots. There were, there was a sequence of three shots that had been cut out and there was a little bit of improvisation in the funeral scene, where some additional stuff was shot that wasn't in the script. But apart from that the script... the film is exactly like the script, shot by shot, which is very unusual. Then it was post-synched and I helped in the post-synching. Again, it has a nice sound track. That film has a nice sound track for the simple reason that it's a very simple sound track, where every noise that you hear, every sound that you hear, is there because you put it there. It isn't there because it happened to be there while you were shooting that scene. So if you hear a woman... there's a scene where a woman in high-heels walks through the town of Hydra in the siesta hour, in the lunch hour, having just been to an assignation with her lover in the bushes at the back, and people are watching from behind the shutters. You see sort of half open shutters where you sense there's an eye behind the shutter watching, and that was post-synched. Cacoyannis took a match box and a match and, as she walked, he tapped on the match box with the match, with the mike close by, so. And in addition you hear... there's a distance sound of the sea, which we put on afterwards, but apart from that it's that simple. So all the dialogue... and when Ellie has a scene where... in the, in the main scene where, at some point, somebody sits on the bed, that was me. We had a bed there and at the appropriate moment, I sat on the bed and the springs creaked, and that's... at the same time as the dialogue was recorded. So there isn't such a thing as a dialogue track and an effects track. The effects are on the dialogue track.

Athens in those days was lovely. Athens was relatively small still. I think certainly under 2 million. Oh yes, it must have been well under 2 million, and the whole of Greece had 8 million. A quarter of the population lived in Athens and Piraeus together. But, for me it was, it had a wonderful atmosphere. In the evenings we used to go and have some... sit outside one of the little restaurants and have our drinks and then a man would come by with a little basket with freshly gathered shrimps and mussels and cockles and stuff like that, and the restaurant supplied a plate and he put the stuff on the plate, and he had lemons with him, which he squeezed on the stuff. You know, we paid him a few cents. It was very, very cheap. You could have a very substantial meal, with wine, for under a pound, certainly. Well under a pound. But on the other hand, the Greek technicians, their salary was 500 drachmas a week, which is £6, £6 a week. All the technicians work for £6 a week. And I got 3,000, which is six times that amount. Yes, I got £40 which was the... I set it at that because that was the union minimum, which nobody would work for in England.

So The Girl in Black was shown in London in November of that year in a double bill with a Cousteau diving film, Jacques Cousteau diving film. And it was... in a sense the Cousteau film was the first feature and the Greek film was the second feature. But it was a success with the critics. One critic wrote something like, 'Even in London in November, the sun breaks through'. And, yes, it had a good critical reception in England and it was also shown in France and in America. It was quite a success because, at that time, Cacoyannis was the only Greek director whose works were shown abroad, with only one exception, and it's a very limited exception. Koudouros, I think, had one film shown abroad, but Cacoyannis had all his films shown abroad and that was quite exceptional. It didn't happen again until the... Angelopoulos started working, many years later. So, we were all set to make another movie, but it took two years to, to get it together.

It was in 1957 that I made my second film in Greece, which was again with Cacoyannis, which was called A Matter of Dignity in English, in Greek it was called The Last Lie. And it was again with Ellie Lambetti and some of the actors were in both films, but mainly it was Ellie who was in both films... oh, and the mother, Eleni Zafiriou plays the mother in the one film and the maid in the other film. And the subject of that film was a household of a man who owns a factory, a woodworking factory, and he gets into money difficulties and they don't pay the maid and the maid's child has an accident and they need money. And she keeps asking for her money, which they owe her and they always make... they keep making excuses, but at the same time they go on with their dinner parties and their card parties, and so on. So eventually there's a bit of an explosion. And Ellie the daughter, is sort of in the middle, sympathising very much with the maid, but also not wanting to betray her family. Now that film involved my first major studio shoot in Greece. Because the family home in which quite a bit of the action takes place, was a studio set built in the very primitive Finos studio on the outskirts of Athens. I've got a picture. It looks like a sort of converted barn, or just a barn, not converted, not particularly converted, which was just outside Athens. And... it was adequately equipped, but there were certain... there were certain things missing, like the lamps didn't have any barn doors on them. They were old- they were mostly made by a company called Cremer in France. They were French lamps and some of the older ones had brass contacts on the outside, which the cable was actually connected to with a thumbscrew. So, if you weren't careful and... they had a handle at the back, but if you weren't careful you could touch those contacts, there wasn't even a casing over them, so you could get, you could get a shock. And I did, several times, because I'm very much a hands-on man. I want to adjust the lights myself, which of course, didn't cause any union problems, at least, in Greece, but it had that particular problem. But it was very interesting for me because it was a major studio shoot with limited, but adequate, means, and that worked out extremely well. And then there was a very interesting dawn scene, there was a very interesting dusk scene. The thing about the dawn scene, which takes place at the foot of the Acropolis, was that we had to do some 15 or 18 shots. It was divided into 15 or 18 shots, and they all had to be done in one dawn, if possible. If it's extremely well prepared it is possible. So you prepare. You see the sun's going to come up there, that place is going to be in shade, and later it's going to be in sunshine, so if you wanted it in shade, we filmed that first, and afterwards we move over there, because over there we still have shade. And if you prepare it very carefully, and the actors are well rehearsed, you can do a shot every two minutes. It's perfectly possible. But, it needs very good preparation. So that worked out extremely well. I often use it as an example when I show things to students, and how... what you can do in the space of about an hour and a quarter, until the sun really hits the whole area, by careful preparation.

There was also a very interesting dusk scene in that film. In a taverna overlooking the sea at Kallithea, outside Athens, and I had ordered a certain number of lamps, and they duly arrived but they didn't have any tripods with them. So we ended up with lamps stacked on top of chairs on top of tables to get the... because they have to be at some height to be effective. I realised that... in England, if you ordered a light it comes with a tripod and a barn door and so on, there I asked for so many lights and I got so many lights, but I didn't get anything else. But that was overcome reasonably well. There again, that is a dawn scene in the film. In fact, it precedes the other dawn scene, but for the sake of convenience, we filmed it at dusk, that particular scene. So it had to be filmed, sort of, in reverse, so instead of getting lighter, it gets darker. But it was very, very effective. I love those. I like dusk scenes and dawn scenes because they always have a nice atmosphere, but you have to have the necessary time, and you have to have the time in the schedule, in the programme. Nowadays, if you ask for something to be done at dusk or at dawn, the production manager says, well, I don't know, I don't know if we can fit it in. It means a lot of overtime or, how do you know you going to get the right weather, or this, that and the other. So, they tend to resist it. Can't you do it with filters, that's the normal response, can't you do it with filters. I say, no you cannot do it with filters. To get a proper dusk or dawn scene you do need to do it, or at least part of it, at dawn and at dusk, otherwise it doesn't have the same look. But in those days that wasn't a problem. If I wanted to do a scene at dawn I could do it at dawn. If I wanted to do it at dusk, I could do it at dusk, which we, which we did. Also, that film has a very extensive day-for-night scene in it, in the village called Arachova, which is just before Delphi. And... I could point out...  looking at that scene I could point out how beautiful black and white day-for-night can be. It's not just a convenience, it's also an aesthetically pleasing result. Which is not the case with colour. But that has a very beautiful, quite long day-for-night scene in it, in Arachova. Then the climax of the film I didn't actually shoot. It had to be pre-shot so somebody else shot that for me before the... Cacoyannis went to the island of Tinos because the finale of the film takes place during the annual pilgrimage to the Virgin of Tinos, and he took another cameraman and they filmed the final shot where Ellie is carrying this boy who was traumatised and didn't speak, and suddenly he cries out and, you know, it's... it's left open whether it's a miracle or just coincidence. But... that bit I didn't actually shoot.

It was also my first encounter with my good friend George Antonakis, whose doing this filming here today, who became my assistant. Well, first of all he was an electrician working for Finos, and there was an occasion where he literally put his hand in the fire for me, where there was some problem with the electricity, and he had to work at the back of the main studio electric supply board and there wasn't a way of isolating it. There was no main switch. You'd have to go to some telegraph pole some miles away in order to cut the current. So he put on some rubber gloves and he worked there without having the current turned off. So I say he's somebody who put his hand in the fire for me, as he did many times, because that time he did it literally.
And then on that film I had another assistant. I had the same assistant as I had on The Girl in Black who was a Greek from Russia. But on the second film he made some terrible mistake and Cacoyannis went wild and he fired him and he took somebody else. And then from the third film onwards, George became my assistant and he did all the other films as my assistant. And then he became a cameraman and then his son became a cameraman. Been going on for 40 years.

The atmosphere at the Finos studio and at the Finos office was something quite unique. I've already said that Finos was... he was basically a gadgeteer and he was very knowledgeable of how... particularly about sound equipment, and anytime a new Nagra or something arrived, the first thing he did, he took it all to pieces and put it together again, maybe leaving certain things out. He'd say, 'No, that's not very good, I'll do it this way'. But he was a nice man, a reasonably generous employer. Not all that generous. They all cut corners with social security and stuff like that. And it was a one-man outfit. He... they made some 20 films a year.

They made between 12 and 20 films a year. And he was one of two major... there were two major studios which were, you could say, vertically integrated. They, they did production, distribution... they didn't have cinemas but they had arrangements with cinemas. They had a lab, so everything was processed in the local lab, and I very quickly developed a good relationship with the lab as well. They used to work with test strips, and you used to get sent the test strips, so I can look at the negatives and see if the contrast looked okay. But basically it was all okay. I don't remember any, any, any but minor problems with the labs.

So, between 1955 and 1967, which was the year of the coup in Greece, I made 12 films in Greece. Six with Cacoyannis and six with other directors. The films with Cacoyannis was more or less every two years: '55, '57, '59, then there was a bit of a gap to '64. No, that's not right. Well, it doesn't matter, every two years, roughly. So the next film was 1959, a film called in English, Our Last Spring. It's actually based on a fairly famous Greek novel called Eroica, and it features a group of young men in the town of Nafplion who form like an amateur fire brigade and they wear helmets and uniforms, and they have an old fashioned pump fire engine, and they run that through the streets, and that's how the film begins. They have trumpets that they blow. It's quite a performance. That was a very nice film... a very nice subject for a film. The problem with that film is that, I think it was a big mistake to make it in English. For some reason, Cacoyannis thought it would have a better chance at distribution abroad if it were made in English, and that was an unfortunate decision, because the whole story involves two Greek boys who fall in love with an English girl who's the daughter of the consul. A sort of 14-year-old, 15-year-old English who is the daughter of the local consul, and it would've been much better were they to speak English with the girl and Greek among themselves. And that didn't happen. They spoke English all the time, and that doesn't work, it doesn't work. And it didn't help the film at all. In fact, it hindered the film. It was one of Cacoyannis' least successful films outside Greece. I think because of that, because of that problem. And then there were certain casting problems in as much as the children, I mean, the young boys were all inexperienced and Cacoyannis showed them every gesture, everything they did was directly dictated by Cacoyannis, and to this day, when I see that movie, when I see the girl saying... 'He won't come now, it's much too late, I think, I think I'll...' you know, I hear Cacoyannis, and I see Cacoyannis in all the things she does, because he showed her exactly. You do this, then you say that, then you do that, then you say this, and you can tell, even years afterwards, you can tell that isn't, that doesn't come out of her, that comes out of Cacoyannis. So that was part of what I said, the puppet aspect, which works fine when you have Irene Papas or Ellie Lambetti who don't take any notice of some of the things that Cacoyannis says in the first place, because they can do it by themselves. But in the case of Our Last Spring, the mechanics tend to show through. And... and for me it was one of the most difficult films to make, because it had some quite extensive interiors in it with crowds of people, a big party that takes place in a house in Kifissia with a garden and 30, 40, 50 people, and there's a little performance, there's a little stage set-up in the garden, and they have a little theatrical performance. And all that, of course, has to be lit. We spent many, many nights in Kifissia, seven, eight nights filming that sequence. And using a slightly more sensitive film stock. At that time, we're talking about 1959, I don't really remember why we couldn't use the Ilford material, because I had... there must have been some reason.
Anyway we shot on Tri X and I was never very happy with that. Tri X wasn't a good film material, as the Ilford materials were. There must've been some reason why I didn't use Ilford on that film. Because I used it subsequently. But Taste of Honey, of course, is later. Yes, maybe they weren't available yet. Because Taste of Honey is two years later. That's probably the reason. Anyway it had this very extensive scene, and because we couldn't have... the largest generator that we could use at that time was 15kW, but in Caphicea I think we had a tap into the electric system, but even with that we were limited in the amount of power we could draw. So it was a bit of a stretch for me, technically. And... then there were extensive location sequences in Aegina and on the sea, on a yacht at sea, and quite a lot of detail. There's some lovely scenes in that film. There's a scene where they performed something called funeral rites, and they all go to the seaside. One of their companion's dies and they all go to a beach, and they perform... no not funeral rites, funeral games, which is a Greek thing, certainly of the, of the period, and they all assemble on this beach and they do gymnastics and athletics. Spear-throwing, like the Olympics, like a miniature Olympics. And then at the end all the victors are crowned with little laurel wreaths, which they then toss on the waves, and that's a beautiful scene, which I shot, again, through a heavy red filter, so it's very stylised. Because it is, it is... It's realism but it's also poetry. It's poetic realism. That scene works very well. There's also some nice day-for-night. Again, it's a black and white movie and so there's again some very nice effective day-for-night. But unfortunately it all goes for nothing. It's such a pity when you spend such a lot of time and you do your best, you work very, very hard and then in the end it flops. But of course, sometimes life is like that. You can't always have a success. But in that case I think it could've been foreseen. It could've been foreseen.

Every film, well not every film but a lot of films have a scene in them where there's some little bit of dialogue which sort of sticks, and you remember it years afterwards, when you come into a situation. And there was a... here was a scene in this film where the father comes home and he finds that his son has misbehaved, in his opinion he's misbehaved, and this Greek actor, speaking with a fairly heavy Greek accent says, in English, something with...
[Q] 'I cannot see my son look like a paliopaido!'
He says, 'I come home, I'm tired, I'm exhausted, and what do I find? My son has behaved like, like a paliopaido!' I can think of several... I can think of several other instances where there's a phrase which sort of sticks in the mind which characterises that particular film.

So in the period between 1955 and 1967 I made six films with Cacoyannis, of which Zorba was the last but one. I also made six other films with other directors, Greek and foreign. The first one that wasn't with Cacoyannis was a film called Maddalena, with the famous Greek star, super star, Aliki Vouyouklaki. There was a very nice Greek director called Dinos Dimopoulos, with whom I made two films at that point, one after the other. We met... we went to the island of Antiparos, which is opposite Paros, because Anti means opposite or adjacent, and we spent... the whole film was made there. The villagers were very co-operative. They were delighted, they were over the moon to be having Aliki on their island for such a long time, so they all moved out of their houses, if necessary, so the crew could find quarters, because there wasn't any... there's no hotel there. There was a... the taverna owner... there was one small taverna at the pier, which wasn't much of a pier either, which... who had just built an upper floor with three bedrooms and a shower room. The director and I stayed there. I don't know who had the third room, but all the rest of the crew were in people's houses. That was one of the most pleasant shoots I've ever had in my whole life, because it was in a wonderful location, by the sea, and we worked... at my request, we worked 06:00-11:00 and 15:00-18:00, which is an eight-hour day, with a big interval in the middle for siesta, and eating and swimming, and what have you. And that wasn't entirely selfish, that was partly dictated by the fact that we were shooting in June and July. And at that point the sun is pretty much overhead and it's not very good, either for landscape or for close-ups. So I decided it's a good idea to have a break in the middle of the day and pick up again later. That worked extremely well. We never got behind schedule. Or if we did... well there wasn't really... for those Greeks... because they didn't really have a schedule, you know, they finished when they finished, that was about it. The first night when I was introduced to Aliki, we were probably both a bit nervous, I certainly was, she jumped up and she said, 'I want to dance the Charleston with you'. I said, 'I'm very sorry, I don't dance at all, you know, not only not the Charleston, but not at all'. She had her mother with her who, sort of, kept an eye on her. That whole experience was very interesting in a number of ways. Because if you compare Aliki Vouyouklaki with, say, Gina Lollobrigida, who are both in equivalent positions relative to their film industries in their countries, then Aliki was a prisoner of her own fame. There wasn't a thing that she could do which wasn't immediately in all the newspapers or public knowledge. She had a very strange life where... which was very circumscribed by her fame. Once we had a, we went off on a kaiki which is a little boat, to a neighbouring island, completely unannounced and unscheduled, and we arrived after dark. And we got off this boat and we went to a local taverna and, within 10 minutes, there were people pressing their noses against the glass, saying, 'Aliki, Aliki'. So she couldn't do a thing that she wasn't immediately surrounded by a crowd. She half loved it and half hated it. Once we had a shoot in a working class suburb of Athens and she was mobbed and she was... there was a scary moment. People started taking souvenirs from your clothing, you know, that sort of thing. But she really... she half... it was a love-hate relationship. She half loved and half hated it.
Anyway we quickly established a working relationship and she was very professional, very particular about her appearance and how she should be lit, and all the rest of it. A bit later on there was an incident once on one of the other films where we'd just started to light, and then it was the lunch break. So after lunch she came back and she sat in her little chair. She sat in her chair where she was placed for that scene, and she got the mirror out. She had a little mirror where she looked at her lighting all the time. So I was standing there by the camera, like this, and she got the little mirror out, there was no dialogue. She looked at me and I looked at her, and she looked at me, sort of, saying, well, what are you doing, this is not very good. I said, 'Look Aliki, you can put the mirror away, I haven't even started yet, so you know, put the mirror away and it'll all be fine'.

In Antiparos I learnt several things. I learnt, for instance... that film had three climaxes. It had three endings, one after the other. The first ending didn't work so they wrote a new ending. There was an ending in a cave complex. That was still part of my cave period, which was a long way away from the centre. You had to go on a donkey ride and it was quite a way away. And, for some reason that, that didn't work at all, so they decided on another ending. And the other ending they decided on was a, a storm at sea. In attempting to film that sequence, I discovered a curious fact, that a storm at sea is not believable in sunshine. You can have a Force 10 gale blowing, but if the sun is shining it looks beautiful, you know, everybody's enjoying themselves. So that was a lesson I learnt. And then the final ending, the one that was actually used in the film, is where her house burns down, which was done in a pretty realistic way. We actually burnt the house down. Once I... I got a bit singed during that shoot. It was very realistic. Also that, that house, incidentally, was a... it wasn't a house, it was a set. Well it was part... no, it was completely a set. It was built, and it was built without a roof, with a... I had a muslin covering put on the top so the house was lit with diffuse sunlight all the time, to which I added a little bit, but not a lot. That was quite a successful experiment. Again, Maddalena is in black and white, so one again had the problem that the contrast had to be within a certain range. And if you light the house entirely through a muslin roof, it doesn't have a lot of contrast so that... but it was within range, so that worked out successfully. And then we had a big fiesta where they leap over the flames, which they tend to do in these islands. The maximum lighting available was 15kW. Because we had this small generator, which Finos owned, which was the largest generator available. It was 15kW. And they had quite a job getting it onto the island because the island didn't have a pier. It had to be... we had to build a sort of improvised pier to get on... to get it ashore even. Because most of the communication was by rowboat. You rowed out to some other boat and then you came onto the island in a rowboat. That was the only way you could get onto the island, at the time. So even getting the generator aboard was quite a problem. And then that fiesta was lit with 15kW because that was it, there wasn't any more light. I had to do it. I can't remember if we used more sensitive film for that sequence. I don't think we did. I think it was on the normal Plus X, or whatever it was. No, it wasn't Plus X, it was Gavaert film. At that time we... for some of those movies we were using Gevaert, Gevapan 30, which was the equivalent of Plus X, and it was... the result was fine. It was all processed in the Finos lab in Athens. The film was a huge success, as most of her films were, in fact. But she was very satisfied with the lighting, and Mr Finos was very satisfied, so everybody was very happy and they all went off to the seaside.

Back-to-back, with Maddalena, I did a film called I  Aliki sto Naftiko, Alice in the Navy, which I just found out played in America, which I didn't know. And that was a colour film and it was Finos' first colour film and possibly the first Greek colour film. I'm not absolutely sure. But at that time there was no colour laboratory in Greece. Finos' laboratory was a black and white facility only. So that film had to be processed in Paris, and once or twice there were some amusing exchanges with the Paris laboratory. Like getting a telegram which said, do not use coloured filters on the lens, and things like that. Oh, that was when I tried to do my day-for-night bit. I'd explained it all and sent them a letter about it. It didn't work first time. And there was a funny... very funny story which happened at that period where a Greek producer started to film, shortly after that, I think it was. He started to film a famous Greek story which is called O Agapitikos tis voskopoulas, which means The Shepherdess' Lover, which is a sort of folk tale. And he started to film this in colour, and knowing that it would be slow to come out, because it had to be processed in Paris and all that, two other producers, Finos was one of them, started to make the same story, very quickly in black and white, and, of course, they finished first. So the two black and white versions opened on the same day, and the poor man who had made it in colour, and wasn't quite ready yet, took the full page advert in the papers which said, the real, the only, the proper, the coloured version, will be out in three weeks!  They all lost their shirts, of course. But, for me it was a bit of a challenge. First of all, again, the lighting facilities were not very great. We had no arc lights. I think there was one arc light in the whole of Greece at that time, which somebody owned. But we didn't use that. We used three 5kW which is nothing to combat the bright summer sun, is very little, 5kW, because you have to use them- because they're tungsten lights you have to put a blue filter in front. So by the time you put the blue filter in front, there isn't a lot coming out the front. I just about managed. And also, when we shot the interiors, which were built in the Finos studio, the art director, who wore several hats, he was also production manager and a sound recordist, and all sorts of things, anyway, he had the idea that, as this is Finos' first colour film it has to be very colourful. And he painted... all the sets had a red wall and a green wall and a white wall and a blue wall. And I thought, oh my God, this is your, you know... this is your baby, I don't care, do what you want. And then we shot quite a bit with the co-operation of the Greek Navy. We shot, we put her on a Naval boat. Because the whole story is how she smuggles herself aboard a naval patrol boat to be near her boyfriend, whatever. I can't remember the story, but it was quite fun to make. By that time I was getting a bit tired and I wanted to go home, because I'd been in Greece since the beginning of May and it was now November, and there were certain scenes still missing, and I said, look, I really must go home. So, in the end, I left it with... certain scenes, for technical reasons, couldn't be made because the Navy wasn't available or something. So there are a few scenes in that film that I didn't shoot. And then, it was successful. Like all her films were successful, so I don't how much more successful it was, because it was in colour. Probably not a lot. Because all her films were successful. And then the following year I made the third film with Vouyouklaki, 1961, which was called Lisa and the Other One, in which she played a double role. So we had only about four shots in the film. She had a double and most of the things were tricked with her stand-in, with her double. But there are four shots which are split-screen shots where she plays in... you know, she's clearly visible in both... as both characters. I used a fairly well known technique where you use spilt... we had to bring a Mitchell in though, because you couldn't do that... the Arriflex wasn't steady enough. So we brought in a Mitchell and those, those scenes, I remember being shot on a Mitchell. George thinks it wasn't, but I think it was.

There was a... a funny incident in the Lisa kai i alli film where Kate doubled for her. There was a, there was a car run-by, because she's been kidnapped, or something like that, and this car speeds off with her inside. And I was in the middle of the road, on a high hat, sort of almost at asphalt level, and this car is supposed to drive up to the camera and then swerve aside and drive on at high speed. Kate was in there just for safety, because you couldn't really see who was in the car. But just for safety, because Kate had blond hair, so we put her in there. And she... remember... as the car was driving off for the run-up, I shouted after her, 'Remember it's only a film!'

The next film I made with Cacoyannis is Electra with Irene Papas which I still consider to be my best film, and I think it's Cacoyannis' best film also. But he thinks all his films are best films, so that's something else. 
Electra, again black and white. Unthinkable in colour. That's quite an interesting comparison because a French woman made, some years later, she made a documentary about Cacoyannis and there are examples of the Electra and right next to it are examples from Iphigenia which was filmed in colour, not by me. But the difference is not the difference of cameramen, the difference is the colour, and you can see, when you see those things next to each other, you can see how much more suitable black and white is for that kind of subject, a Greek tragedy, is much better in black and white because, in colour, it turns into a sort of costume drama. Also, the landscapes. There's a big problem with the landscape turning into a picture postcard. So Electra is one of the very best examples of black and white. Why black and white? Because Electra is unthinkable, to me anyway, in colour. And.. in Electra we adopted, well Cacoyannis actually, demanded a very severe style which went like... boom, boom, boom... and everything, all the movements, all the things had to be in a very steady rhythm, and the moment somebody put a foot wrong, oh yes, no, no, you can't do that, it doesn't fit the, doesn't fit the rhythm. 
Electra starts with a crowd scene where we'd got 800 people from the army and they're all rushing along in a valley accompanying Agamemnon who's just come back from the Trojan wars. And... we were up on a hillside outside Athens, looking down into the valley where these 800 army people were prepared to do their bit, and we had a very old army loudspeaker system. Cacoyannis was given a microphone and these loudspeakers were set up to project the sound down into the valley. But it didn't work terribly well. Cacoyannis got very annoyed and he was shouting himself hoarse through the microphone, but not getting the results that he wanted. And then there was a major hold-up, because the reins for Agamemnon's chariot were missing. We had a whole hoohaa where we had every... we had these 800 men waiting and all the rest of the crew waiting, everybody was waiting, and there weren't any reins for the chariot. Anyway that was probably solved eventually. But that's a very nice beginning scene. The whole film is from beginning to end, is wonderfully staged and wonderfully filmed, I would say. It starts with a rocky surface where you have the introductory title, and then the hand of Clytemnestra comes in with the manicured fingernails and all that, and grabs a rock. She's expecting, she's waiting for Agamemnon, having already planned that she's going to murder him. So the scene is set very quickly, that bit is Mycenae, is shot in Mycenae where you got through the famous lion gate. Then there is... in that film there was one studio, one little studio scene, where we built the hut where the peasant lives, where Electra's married off to this peasant, so as to, it says in the film, so as not to have any significant heirs. They live in this little hut which we built as a set in the Finos studio. All the rest is natural stuff. I used a red filter. The whole film... virtually the whole film is shot through a deep red filter which is called a Number 25, in order to get these very contrasty skies, dark, dark, dark skies with white clouds, now and then there are clouds. It's very beautiful to look at. And we found this location between... near where the airport is now, between Keratea and Anavissos, and we spent... the best part of the filming was done there. Only this one interior was done in the Finos studio. Oh, and the bath. Agamemnon's murder was also done there, in the studio. But all the rest is natural. And there's some very nice day-for-night stuff again. Very nice, and dusk. And day-for-night- there's one scene which also makes use of a bit of luck, where there'd been... some clouds came up in the early evening, because there weren't any clouds before. We shot October/November/December.
And... October in Greece is largely cloudless, but in November certain clouds develop. And there was one scene which we knew we had to do, and as we were all gathered in that one place, we could say, right, this is a good moment to do that dusk scene. So we went up onto the little hill there, nearby the location, and we did a scene which is, maybe, two minutes length, where she's sent off... where Electra sends off Orestes to the murder of Agamemnon, and wishes him godspeed, as it were. That scene is half day-for-night and half dusk. So as you need strong sunshine for day-for-night, the day-for-night bit is shot first, while you still have strong sunshine. Then we had to wait a couple of hours until the, until the dusk actually set in. Maybe, maybe an hour and-a-half. And then as the dusk had commenced we set up the dusk sequence, which is lit by daylight and some lamps. And there's a beautiful, there's a beautiful cloud in the background which we used in the scene. There's this character with a beard who comes out in profile in the... against the beautiful sky and then they all kneel to the ground, so I had to, I had to balance the... the balance against the sky is one sort of set up, and the balance against the earth is a different kind of set-up and the two had to be in one shot, so that was quite tricky. We just had a 5k, which is about the maximum capacity of... our generator was 15kW, I think. But that scene is worked out extremely well. But it has to be carefully planned, because you have to do the scenes facing east first, in day-for-night mode, and then you do the scenes facing west. So the scenes went... she comes out of camera and goes into shot reverse and that reverse shot is taken first, two hours earlier, so the continuity has to be very careful, that that matches, going from a dusk shot taken two hours later, to a day-for-night shot taken two hours earlier. But that all worked perfectly and that looks very good. Provided you, you're prepared that can be very efficient.

By the time we came to film Electra, I had learnt enough Greek to appreciate the beauty of Euripides language in that film. There were certain bits where he talks about the welcoming qualities of the poor are often superior to those of the rich. A poor man will give... if he only has a loaf of bread he will share it with you, and there's some very... stuff in there which is very topical. As true today as when Euripides wrote it, all those years ago. And I was just about... enough... I knew enough Greek to appreciate the beauty of the language. And then, that film also contains one sequence which is about three minutes long which I often use in teaching. If I'm teaching a workshop or in a film school. I use that sequence as the ideal... as an example of the ideal combination of direction, acting, lighting, composition, music, editing. In an ideal situation, when all those things contribute and lock into each other, you can get a wonderful result. And that scene is as good a result of such a successful collaboration as I can imagine. Where Orestes comes in, is introduced by the old shepherd who rescued him as a child from his mother, basically. And... he presents him to Electra and says: this is your brother, Orestes, come back from the foreign lands. She's reluctant to believe this, because they don't recognise each other because they haven't seen each other since they were children. So she says: prove to me, show me some signs that this is Orestes. And he says: well, behind his left ear there is a mark which he acquired when together you went out and you were chasing a small deer, elaphopolou. And she says, 'Thimama', I remember. And then he says, 'And he still has his father's sword'. And he shows her the sword. He backs off out of the frame. He has a big close-up of this shepherd with the beard, and he backs out of the frame and in the middle ground you see Orestes and Orestes comes... no, Electra, and Electra comes forward and Orestes comes in from behind the camera and they meet, and she bursts... well she doesn't burst into tears, but she embraces him. And then, and that is already close, but when she embraces him, when you think you're as close as you can get, you go even closer, and she gives a side glance at Orestes' friend, Pilaves who's accompanied him. And then they exit. But it's a wonderful, wonderful... I've seen that film 20 times, at least, and I cry every time I see that scene, because it is so powerful, you can't help but cry when you watch that scene. Because Irene is marvellous. The one weakness of Electra is that Orestes isn't quite up to it, but then who can, who could be? You know, who is the equivalent of Irene?

I said earlier that Electra sends off Orestes to murder Agamemnon because, of course, it isn't Agamemnon, I remember, it's Aegistos her mother's new lover. And then the film finished with... we needed a shot of vultures, because in the scene where Agamemnon is murdered, they throw a net over him and Cacoyannis wanted to cut that to the flight of a bird in the same direction, a vulture. And so after the film, as I said had finished... after the filming had finished, in fact, it was early the following year that we set off for Meteora, and we acquired a dead sheep. And we put this dead sheep out and we sat and waited for the vultures to come and, of course, the vultures didn't come because they like carrion, which is not a sheep that was killed yesterday. It's a sheep that's been dead for a few days, at least. So the biggest close-up of a vulture that we could get, with our long-focus lens, was not quite as big as it should have been. So that scene isn't all that successful. But... the other comment I wanted to make is that Theodorakis – it struck me using, again – Thesarakis' music in that film, that Greece is unique in the fact that you could have the foremost poet of the land, Seferis, write a poem and that poem could be set to music by Theodorakis, and the resulting disc would be in every jukebox in the land. That is something I can't imagine outside, outside Greece.

Now, Electra... Electra cost something of the, in the region of $75,000, which is not a lot of money, even in 1961. It was sponsored by United Artists, so... Cacoyannis used to have a very simple way of dealing with the money people. He used to go and say, give me $100,000 and I'll give you a movie. That was basically it. And because it was so direct, he never asked for enough money, so we were always short of money. In the case of Electra, there wasn't enough money for the cast to be transported every day, so the cast... the chorus, had to stay in the village of Keratea and only Cacoyannis and I and the principles, Irene and Orestes and the others, they travelled every day to and fro, but the others had to stay in very primitive conditions throughout the whole shooting. But, the film was a success. It was shown worldwide, but because of the accounting system that companies like United Artists operated, it never went into profit. Even three years after release it wasn't in profit, officially, because the system that they operated was such that, if Electra was shown for a week in Venezuela, and if United Artists had eight movies showing that year in Venezuela, then one-eighth of the cost of operating the United Artists office in Venezuela, would be credited or debited, written off against Electra. So Electra bore all these costs which it couldn't support.

Now, the next film that we made together was Zorba. There was an interval of three years that time, between '61 and '64. In that interval I think... yes, in that interval he made one more film with Ellie Lambetti in Italy. Ellie Lambetti meantime had married a guy called Frederick Wakeman, who's an author. I think that's correct. Freddie Wakeman, yes. They had a project from a book of his, the title of which I forget. And it was going to be made in Italy. In fact, it was made in Italy and, once again, we ran into the union problem. The Italians said yes, you can make the film in Italy, and all the rest, but you have to use an Italian cameraman. So Michael used an Italian cameraman, and that's why there was a three-year gap between Electra and Taste of Honey... and, sorry, and Zorba. Now, Zorba was a favourite book of Kate's, and it was Kate, actually, who suggested to Quinn that he film Zorba. It was also Kate's suggestion that he takes Anthony Quinn, because it was quickly apparent, or it was generally agreed, that there was no Greek actor that was capable of playing that part, for an international audience, that's to say, in English, because, for obvious reasons, they didn't want to do it in Greek with subtitles. That wouldn't have been the right thing to do in a case like that. So, he agreed readily that Quinn would be a suitable actor to play that part, and he went off to Hollywood and he signed him, as he went off to Athens to talk to the widow of Kazantzakis to get the rights to make the film, none of which was any problem. Also, Quinn seemed to have agreed quite readily. So, we... and the, the female role of... female principal role of Madame Hortense was played by... was scheduled to be Simone Signoret. And they all arrived and we started. And within about a week of beginning the shooting, it was obvious that Simone couldn't play a woman that weak, or that vulnerable. She just couldn't be that vulnerable. She was too strong a personality. And there was a sort of mutual recognition of this fact, and she bowed out very gracefully. And Cacoyannis went off to Paris. The shooting was interrupted for two or three days, not very long. And Cacoyannis went off to Paris and he found Lila Kedrova and he brought her back. And Lila Kedrova, at that point, didn't speak a word of English, she spoke only Russian and French. And... she learnt her part in the space of 24 hours. I think, within 24 or 36 hours of her arrival, we were filming with the night scene outside the... her house where she dances and plays a... quite a large scene. She learnt that by rote within a few hours of arrival, virtually, and played that scene and played it all beautifully, and won the Oscar for it. Anthony Quinn was another thing. He's a Hollywood star, so I wasn't surprised when there were certain initial problems. In fact, he came to us and he said, 'Now, you know, I'm only good in my first take, so it's up to you technical people to get it all ready, to prepare it all, then I come and I do my take, and that's it'. And Cacoyannis didn't say a word. It was me who said something. I said, 'Yes, Mr Quinn, but we don't work that way here'. He looked at me, because nobody has ever said that to him before. They always said, 'Yes, Mr Quinn, of course we will do whatever you say'. So, I said, 'We technicians also have the right to make mistakes and to prepare, and we may need a retake, we'll do our best, of course'.

So, when... first day when Anthony Quinn came onto the set, there was a little, sort of, stand-off, one could say and he said, 'You know, I'm only good in my first take, so it's up to you technicians to get everything ready and, you know, and then I come and do my take, and that's it'. Nobody said anything. And I said, me, I said, 'We don't work like that here, Mr Quinn'. And he was very surprised that anybody should talk back to him. And I said, 'We technicians also have the right to get it wrong sometimes, and, you know, I'm sure it'll work out all right, but it isn't necessarily always going to be the first take'. There was a little bit of murmuring and humming and hawing, and then it worked fine. Within a very, very short time we had an excellent relationship. There was never any more trouble, and by and large, he did what he was asked to do. There was a certain amount of discussion with Cacoyannis, which always happens with big American, particularly American, actors. They want to be sure to put in their 10 cents worth. Most of the time it's nonsense. They have to... the directors have to spend a considerable amount of time with diplomacy, talking them out of extremely bad ideas. But I'm not a diplomat and I put my foot in it several times, but in that case it worked. We didn't have any more problems like that. Later on, there were... we had a little setup in the local warehouse we also built a small set – the only set in Zorba is the hut, interior of the hut, which we built in a disused warehouse in Chania Harbour, and there we also saw the rushes, which went back to Athens to be processed, and then came back and we saw them every three or four days, not every day.
And once there was an occasion where we were all sitting there and Kate and I were sitting behind Anthony Quinn, and at one point Kate, Kate leaned forward and tapped him on the shoulder and said, 'That was rather nice, Tony'. And he said, 'Isn't it always?' And she said, 'No, it's not always'. Then we talked about Fellini. We said, 'How was the work with Fellini?' No, 'How was your work on La Strada?' and he said, 'Oh, Fellini'. Like he was some sort of insect. And Kate said, 'Well, it's thanks to your work on that film that you're here, because we loved your work on La Strada and we thought you'd be the right man to play Zorba'. But, as I said, we had an extremely good relationship. Kate also said once, 'You know, Tony, you have the most beautiful eyelashes, just like those donkeys'. Anyway, all went very well. But he was surrounded by four people. He brought four people with him. He had his own stand-in, his own photographer, his own secretary, and his own makeup man, and they kept patting him on the back. They were there as yes-men. They were not there purely for the professional job. They were there to say, 'Tony, that was great', all the time. And once we pointed this out to Tony, that, of course, those people will say it was all marvellous, because you pay them to do that. And Tony said, 'I know, but I need them'. No, you see, it was nice. I mean, he was no trouble at all, and we did admire him. He was a very good actor, but actors have to be kept in their place. There's many an occasion when I wanted to turn round to an actor, particularly an American star, and say, 'Do you know, it's not so long ago that they refused to bury actors in consecrated ground, so don't come here with your mannerisms'.

Cacoyannis came to me, about less than two weeks, I would say, before we started shooting, having had a flea put in his ear by Quinn as well, who was rather afraid of playing that role... actors like Quinn are terribly afraid of almost anything. They panic at the slightest drop of a hat. And... so Cacoyannis said let's make it in colour, we can afford it. And I said oh no, no, we're not going to do that. And he said but look, Madame Hortense's bedroom would look so lovely in colour. I said, that's very true, but what about the murder of the widow? You're going to have red earth, blue sky, green trees, and there's nothing you can do about it. It turns into a picture postcard, and there is nothing you can do about it. And, fortunately, I was able to prevail to have it made in black and white. Because, two years later, '66, was the end of black and white, basically, because of American television. The factor that was the... the important factor there was that American television, after 1966, would no longer buy a black and white movie... the rights to a black and white movie. That was sufficient of a reason, although American television sales were only, perhaps, 0.1 of 1% of... 0.5 of 1% of the total, it was sufficient of a factor to say, well, you know, if we make it in black and white we forego all that, why throw all that money down the drain, we'll make it in colour. If you like, you can print it in black and white, and certain directors... in fact, that happened several times. Many a film has been made in colour, simply because somebody said, look, look, let's make it in colour, then if something goes wrong we always have that fall-back position, we always can go back to... you can have it printed in black and white, but it's not the same. A print, however good, from a colour negative in black and white, is not the same as a good black and white print from a good black and white negative. There is a subtle difference, but quite a significant difference. But that question, shall we make it in colour or in black and white, would simply not have arisen after 1966. Impossible.

On Zorba I repeated my experience with Taste of Honey. Slightly modified though. Because Ilford made... at that time they made four stocks. There was 25 ASA, 16 actually to, 16 to daylight, I think, 25 to tungsten. Then there was a 100 ASA, a 200 ASA and a 400 ASA. On Zorba I used the 25 ASA and the 100 ASA and the 200 ASA. All the exteriors were on the 25 ASA, because it's wonderful light and you get wonderful detail in the highlights on that stock. The mountains, for instance, in the background with some snow on them, there was wonderful detail in the highlights, which you couldn't get on Plus X or on the 100 ASA stock. The Ilford stock which was called Pan F film, which is available even now as stills film for 35 mm stills cameras. It had wonderful detail in the highlights. Then there was the equivalent of Plus X, which is perfectly okay, but once you go to Ilford you might just as well use all Ilford. By that time I had tested it in the Athens lab and they had no problem developing it, because it has a different procedure than Kodak, different development times, that kind of thing. And... there were a few initial hiccups, but it all turned out all right very quickly.

There's quite an interesting comparison between Tom Jones and Zorba, because they had certain things in common, but there were significant differences. They had the schedule in common. They were both scheduled for 15 weeks, 15/16 weeks, because they were both big movies. And... they had... in the case of Zorba, I would say, the crew was about one quarter of the crew on Tom Jones, if you count all the menagerie and all the animal handlers and God knows what. On Zorba we had something like six foreigners, and the rest were Greeks. There was a makeup man from Italy, assistant director from Italy... no, makeup man... a makeup couple. Makeup and hair were a couple from France. There was a Italian assistant director and Italian stills photographer, and me, and all the rest were Greeks. Of course, there was Anis Nohra who was... who was a Greek from Lebanon who was Cacoyannis' regular assistant. By that time he'd been promoted to sort of production manager, kind of thing. But the crew numbered about 25 people, whereas on Tom Jones it numbered 100 people, if you count everybody. And also the big difference between those two movies is, not only the directorial style, which we've already talked about, which were very different, but the general manner of making the film with a limited amount of equipment and fairly primitively, but, but very effectively. You didn't need all that extra gear. Zorba had a very limited lamp park of... not park... very limited range of lights, and... most of which... all of which were local, and some of... these box lights, again, we used was photo-floods in boxes, and it was very effective.

Operating yourself. That, of course, is the big factor. I love to operate myself, provided I had enough time. Because operating yourself becomes a nightmare if you have a very short schedule because you've got enough on your plate already, without operating as well. But if you do operate yourself, it adds something. To me, if I look at those two films side by side, the biggest factor there, that separates them, is the fact that I operated myself on Zorba and that makes it more personal to me. All the compositions I can, I can kind of sign, whereas on Tom Jones they were at one removed, and not all that much attention was paid to the compositions, as I would pay, quite automatically, if I'm operating myself.

Zorba contains what is probably the most difficult scene I've ever had to tackle, which is the love scene between Irene Papas and Alan Bates, which was shot in a very rickety old house. We were on the first floor, and you couldn't take the Elemack, the dolly, up there, the floor wouldn't support the weight. So all we could take is an ordinary camera on an ordinary tripod, myself, Cacoyannis, the two actors and, perhaps, one other person, then the floor started to, sort of, become a bit shaky. So we said, that's it, absolutely nobody else up here. And then it was a classic situation, which happens quite often in movies, where you can't properly follow the idea of source light. In most movies, I think most cameramen will say that source light is the guiding principle and where, in a situation like this, where would the light be coming from? Would it be coming from the windows, would it be coming from the practicals, would it be coming from the moon, the sun, whatever. And in that particular scene, it starts with one candle alight, and then half-way though the scene, she blows the candle out, and the curtains are closed, because it's a bit secret, the whole thing, she doesn't want all the village to know what's going on. So where's your light source in a room at night with the curtains closed, and in black and white. Because then you're faced with a tremendous problem. The solution was to create a sort of a glow, an overall light with no particular source, strong enough to see what's going on, but not so strong that it seems to be coming from somewhere. So... that's fine in colour, but in black and white you come up against the same problem I've already mentioned several times, the contrast problem that, if you're not extremely careful, the contrast will drop below the acceptable level. So that was very hard for me. And when I look at that scene, which is a nice scene, it's beautifully played, I'm still rather proud of the fact that I managed it, because it's right on the edge, all the time. Certainly from the moment where the candle is blown out, it's, it's on the edge, but it's beautiful. And the, the bulk... as I already said, the bulk of the scenes are exterior and the only interiors are Madame Hortense's bedroom, her house and her bedroom, mainly, which was in a real house which still exists, called Kokkino Metochi. And the, the interior of the hut was a set and that provided the problem that there had to be strict continuity matches. When people go out the door and in the door, that there is an angle which is shot on location here in Stavros, just 300 yards from where I'm sitting now, where you, you're inside the real house and you're looking out, so you have the door frame and the little bit of wall right and left, and then beyond that you have the sea and the beach and the rocks and the mountain. Then you cut inside and very often it's a direct cut, somebody comes in and somebody goes out, so you cut to the set. So not only do you have to be very careful that the continuity matches, the continuity of clothes and movement and speed and all that, but also, of course, the lighting continuity has to match. And the studio, so called, was pretty primitive. There wasn't a lot of space around the set. So I put some very nondescript backings outside of the windows and I avoided shooting directly into the windows, which were dirtied down to be sort of pretty milky. And also, never directly towards the door because there wasn't anything out there. So the door is always filmed so that people go diagonally across camera and out to the door, and then you can cut to the other angle, and there is the real exterior. That of course happened in the day, at dusk, at night, so there are lots of lighting matches that have to work and, I'm glad to say, it works very well. But that takes a bit of experience. That takes a bit of doing. I've had to do that two or three times in my career and it's always a bit tricky, particularly if there's a big interval between the two shoots. You have to remember how it was lit or whether you had on... the exterior cloud conditions, and so on, so that the exterior matches the interior. But that worked, that worked pretty well between those two... in those two conditions. The other interiors, particularly, Madame Hortense's bedroom, again, was a bit of a challenge. In black and white it had to look really elegant and... well no... yes, I suppose you could say elegant. It had a certain atmosphere, an atmosphere of its own, which the lighting, of course, helps to produce. And there again, I'm very happy with the result because it looked beautiful. I'm sure it wouldn't have looked any better in colour. So we managed that quite nicely.

The finale of Zorba, as you probably know, is the collapse of the cable railway. And that was shot right towards the end. In fact, it was the last bit of shooting that we did, and that was all staged. We had some... there's two or three cameras in use on part of that sequence. And one of the cameras... actually we got hold of a small Eyemo, which is a small combat camera, basically, which takes 50ft, 100ft of film, and we managed to attach that to the cable behind the log. The logs were on a, sort of, sled. And we made an extension to one of the sleds, or had another sled linked to it, and on this sled we mounted the camera. So you're going down the cable railway, with the log. And then we planned to recover the camera at the end, just before it went into the sea, but we said if we don't, the value of that camera is not very great, so it could be sacrificed if necessary. But we managed to, to catch it before it went into the sea, and the shot is in the movie. A couple of shots. And... then there were some special shots of the... just of the cable... of the towers collapsing and all that. But, as I say, it was almost the last thing we shot and I'd already left the location when I got a frantic phone call or telegram, or something, from Cacoyannis to say the collapse of the cable railway was no good and it's got to be redone. I said oh, well my... George can do it, I'll send George. No, no, no, you have to do it yourself. And there was a big argument. And I said, look, this is an engineering problem, the cameras are set. Any idiot can photograph it, not to call George an idiot, but anybody can do it. But Cacoyannis was absolutely adamant. So I said, all right, all right, I'll come back and do it. And we did it all again. Because in the initial collapse, it was there in one frame and it was not there in the second frame. There wasn't any feeling of collapse, it was just bup, gone. You know like that, like you wipe your hand across, and it's gone. So that, of course, wouldn't do. So that had... so that had to be redone and I came back and we just spent a day shooting the actual collapse.

Initially the film was going to be a United Artists film, who had been the producers of Electra, the financiers of Electra. And then a problem appeared with Tony's stop-date. Tony had a contract, Tony Quinn that is, he had a contract with Fox to make High Wind in Jamaica, I think it was. That implied a stop-date that he couldn't go; he couldn't overshoot the schedule of Zorba by more than a week or so, and they thought that's a bit dicey, that we won't take that risk. So there was a problem. So, the solution to the problem was that Fox took over the film, took over Zorba, in the end and they produced the film. So there weren't any overlap. But we didn't go over schedule, so it wouldn't have been a problem, but they weren't, they weren't willing to risk that, so it became a Fox picture. Of course Fox drew all the benefit from it winning the Oscars and all that. To my considerable surprise I won the Oscar for that along with... along with Lila Kedrova and the art director, Vassilis Photopoulos. And, I was busy on a long documentary job for the National Film Board of Canada the next year. And, I didn't even realise I'd been nominated. And, many years later when Fox gave up their office in... they had a sort of a production office in London at that time, and many years later when they closed that all down, I received the Nomination Certificate which they put in some drawer somewhere, but it never reached me. And the Oscar itself, because I couldn't go, and I wouldn't go to Hollywood, because you have to go on speculation. You might win or you might not. It might be one of the other five nominees who win it. Also, that was the last but one year where there were two Oscars for photography. There was a black and white Oscar and a colour Oscar. I think it was My Fair Lady who won the colour Oscar that year. But two years later they abolished all that because there weren't anymore black and white films, as simple as that. Anyway, I wouldn't have gone to Hollywood anyway, and I couldn't go because I was busy, so the Oscar was received by Arlene Dahl, and there's wonderful photograph somewhere of... which says, 'Zorba photographer wins Oscar with Ilford stock', and above that is a photograph of two men shaking hands, neither of which is me. Because they panicked. They tried to get hold of me and they couldn't get hold of me and they panicked and they published this photograph. When you read the text it says, 'The Managing Director of Mole Richardson, Rome congratulates the Managing Director of Ilford, Italy, on Walter Lassally winning the Oscar for Zorba the Greek'. 
And, then the upshot of that was, afterwards, of course, I got a lot of offers. I got quite a few offers, all of which I turned down for various reasons. But I was offered Bunny Lake is Missing by Otto Preminger where I didn't like the script, and I was offered Arabesque by Stanley Donen where, again, I didn't like the script. And, there were some other films where Kate said no, he's busy, which was true. I was making than and they said well no he's not doing anything, we've checked. And she said yes, he's doing this long documentary for the National Film Board, and they said, 'A documentary?'  They couldn't believe that you'd turn down a feature for a... because you were working on a documentary. Later I regretted it slightly. Occasionally I, sort of, said, well this would've been an entry into the American mainstream, but I was never really... I was never really keen on that. I wanted to make the kind of films, mainly intimate films. In that respect, Zorba is already an except... no, it is an intimate film. Zorba is less of an epic than Tom Jones. And... and I wanted to make that kind of... continue making that kind of movie. I didn't want to enter the American mainstream. But sometimes I have a, sort of, twinge of regret that I let that opportunity slip by a bit cavalierly, one could say.

My regrets started, in that respect, with Hydra, with the island of Hydra, where we shot The Girl in Black, because, because Anis Nohra, the production manager, was also the production manager for Boy on the Dolphin, he actually brought that film to Hydra. And after that the island exploded with tourism, and I did regret that a little bit. But Crete is a different story. Crete is big enough to absorb an awful lot of tourism. So I don't really regret that. Now, of course, there's Zorba all over the place. There's Zorba Taverna, and Zorba Restaurant, and Zorba Villas and Zorba House, and all that. And even, I even found, in India, when I went to Agra, I found in Agra there was this tiny little, like a café, which was called Zorba the Buddha.

In 1967, I was contacted to be the cameraman for Oedipus the King, which was a British production, I think. Yes, a British production, starring Christopher Plummer as Oedipus and Orson Welles and Cyril Cusack and Roger Livesey and Lilli Palmer. It's quite a distinguished international cast, one could say, which turned out to be a problem because they all had different accents. But while we were preparing Oedipus, and we were quite a way into the preparations, in fact, the set had already been built, it was planned to be shot in the ancient theatre at Dodoni near Ionnina in the north of Greece. Using the whole of the theatre as acting area, not just the stage but the seating as well.
And, during the late stages of the preparation, the coup happened in Greece and I came out of my hotel in Athens one day and there was a man with a machine gun at the end of the road saying: stop. I thought, what the hell's going on?  Up to that point I thought maybe I wanted to buy a house in Greece, or live in Greece. Then I thought, we're not used to this sort of thing in England, you know, you don't find people with machine guns at the end of your road. So I had a second think about moving to Greece, at that point.
Anyway, the production duly panicked and they wanted to move the film to Sicily and then they discovered that too much money had already been spent in preparing Dodoni so they had to, sort of, live with it. But, I think, in the process of all that, I have a feeling that the production company changed. I'm not absolutely sure. Anyway, the film went ahead. And, we were all in a hotel in... near Ionnina, one of those government hotels called Xenia, which Greece had a string of at that time. We started with... without Orson Welles. He came half way through, almost. He didn't have a big part. He had... I think he had four pages of dialogue. And the first thing he did... he arrived one evening when we... after shooting, we were sitting in the lounge at the hotel, and he arrived leading a goat on a string, and he immediately took over the whole proceedings, and lorded it over everybody, and told anecdotes and stories. Then he sat up half the night and cut his story, his part, down to half, so he could do it in two days instead of four days. And that wasn't such a bad idea, actually.
Then we filmed for two days with him. After the first day, we... I didn't want to pick up where we'd left off the next morning, because the sun, being in a confined area like that, of course, you can't cut scenes where the sun is in the west and scenes where the sun is in the east, it's obvious it's not the same. I told him that we were not going to do that, or he was told that we weren't going to continue with the dialogue. And he said, 'Oh, I want to do the dialogue, I want to do the dialogue'. So he agreed, reluctantly, to do the few, little few bits and pieces that he had to do, other than the main dialogue scenes, there was one big long speech, staring into the setting sun. Because he plays the blind prophet Tiresias and he did that scene, a three-minute scene, I think, something like a three-minute scene, staring into the setting sun. He didn't blink once. Brilliant. When the camera was rolling he was brilliant, when the camera was not rolling he was a bit of a pain in the arse, sometimes. But with... from him I could take it. He patted me on the head once and said, 'I've been doing this since before you were born, my boy'. And I said, 'That's not quite true, but all right, from you, okay'.

Orson Wells I had a lot of admiration for. I mean, he could afford to be a bit awkward when the camera wasn't running because he was so brilliant when it was running. But Christopher Plummer was another matter. I rather locked horns with him several times and he, he, he did annoy me. For instance, he wouldn't stand on his mark before the clapper-board was given, so you couldn't line him up properly. He said, 'Oh, you can do that with the stand-in'. So I said, 'It's not the same, won't you just for a moment...' 'No, no, no, I have to...' and he's pacing about somewhere near the place, and then the clapper-board would be given and then he would step on his starting place, which was a bit of a nuisance. And, also, there was quite a few discussions with Philip Saville the director. Again, the situation which I've come across several times where the director and the star have something like director... star had something like director approval, or they're supposed to be the best of friends, but when it actually comes to it, they quarrel all the time, and they won't do what they're told. They won't do what the director asks them to do, at least not first time. So there's a lot of these discussions going on with everybody waiting. And many, many a time... there's been many a time when we felt, in the crew, we'd... next morning we'd all appear with these T-shirts which say, 'Just Do It!' Anyway, he... there was a scene where... Roger Livesey was there and Cyril Cusack were there, and they were all patiently waiting in the arena at their appointed places, wearing these heavy woollen garments, and it was May/June. It was hot. And... and the chorus were all there. In the chorus was Takis Emmanuel whom I'd worked with previously twice, in Zorba and in Electra. And, again, there was some hiatus and Christopher started delaying things and talking to Philip Saville and everybody was waiting patiently, and suddenly there this was this outburst from Takis. He had this outburst all in Greek. He's saying... and then they calmed him down and the scene proceeded. But immediately afterwards Christopher came and he said, 'What did he say, what did he say?' 'We'll tell you later, you know'. And then in the evening we said, 'What he said was, ''We're not extras, we're all players of the National Theatre, we have all played this part before. You know, the part that you're playing here, we've played before and we're sick and tired of being treated like dirt by people like you''.

It was my first and only film with Philip Saville who'd done main... mostly television up to that point, I think. Because it was all confined to this... nearly all confined to this theatre, the question of the famous line became important. What you... so it's planned in such a way that you don't suddenly cross the line without knowing it. He said, 'Yes, yes, that's fine, no problem'. So we planned that first we'll do this and then we'll do that, and that also always created problems with Christopher Plummer because whatever we planned... if we'd planned a long shot, Christopher would say, 'But look if this scene has to be like this, I whisper'. And if we'd planned close-up line, he said, 'But Philip, in this take I leap, I make these large hand gestures, he said, it has to be loose. It was always wrong'. Or he used to look at the track that was being laid, and he'd look at the track and he'd look at Philip, and he'd look at the track like he was an absolute idiot, you know. How can you possibly want a track here?

So we would proceed with the shooting and Philip said, now this and now that, and now that, and now we're here. I said, 'But Philip, you've crossed the line'. He said, 'Oh well, never mind'. I said, 'Well, we better have a... there are ways of tackling this problem. Well known ways. We can't just sort of say, never mind'. So that was a little bit of a problem from time to time. But the number of times where I've seen these enormous discussions with people going round the back of the sets and drawing little diagrams on the flats where... for instance, a classic example is where you have a table with four people round it, in the middle you have a vase of flowers, and you sooner or later you get to a position, and say, well, should the vase of flowers be on the left or should it be on the right, and they can never agree about that. But the important thing about crossing the line is you shouldn't do it unwittingly. You should be aware of... This is a... this is a convention and it's a convention which has a reason behind it. Which is regularly broken by people like Ozu, particularly Ozu in Japan.
Whenever I discuss this with students, the problem of the line, why the line is there, why you shouldn't cross it, how to cross it if you need to cross it, and then I point to Ozu. I said, if you see any picture by Ozu, you'll find that people are always looking... if there's two people in a room and they're having a conversation, both of them are always looking somewhere close to the camera, but usually on the same side'. And at first you, kind of, say... something a bit funny going on, and then, of course, you accept it. Because there's two people in the room, there's nobody else there and they're talking to each other, so obviously they're talking to each other. But in the West and generally speaking, we have this convention and it needs to be followed, and there are ways of dealing with it. But you shouldn't... you shouldn't cross it unwittingly.

The reason Oedipus wasn't... well, there were two reasons why it wasn't very successful. First of all, being a classical Greek subject, a tragedy like Electra or Iphigenia, there has to be a unity of speech, of accent. And in that film, Christopher had a slight American accent, Lilli Palmer had a slight German accent, Richard Johnson spoke in a very Shakespearean declamatory way, and it jars. It doesn't... it only works if you're not a native English speaker, then it doesn't bother you. But if you're a native English speaker, it tends to... it tends to bother you. The other reason it wasn't successful was very unfortunate. In the very same year Pasolini should make his Oedipus, which is a much better movie. But anyway, that's... that's luck of the game, isn't it?  Luck of the draw. And then... that was my last film in Greece because as soon as the film was finished, I left. And I didn't go back to Greece during the reign of the colonels, which lasted seven years.

The plot of that film was: the Chinese are plotting to steal an atom bomb which is in this warship moored in Pireas, and there were casting difficulties because there weren't any Chinese in Athens at all. And we finally came up with a Chinaman who was a cook on a ship in the American Navy, and he played the... the one or two scenes where you actually see a Chinaman, because most of the time you don't see them at all, they're just a force behind the scenes. And, Kourkoulos who's quite a well-known... Nicos Kourkoulos played the lead. He's quite a well known Greek actor, and he played a sort of Greek James Bond and he left bodies all over the place. He had license to kill, you know, and he left bodies all over the place, nobody cared, nobody asked any questions. And there was a scene where they capture him... the villains capture him, and they take him onto a yacht and they tie him onto a bed, onto a bunk in the cabin. Then the script says, but he asked for a glass of water and he manages to smash the glass and he cuts the rope with the smashed glass. So he was tied to the bed and we did the other stuff, the other scenes where he's tied to the bed, and then came the scene where he's supposed to free himself. So the director says, 'The glass, the glass'. And the prop man, poor prop man, said, 'What glass?' And he said, 'The glass, haven't you read the script, man!' And, so a glass was brought which turned out to be unbreakable. And, I wish I could get hold of that film, because it's a real... it's a good laugh. It's very funny, unintentionally.
[Q] American financed? 
Yes, it was financed by a group of theatre... Greek theatre owners from Boston, I seem to remember. But it's one of those lost films that's just disappeared.

When I did go back it was for a film that was planned that was called Rider, which was going to... It's all about the people who do the circle of death in this circular arena. You know, ride the motorbike up the side of the thing, and it's quite a good script, which was a Mephistopheles, it was a Faust subject, Mephistopheles subject. Orson Wells again was in and Oliver Reed, and it was a co-production between Finos and quite a respectable English company, which was actually funded by, I think, the Daily Mail. It had connections with a major newspaper. Anyway, a lot of discussions evolved where the Greek side was so suspicious of the English side, they kept saying, 'Yes, we're giving 40%, you're giving 60%, but how do we know that your 60% isn't really 100%', and... you know, and there was no reason for it.

So this film called Rider was being prepared and it was going to be directed by Andrew Sinclair, with whom I'd worked indirectly on Malachi's Cove. He was the producer of that and Henry Herbert was the director. So I knew Andrew and he was a very nice man and preparations were going well until a major difficulty developed because the Greek side, represented by Mike Damalas who was standing in for Finos at that time, Finos was, was sort of getting ready to retire, so he left things to Damalas who became a sort of General Manager. But he was so suspicious that eventually the film collapsed. And the... and the... Because they talked so much about how the pudding was to be divided that they forgot to bake the pudding in the first place. Orson Welles had arrived and Oliver Reed had arrived and somebody else had arrived, we'd shot some second unit footage with a, a tiny, diminutive girl doubling for Oliver Reed in the stunt sequences because they'd brought this, this wall of death arena and put it up outside the new Finos studio, which is near where the new airport is. We shot for about a week on this... all the motor cycle riding bits with this tiny girl doubling, because on the motor cycle you can't tell. Then they all arrived and it turned out that the film wasn't going to be made. And, sets had been built and quite a lot of money had been spent. Orson Welles invited everybody to a great banquet, a great dinner, and then handed the production the bill and left. But he had every... you know, he was right. That was a great shame because it could've been... it could've been a very commercial film. It had a commercial script, it had a good idea, the Faust idea, you know, the Mephistopheles, Faust thing. It should've been... It's a great shame that it collapsed because it could've been a very commercial film, and a very good film. No reason why it shouldn't have been.

I didn't work in Greece again until into the... in the '90s. When in 1993 I got a sudden phone call from somebody speaking on behalf of Dimopoulos saying, 'Dimopoulos is making this new film and would you be interested'. I said 'Yes, I'd be very interested, I'd be delighted, in fact'. So I came and we made a film called The Little Dolphins, which is a film with four children as... four 10-year-olds, 11-year-olds as the main protagonists. And it was made in the west of Greece near Argos, sorry, near Arta on a bay called the Amvrakikou Colpo, so the film is called... in English it's called The Little Dolphins, but in Greek it's called Ta Delphinakia tou Amvrakikou, being the dolphins of this little bay.
And, again, it was made very efficiently, very quickly and for very little money. But, by the time that film was made, there was no longer an audience for it. So it got a big hand in Salonica at the festival. It didn't get a prize, except a special prize that was given to the children, which they created especially for the occasion. But festival prizes I shall talk about at some other, at some other point, because it's always a lot of political nonsense going on. But it had a big success in Salonica. It had the biggest... I was there for the whole festival, I saw nearly every movie that was shown that year, that was in '93. And, it got the biggest round of applause of any movie. But then it didn't take any money, because it's a family film and families don't go to the cinema anymore. It's really tragic. It's such a shame because it's a nice film. Now, unfortunately, in... last year or the year before, Dimopoulos died, so that was a great shame, very sad. In fact, in the last few years a lot of people have died. But I suppose one has to expect that when you get to my age.

During the period that the colonels were reigning in Greece, I worked elsewhere and I did three films, more or less one after the other in England, the first of which was Joanna. And Joanna was directed by an interesting guy called Mike Sarne, who started as a pop singer, but he's very talented. And he wrote this script about a kookie young girl who comes to London in the Swinging Sixties. It's a late Swinging Sixties film and, to my mind, it's a more successful picture, a more accurate picture, of the Swinging Sixties than some of the other films that were made at that time, like Smashing Time and I'll Never Forget What's His Name, and so on, because he was part of that scene. He wasn't looking into it from outside, he was part of it. So that film, I think, conveys the atmosphere of the Swinging Sixties very well. And his star was a kookie young South African girl called Geneviève Waïte, whose first film... In fact, it was her only film, I believe... it was. And it was financed by Fox, but only just. Because Mike had become friendly with a guy called Michael Laughlin who had some connection with Zanuck and with Fox, and... but it was a bit tenuous.
So, we went ahead and in the week before and the days before shooting started they went to Kodak to get the film, and Kodak said, 'Who's film is it?', and they said, 'It's being made by Fox' and so on, and they said, 'Well, we haven't heard anything about it'. And they checked back and they went to the office of Fox and Fox said, 'Come back when you've got a film, you haven't got a film at the moment'. Because Fox London was at loggerheads with Fox US, and they thought they were being usurped because he should've gone, he should've done it through Fox London, and he didn't. But that was all smoothed out. But I think the result of that little episode was that we started on a Thursday instead of starting on a Monday, because on the Monday they wouldn't give us any film.
That film was made, again, all location, no studio scenes. And by that time the film stock had got a bit more sensitive than it was on Tom Jones. So it was a bit easier, with smaller lights and fewer lights. And Mike wanted to make it in Cinemascope. And, I don't like Cinemascope so I tried to wean him off Cinemascope. I tried to say, well it means a lot of heavy equipment, and anyway I don't like the format, but he insisted. And he didn't want to make it Techniscope, which I suggested which is a way of making Cinemascope in an ordinary camera, you don't need special lenses or anything. But he wouldn't agree to that, so I said, 'All right, all right, we'll make it in Cinemascope'. So we got a hold of an early Cinemascope camera, or, I should say, an early Panavision camera. Panavision is a much-misunderstood phrase because Panavision is actually a hire company. It's a company who supplies specially designed equipment and who has outlets in various countries. And, the format is the scope format which is 2:35:1, and which, unlike the other formats, which is loosely called wide-screen, is actually pretty closely observed. If you make a film in scope you can be fairly certain that it'll be shown in that... that your frame will be as you see it in the camera, which is not the case in the so-called wide-screen.
Anyway, so we got this slightly complicated camera from a hire company in London, and we prepared ourselves to make this film. And I needed a completely new crew, because my old crew on Tom Jones had all been kicked upstairs, as it were. So I got some... some interesting young people to work on that film, who were then with me for the subsequent films that I made. And, as I say, it was an all-location film, all around London. Mainly around London. Just towards the end there's a very short bit in Tangiers, which is shot in Tangiers, which they didn't know at the beginning whether they'd have enough money to actually go to Tangiers. But it turned out that they did, so we did a few days in Tangiers. But most of it is shot around London. There were some amusing incidents... well, amusing – not so amusing. There was one incident where a girl has to take some aspirins and after, sort of, take five, she collapsed and it turned out that the prop man had been giving her real as... real aspirins.

Donald Sutherland was cast rather... three-quarters of the way into the picture he was cast, rather across type, as a... as an English lord, and he devised for himself, a very interesting accent, which was somewhere between the English and the Canadian, and it worked... it worked beautifully. And he came with us to Morocco. There's a lovely scene that we played in Morocco on the beach with the sunset which was happening, which was largely improvised and I was getting more and more worried because I was thinking sooner or later he's going to say, cut, and he didn't say cut and the camera kept rolling, and the light kept changing. I thought, you know, how's this going to be... how am I going to inter-cut this with the close-ups and with the other angle. But it all worked out... all worked out in the end.
And then, the film went to Cannes. And at the end of the film, the heroine leaves London after her many adventures, and she leans out of the window and she waves to whoever, and she says, 'Don't worry, I'll be back'. And the Cannes audience rose out of their seats and shouted, 'Jamais!' 'Never!' It has rather a nice ending actually there, Joanna. She leaves on the train and the boyfriend, the painter played by this German actor, Christopher... I can't remember, I'll look it up. Anyway the, the boyfriend is left behind and so she's waving to him, technically. And then the train goes out of sight, and suddenly he looks around and on the opposite platform is the entire cast assembled, and they sing and dance to one of the numbers that appears... because there's quite a few musical numbers in the film, and Joanna is there in her top hat and doing a dance, so that's the sort of credit sequence at the end. It was rather nicely... rather nicely done. And you see the camera crane and the operator and all that. But in Cannes they didn't reckon... she wasn't welcome back.

When the film was shown in New York, Judith Crist wrote, 'Joanna is a big oozing glob of schmaltz, WL' – Walter Lassally – 'has given us the most beautiful camerawork he has done in recent years, and he's done some beautiful camerawork in recent years'. So that was... that was something. But I discovered the danger of having my photography over-praised. I discovered, not only on that occasion because once Anthony Page who was a theatre director who started at the Royal Court like Tony, he was associated with Tony, was going to make his first film... again, I can't remember the title. He went to Kate, who also represented Peter Suschitzky and a couple of other... Wolfgang Suschitzky and he wanted one of them, and Kate said, 'Well, I'm afraid they're not available, why don't you take Walter?' And he said, 'Oh no, I don't want to make one of those films which the critics say is so-so, but beautifully photographed by Walter Lassally'. So I discovered it doesn't pay to have your photography over-praised.

The next film I made in England was The Adding Machine, which was, again, a very interesting project with a charming, but very unusual director called Jerry Epstein whom... who it was widely supposed that he was an illegitimate son of Chaplin's. And it's possible because he looks exactly like Chaplin. There's a great resemblance. And he had made some minor feature films before, some minor, let's say, dramatic films with story line and actors, which I didn't see at that point. I saw them subsequently. So he was supposed to have some experience, he wasn't a newcomer. But it turned out that... that he had certain quirks that you wouldn't expect from a person with experience.
The first week, we spent the entire week shooting one dinner table scene. So after one week we were one week behind schedule, more or less. We shot this dinner table scene where there's four people at the table. We shot it from every conceivable angle except from straight over the top, that's about the only angle we didn't shoot. So there were long shots and closer shots and two-shots and three-shots, and close-ups and over-shoulders, and God knows what. And they're eating soup. The first course is soup. So we shot the long shot and that... and they're always eating their soup. We shot the two-shot and they're eating their soup. And then we came to the close-ups. And, I moved in and I let Jerry have a look and he said, 'No, no, no, that's much too close. I want to see the business'. I said, 'What business?'  He said, 'The soup'. I said, 'But don't you think we've seen the soup? You know, we've got the message that they're eating the soup'. He said, 'No, no, it's too close, I don't like that'. I said, 'Well, if I move back, the person sitting next to him will come into shot again', and he said, 'Move them out!'  I said, 'We can't do that, because you miss them. You know very well there's somebody sitting within two feet of this guy'. So that... that was quite a problem. So we were behind schedule quite quickly.
And then later on in that film there was an incident about the framing. Because, in common with all the pictures of that era, except the Cinemascope pictures, you had one form or another of the wide screen. And sometimes the camera gate was masked to that format, sometimes we weren't allowed to do that, and you had a mask in the view finder only, so there was all sorts of things being photographed in the top and in the bottom that didn't appear on the screen, at least not if it was screened as intended. And in that scene we were shooting 1:66, I think it was, and the gate wasn't masked, so we were actually shooting Academy, 33. For some reason, they used to see rushes in the lunch hour, and I said, 'I don't want to give up my lunch hour to see rushes, I'm very sorry. I'm very happy to see rushes afterwards, but not in my lunch hour, because I want my lunch hour. I'll have my food and I'll have a little rest and so on'. So one day, for some reason or other, they wanted to check something in another theatre so they went to town, into Wardour Street, and he came back and he was absolutely fuming. We met in the corridor and we had this shouting match in the corridor in Shepperton, where he said, 'It was terrible, terrible, I can't stand it, all the heads were cut off'. I said, 'What do you mean all the heads were cut off?'  He said, 'Well, we sat down in the theatre and all the heads were cut off and people kept shouting, 'Rack! Rack!'' And I said, 'And did they?' And he said, 'I don't know, but all the head were cut off'. It was just mis-framed by the projectionist. Because if you use that system where the viewfinder is not the same as the gate, then you're entirely dependent on the projectionist to frame it correctly. But he... he couldn't understand that. The operator was sweating blood by this time, and I said, 'Don't change a thing, we're fine. There's nothing wrong'. Jerry kept saying, 'Too tight, too tight, you're cutting the heads off'.

Shoot and protect. That's a system which arose at that kind of period where, if a film is intended basically for the cinema but eventually is going to be shown on television, like all films, they're eventually going to be shown on television. Then they often ask you to operate a system called shoot and protect, which means that you shoot for the 1:66 central area, but you protect the top and the bottom by not having microphones in them or tracks, or whatever. And this is time-consuming. It's not cheap. The people think well... The lawyers put a clause in the contract that say you mustn't mask the gate because it will hinder the sale to television. I said, it should be pointed to these guys that this is not a free lunch. It takes time, and sometimes it really prevents you having the best image. Because you can't get the lights necessarily in the best position, close to the edge of frame, because the edge of frame is not one edge of frame, it's two edges of frame. And you don't know which... You have to keep them out of the outer edge of frame, so it's awkward. Anyway that system is known as shoot and protect. And my reaction to that has always been, what I think you should do, you should protect the cameraman and you should shoot the people that want you to do that.

The one great bonus of that movie was working with Milo O'Shea and the lovely Billie Whitelaw. And there was also a strong technical challenge at the end of that movie, where there's a scene which takes place on a large beach. For various reasons the film had to be made entirely in the studio... well, almost entirely in the studio because it takes place in New York in... well, it has two locations.
The first location is New York 1923 and the second location is Heaven, or Paradise, or whatever. Because half way through the film the hero is executed, having murdered his boss. And you sort of think: well, where do we go now, you know, and then you go to heaven. So Heaven is... basically Heaven in that film is a large beach with a funfair attached. So we built all that in the studio and the large beach was built in the so-called silent stage at Shepperton, which is a bigger stage. And it was lit with something like 18 brutes. It was a huge set. By doing that in the studio... it's quite interesting. By doing that in the studio with just a few cut-ins in a few inter-cut scenes which were shot on a real beach in Cornwall, most of the scene takes place on that stage beach. And it suits the film very well because it has just a touch of artificiality. Like in the distance, you see the sea, which is actually silver paper being moved up and down, which is what they used to do in those kind of circumstances. And the degree of artificiality, which might have bothered one in other circumstances, in there it fitted perfectly. But it was quite a challenge for me because it's probably the biggest set that I've ever lit, except one documentary scene that I did in St. Paul's Cathedral, but as for studio sets, it's by far the biggest set that I've ever lit.
But I loved working with Billie and with Milo, and we did another picture... I did another picture with Milo subsequently. And, also I had another connection to Billie Whitelaw, because she's married to Robert Muller who is a writer and author, and he wrote a book called The World That Summer, which is more or less about the same situation that I was in as a refugee from Germany at that age and in that period of time. When I read that book it had a very strange effect on me. It liberated... all of a sudden I found myself in tears, and it liberated something in me that I'd kept in very tightly and very unconsciously, and when I read that book it all came out. Then in... during that period I saw them at... at infrequent intervals. I had lunch and dinner with them. They lived in Canonbury, but they were always very charming people, as was Milo.

The last film of that period was Three Into Two Won't Go, directed by Peter Hall, whose first movie it was, although he's a famous theatre director. But up to that point he'd directed... I think he'd directed one other film before. There's a film called Eh?, E, H... I think it was called something else as a movie, I'm not sure. But as a play it was called that. I think that precedes the Three Into Two. Anyway, he was a relatively inexperienced film director. And, the cast was very distinguished, high quality cast. Rod Steiger and Claire Bloom, who at that time were married to each other. And Judy Geeson who was a newcomer. It's basically a triangle between those three characters. But they had certain fixed ideas, Peter Hall, but not only Peter Hall. Somehow they wanted absolutely to make that film on location and not to make it in a studio. Strangely enough, normally, under normal circumstances, I would've said... yes, well I agree with that decision, because I much prefer to work on location. But in that particular instance it turned out to be totally counterproductive, because we ended up having all the disadvantages of being outside a studio, and none of the advantages. Because they'd picked the location which was a housing estate which had not yet been occupied.
It was a housing estate in Camberley outside London, which had been built for Quantas Airlines, and for some reason they never moved in. They decided... they abandoned. So it was sort of abandoned. All newly built but abandoned. And... and the production manager was terribly proud of himself that he'd found this location, which was not on... under one of the flight paths to Heathrow Airport, because it's very close to Heathrow Airport. And... so he was very proud of himself and we went there in the week before shooting was to begin, to make some tests. And suddenly, half way through the test we heard machine gun fire, quite close by. We said, 'What's that?'  And it turned out we were opposite a tank testing ground. But they made an arrangement with the army not to test any tanks while we were shooting, so that worked out.
In the end it worked out all right. But it was counterproductive because Rod Steiger would only work nine to five. So we couldn't shoot any real night scenes. So we ended up in a ludicrous situation of turning this little, like a council house, into a set. The entire house... for the night scenes the entire house was covered with scaffolding and tarpaulin so we could shoot night scenes in the daytime. It was... and for the windows, which were relatively small, they made full-size, coloured transparencies, which were placed in light boxes outside the windows, on which there was one street lamp, or something. Nothing much, but there had to be something out there. You couldn't just have black velvet. It was all immensely expensive and totally counterproductive, because Peter Hall said... at the beginning he said, you know, if you're in a real place, a real council estate, there's people passing with prams and a little bit of run... by situations, which arise naturally. And, of course, none of that happened, because the place was deserted. So we didn't have that, and we couldn't work at night, so it was entirely counterproductive. And also it was very small and to shoot sound in that... those rooms which had relatively low ceilings was quite difficult, because the sound man wanted a false plastic ceiling put up so it would absorb some of the ambient sound. And also, I required the... in order to put any lights below the ceiling, which had to be kept out of frame, obviously, I had a great problem because however near the ceiling you put them, they were still reflected in the windows. So we ended up having to take all the windows and window frames out, and refitting them in their frames at an angle of... in new frames, at an angle of 15º so the lights wouldn't be reflected into the camera. It was quite a business.
It must have been extremely expensive. And... Rod Steiger was always... I worked three times with Rod Steiger and the last time was on The Ballad of the Sad Café where he'd mellowed a bit, but in those days he was pretty stroppy. And there was a love scene with Judy Geeson, which is absolutely ludicrous, which takes place in a small hotel bedroom. And and they decided that this love scene couldn't be played on the bed, because, at that time – not only at that time, but there seems to be this idea around that love scenes are much sexier if they're played on the floor. So we had them lying on the floor and whichever way round you did it, it just looked ludicrous. If Judy Geeson was on top and Rod Steiger was underneath, it looked like a fly on an elephant, and if Rod Steiger was on top and Judy Geeson was underneath, she was in danger of being crushed to death. A completely impossible, ludicrous, situation. And if we'd been on a set, I would've asked for a pit to be dug so at least we could shoot up and have a bit of Rod Steiger in frame, not showing the full bulk of him, because he's a large man. And I said: to make this less than ridiculous it's going to be very difficult. But we managed it in the end.
And there's another scene in the same bedroom where she hides in a closet and it's night. When you open the door of the closet, it opens across the only window of the room, so it cuts out whatever light is coming in the window. So, you're... again, you're in this black cat in the coal cellar situation, how do you light a scene like that?  So I put a tiny little light directly above Judy which hits her face almost directly from above. We got over it that way, but it's not easy when you get into that kind of situation. And of course, there are times like that where it's useful to be in a studio because you just take the lid off the cupboard, or whatever, and you light from above. But if you're in a real room you can't do that. So, there's pluses and minuses in... in all those situations. But overall, I still... I really would still prefer to shoot on location, than shooting entirely in the... in the studio.

The relationship between Peter Hall and Rod Steiger was also a bit fraught. He gave him endless arguments. There was endless amounts of arguing. And Kate, who was sometimes watching, she got very irritated and she took Peter Hall aside one day and said, 'Look, what you must do, you must say, look at your contract, it says here, me director, you actor'. Again, it's that situation again, Just Do It! But they don't. They won't.
[Q] But presumably no problems with Peggy Ashcroft? 
Oh God, she's lovely. She's another one of those wonderful ladies, like Edith Evans. That... the people who come basically from the theatre originally, and particularly the British theatre, they're just wonderful people. They're... She's a great lady, as is Edith Evans who was in Tom Jones, so... And then I worked again with Peggy in India. No, she's... she's wonderful. But that film had a lot of problems because there were things in there that were... they read all right in the script, but they're quite difficult to put into effect. Like, it said, the house is all painted white, but the painting hasn't quite finished. The idea there was that the... it was a virginal white to represent the virginal problem that Kate... yes exactly, that Kate... that Claire Bloom had, the Claire Bloom character had. And, of course, none of this comes through to the audience. It's totally useless.
There's one very interesting scene in that film where... which was quite a problem for me where you're shooting down the narrow entrance hall, very small house, and I'm shooting down the narrow entrance hall facing the front door, and outside you have the front garden, or whatever. There's a scene which starts outside and then you track back, all in one shot and she comes in and goes into a room. And outside it's F22 and inside it's... with a push, it's 4, so something has to happen. So the only solution that I could see in that particular case, was: I built a cage of neutral density filters which were 6ft tall and 4ft wide. And I built a cage out of these neutral density filters outside, so when you think you're looking straight at the landscape, you're actually looking through a 0.6 neutral density filter. And that worked very well except that there's a faint reflection of Judy Geeson's back in the landscape which shouldn't be there because... But we got away with it because it's very brief and it's only there if you say, 'Now look, watch this scene carefully, do you see anything that shouldn't be there?' 'Yes, there's a faint reflection there. How did that get there?'

In 1958 came my second experience of the Third World when I was asked to make a film in what is now Bangladesh. And, I went out there round about Christmas time and, in fact, they said, 'It's essential that we get there before Christmas as...' I would've liked to spend Christmas in England, but the director, whose name is Aaejay Kardar – and he became a very good friend for many years later – insisted that it's absolutely essential that we get there before Christmas. So, we went out. I was accompanied by my old friend John Fletcher and his recently married wife, Marlene, did the continuity, and John did the sound and... and helped generally.
Then we had Satyajit Ray's assistant director, Santi Chatterjee, he was the assistant director, and I was a great admirer of Satyajit Ray, so I was looking forward to the opportunity of discussing all that with him. He spoke very good English. But the crew... That was about it. The crew was very, very small indeed. At that time I had my own Arriflex so I brought that out there with the usual delays of customs that I'd already become accustomed to from Greece. Very similar. In fact, one Pakistani official once said to me, 'You British...' meaning: 'You British, you may have invented bureaucracy, but we have perfected it'. So we spent hours at the airport, you know, clearing the gear and all that. And, Dhaka at that time was a relatively quiet, small town, as Indian towns go, Indian and Pakistani, it's the same to me. And we first were quartered in a place called The Rumna Resthouse, which was a modest... It was like an inn really, or like a hostel more than a hotel, and the food was pretty monotonous and very hot. Now, I don't mind spicy food, but this was... this was pretty spicy, and occasionally you liked to have a respite from... from very spicy food. So after a while, we persuaded Kardar, which wasn't very difficult, that we would move into the city's only so-called luxury hotel, which was a 12-storey concrete building, like they all are nowadays. And he didn't mind. He also thought, well, maybe The Rumna Resthouse is a little bit primitive, we can do better that for our English guests. So we moved into the Shabagh Hotel and that proved to have problems of it's own, which I'll come back to later.
But, we... within a week or so of arriving, and this was within days of Christmas now, we went out to the village which involved a taxi trip in ramshackle – very ramshackle – old American Buicks and Chevrolets from the town of Dhaka to the port of Dhaka, which had a separate name, it was called Narayanganj, which is a bit like Athens and Piraeus. And that area of Bangladesh consists of, what they call ponds, which is areas of water divided by embankments. Along some of the embankments the roads run. And they're quite narrow and these cars used to drive breakneck speed down these embankments, and we always had our hearts in our mouths, and said, 'Slow down, for God's sake, we're not in a hurry!' Anyway, and there were terrible stories about if they run somebody over, the crowd will gather and they'll cut the driver's hands off, on the spot. So we were a bit sort of... but nothing like that ever happened.
Then you got to this port of Narayanganj and you got on... yes, and then came the drama of the two launches. Initially we had just one launch which was waiting for us. We got on board; all this was fairly leisurely. There was always something missing that delayed our departure, but we finally departed, and we went down the beautiful river Meghna, which is part of the system of the Ganges Delta, really. And it was a two and a half to three-hour trip, I seem to remember, down to the village of Shaitnol which was deep in the Bangladeshi countryside. Bangladesh at that time was called East Pakistan. And... and he said... Kardar, the director, told us that the materials for the hut, we were going to have two Nissen huts that had been donated by the Pakistani military, and he said, 'The stuff has been sent ahead so the huts will probably be ready by now'. So we got off at the village. Again, very primitive, a little rickety wooden pier, hardly worthy of the name. You could get off this launch and go ashore. And a small crowd gathered, of course, to watch us, because it was a very unusual event. Then we walked across the fields to the site where the... near the village. There's a little village called Shaitnol, and then near the village, but not in the village, was this site where these two huts were to be erected. And the materials for the erection of the hut were lying on the ground and the people, the erection crew, were asleep on top of the materials, and that was it. So the urgency evaporated. I said, 'Well, you know, we could've stayed in England till... till this was done'. But even to communicate between the village and the town was not exactly easy. There weren't any radiotelephones, or any telephones, or any kind of communication. You had to send word down there, and then word would come back. It was a bit like the Middle Ages, by stagecoach. So... so we went back to our Shabagh Hotel. Then began a series of journeys to and fro. The film was made over a period of five months. And we used to shoot for eight days, ten days, down at the village, and then we gathered everything together, all the film, and brought it back to Dhaka, where there was a film laboratory, which was government-owned and there was a studio as well. Well, you could call it a studio, but it was a bit primitive.

It was one stage, which had some very interesting features about it. It had... the walls looked like insulating sound tile, so it would be both soundproof and non-reflective as far as sound was concerned. But when you took a close look at the walls, they were actually covered in the local mud plaster into which a team of... of an army of little men had poked little holes. So that it looked like acoustic tile, but of course, it didn't perform the function of acoustic tile, so that was pretty useless. Then the electricity supply... there was a fairly normal and adequate generating powerhouse on the site. I don't know how many kilowatt, but adequate. But it wasn't connected to the stage. The only... It was connected to the stage, but the only outlets actually in the stage, were... in each corner of the stage, which was fairly large, there were three 15 amp, normal, commercial... I mean domestic 15 amp plugs, and that was the power supply. So the first thing we had to do... because we planned to shoot one little sequence in the stage, the first thing we had to do was lay adequate cables, proper cables, directly from the power house, through the doors, into the stage, so that we could connect lights of more than 3 kW. Otherwise that would've been our lot, 3 kW, that would've been it.
And the third interesting feature of the stage was that, right at the top... It was a pretty tall stage, right at the top there was a metal ladder that led up to a walkway which went right round the top. And at the end of the walkway there was a double metal door to the outside. So I investigated all this to see if there weren't any problems. Fortunately I did it all fairly cautiously, because you opened the first metal door and then you opened the second metal door, that swung outwards, and there was no staircase to... you know, there was a 30 ft drop to the ground!  Because the staircase hadn't been built yet. Anyway, small little things that could be fixed.
Anyway, we didn't plan to use the stage till much later on, so we said: this and this and this will need to be done. The only film that had ever been made in that stage was a government documentary. I can't remember what the subject was, but they were... they had erected a typical native hut, fisherman's hut, in the stage, but it was... it was just that. It was a complete fisherman's hut, erected as though you would do it on site, in the stage. It didn't have moveable walls or ceilings. It was just a fisherman's hut, exactly as they would have it, erected on the stage, and that's the only bit of filming that had gone on there. And the... The whole thing was called the East Pakistan Film Development Corporation, something like that. It was a government agency. In charge of this government agency was a very suave and clever man called, Nasir Ahmad, with whom we had a lot of dealings, because he was also responsible for doling out our film supply. Film was rationed and the film was being made with the help and co-operation of the East Pakistan Film Development Corporation. So if we wanted film, we had to go to him. And first of all it was all very straightforward. Towards the end it became very hairy and people had to sit on his tail all day long, in order to persuade him to part with... find some more film for us. Not that our demand was excessive. That also was a problem, because it turned out that the film came in batches and each batch was from a different manufacturer. So that film ended up being made on two types of Eastman Kodak, one of which was called Deko, which is the Deutsche Eastman Kodak, it's the German version. Then there was some Ferrania, and some DuPont. So the film was made on five different film stocks, because that's the way it was. There was no choice.

Eventually we... we heard that the huts had been duly erected. It took, I think, at least a fortnight. We were sitting there twiddling our thumbs for quite a while. I kept thinking how nice it would've been to spend Christmas in England, but that was past history. So eventually we got our gear together, and having made as many preparations as we could, inspected the laboratory and said, well, it's a bit primitive but it works, and it had processed stuff before, so it wasn't the first time. So we set off for the village. That always involved a very lengthy procedure.
Oh yes, before we actually set off for the first shooting trip, we tried to hire a second launch, in case something happened to the first one, and maybe for some parallel activity. And they did manage to find a second vehicle... a second launch, which was slightly smaller than the first launch. But this second launch always had severe problems. In order to start it, they had to... the cylinder heads were all open, and in order to start it, somebody went round with a little oil can full of petrol, and he just injected petrol into the top of the cylinder heads. I think there are eight of them. But by the time he got to the last one, the first one always died so that launch only went once in the entire film. It only worked once and that was on the... in the last week. And in the last week we used that launch to go some way, distant way, from the village down to an inlet of the river, a little branch of the river, to do something or other, I can't remember. We got quite a way down and then it died, and we had to row back. Anyway, we got on our main launch and then the... then the palaver started about something is always missing, either the oil for the lamps, or the wicks for the lamps, or some part of the food. And then the captain started agitating because, as time went by, knowing we had a three-hour trip, or something, ahead of us, he kept saying, 'If we don't start now, I'm not going because there's the pirates, you know about the pirates, the pirates operate on this river and there's no way that I will leave here knowing I'm going to arrive at the other end in darkness. No, no, we... we either go now or we don't go at all'. So eventually we made some kind of compromise. Okay, so we don't have all the candles we might need; and we go.
The trip itself was very pleasant, very relaxing. A huge river, you couldn't see the other side by the time you got to... by the time you got down this river to the village of Shaitnol, the river was over a mile wide. You couldn't actually see the other side, the other bank. And the huts had been duly erected and we moved in. And the director and the assistant director occupied one hut. Each hut was divided into two rooms, which had a partition between them. It had a primitive, very primitive toilet, bathroom facilities. Buckets of water, basically. The director and the assistant director occupied one hut and I and John, with his wife, occupied the other hut. We didn't get an awful lot of sleep because dawn was reasonably early, about four o'clock in the morning. And at dawn the crows used to dance on the metal roof of the hut, which made quite a lot of noise. That was usually our wake-up call.

The cast was very good. There was a friend of Akhtar Kardar's who was a painter, a very talented painter, called Zulqarnain, was the... played the main fisherman. Then a young lad, also an amateur actor basically, he played the, sort of, hero, younger hero of the film. And the girl in the film, the principal woman in the film, was an actress, a very experienced actress, from the theatre in Calcutta, called Tripti Mitra. Beautiful and a very talented lady. We all became very good friends. And then there were some more... one or two minor actors. There were perhaps eight actors altogether and the rest of the people were the people of the village.
The next problem was that the director was Punjabi, the extras, all the local peoples, were Bangladeshi. The film was being made in Urdu. The language of the film was Urdu. The script had been written in English, and it was translated on the set, every day, into Urdu. There wasn't a lot of dialogue, but what dialogue there was... was in Urdu, which the fisherman, of course, the local fisherman, didn't understand. They didn't understand Punjabi either, so there had to be a lot of, kind of, cross translation. And there was a wonderful moment, quite late on in the shooting where there was some dispute over the correct translation of this piece of the English script, and the director looked up and he said, 'Does anybody here speak Urdu?'

So we started our filming and most of the filming went quite well, but there were some quite tricky scenes. The first scene in the film is the fishermen setting off for their night's fishing, because they... they fished at night. And each boat had a paraffin lamp at the back. One of those pump-up things. What are they called? They're called Tilley lanterns in some places. They have another name in America.
[Q] Coleman lanterns.
Yes, Coleman lanterns in America. In England they're called Tilley lamps. Very often it was the wicks for those that was missing, and we couldn't leave because we hadn't got a new supply of wicks for the Tilley lamps. Anyway, the first sequence... in the script it read, you know, fairly easily, sort of, this boat goes out and... and they do their fishing, they have a bit of dialogue, and the light is coming from this little lamp. Then, at the end of the sequence it says: '...and we pan with the boat into the rising dawn', which is when they stop fishing. Lovely, very nice.
Now we had this launch and I think we also had some... some kind of a raft that was made, I think, so as to enable us to work on the river, which, as I say, was a mile wide. So we started off in this little creek that ran along the village. And all the preparations for going off fishing were done there, and that was relatively simple. We had our generator and we had... so that could be lit fairly simply. And we had a local electrician that helped us who was reasonably experienced, but not in film making, just as an electrician. Except that he had certain habits that we... we, sort of, wondered about, and now and then I heard a shout going up. John Fletcher shouting, 'Ayub no!' What he was doing, he was stripping the cable with his teeth, to make the... to make the connections.

So eventually, having done the preparation shooting on this little inlet, we went out onto the big river and there were, I think there were two boats, I think, at that time, on that scene. All the close stuff we did before in the little inlet where I had one light, one 500w pump lighting, simulating the light coming from this lantern. And... fortunately the fishing boats had a little... sort of like a little hut, like a little shelter in the middle which was open-ended, at both ends, so you could shine the light in and hide the pump by carefully positioning the boat, so that the actual cover... the actual shelter hid the... hid the electric light. But the electric light had to be powered. There were cables running under the sea... under the water, rather, under the water to our launch or raft, I can't quite remember, I think it was a raft... Anyway, and on which was the generator, you see. So this whole expedition set off into the middle of this river. Although there wasn't much wind or anything, the river had quite a strong current, so controlling this operation was quite difficult. And, at one time, I remember, I was so annoyed that my instructions weren't being followed, which was due to the problems... due to the difficulties of composition, so I had this little metal megaphone and I smashed the megaphone on the side of the boat and actually cut my hand. I was so upset.
And then the last shot... the shot where it says, you pan the boat into the rising dawn, was... was actually quite complicated. You can imagine, the dawn is rising and speed is of the essence, and yet, to control the boat, let alone the two boats, that's when I smashed the megaphone I think, because first, second, third attempts didn't work, we had to redo it, and the dawn was coming up more and more and more. But we did get the shot in the end. But that wasn't easy, I can tell you.

So the only thing that we didn't actually shoot in the village are the interiors. There's a few interiors in this little hut where this main fisherman lives, and that was built in as... in the end we ended up building it outside the stage and on the back lot, as it were, of the studio, because the problems of working in the stage were too... too considerable, that... but by building it outside, I could use the daylight and supplement it with some lamps. But that's the only thing that wasn't filmed in and around the village. So a lot of filming went on in the village, and then there was some filming of a fish market which took place nearby. There's some lovely dawn stuff. Every dawn was very, very misty. Some days you couldn't see down the end of the road, almost. It was very, very misty. And that made some nice scenes. And I've got some nice photographs. I didn't get it in the movie... but I've got some nice photographs of the moon over the mist, as the mist was, sort of, dispersing. It was lovely.
The atmosphere was just lovely, and it was hot, but it was not boiling hot, because it was winter, you know, it was January by that time. Most of the filming was from January to March, at least in the village, when the temperature was reasonable. The humidity was quite high. And every evening we went back to our little Nissen huts and had a drink and went to bed. Woke up the next morning at four o'clock by the crows dancing on the roof. Then there were some nice little incidents. There was a tracking shot I had to do, where some children walk or run through the village. I was going to do it as a hand-held tracking shot. We had a small primitive dolly, but there was no way of laying the tracks and all so cumbersome. So I said, 'No, no, I'll do that'. They'll come to camera and I'll walk back a little bit and then pan them over and then walk behind them a little bit. Just a little hand-held tracking shot. But I was wearing open... open sandals... open-toed sandals and they weren't very good for stable footing for me, so I sent back to my hut. I said, 'Go and fetch me my sneakers'. So they brought me my sneakers and I did the shot, once or twice, and it was fine. And then, a day or so afterwards, I heard this rumour was circulating among the people who knew just a little bit about film making, about Walter has this pair of magic shoes, that enable him to do tracking shots without the dolly. That was lovely. And there were two... two little... a little boy and a little girl about, I don't know, four years, no younger, yes, four or five years old, that we called Roti and Puri. I don't think they were their real names, but they were nicknames, and Roti and Puri are two types of bread, basically, in Indian languages.

We worked for a week, eight days, ten days, and then we gathered our stuff together and went back to the town, to the Shahbagh hotel, and handed the stuff over to Mr Chisti at the lab who promptly processed it. There were one or two practices at the lab that I didn't approve of, but what can you do? If they found the developer was getting too hot, they just threw lumps of ice in the tank and, of course, that dilutes the developer. But they were used to that method and the results seemed to be okay. And the different film stocks weren't a big problem. One of them was a problem.
One of the film stocks, I think it was the DuPont film stock, had probably been stored badly next to the ship's engines, or something, on the way over. So that turned out to be a whole stop slower than what it's supposed to be. It was supposed to 80 ASA and it was only 40. I discovered that, you know, subsequently, but, again, the material was not unusable, and I adjusted it myself, accordingly. And, so the... so the fact of having to make it on five different film stocks, which might bother some people, didn't bother me all that much. When something is a fait accompli, what can you do?
Every time we went back to the Shahbagh Hotel, by that time we had got used to the circumstances at the Shahbagh Hotel. And one of the circumstances was that the Shahbagh Hotel was divided into two sections, as far as the water supply was concerned, because there were two Japanese... big Japanese-made boilers, which supplied the hot water. And one of them was broken down... had broken down and they hadn't been fixed for the entire time that we were there. So every time we went back, we said, 'Can we have our old room back?', or, 'Where're you going to put us?' And we said, 'And we want a room with hot water'. They always said all our rooms have hot water. I said, 'No they don't'. And the telephone system was something else. You must remember that in 1958, we didn't have the facility, you know, you get out your little mobile phone and you phone anywhere in the world. In Bangladesh, in 1958, you were able to speak to London on the telephone twice a week. Once via Geneva and once via somewhere else, and you had to book that well in advance. Then you waited by the telephone, hours possibly, and then your call might come through, or it might not. That was it. No other way of communicating. You could send a telegram, I suppose, but that's another story. As we were processing locally, we didn't have this problem of communicating with the lab, as we had in India, for instance. And... so at the Shahbagh Hotel, yes, hot water in all our rooms, but not in actual fact. We relaxed a bit and the stuff was processed, and we saw it in the... I can't remember where we saw the rushes. I don't think the studio had a projection theatre. It must have had. We must have seen our rushes somewhere, but I don't remember where. Anyway, that was all pretty satisfactory. There weren't any retakes or anything like that.

Eventually the work in Shaitnol was finished, and we stayed in Dhaka for the... for the studio work. And as I've already said, it proved impossible to build this hut in the... Oh yes, there was... we built a hut on the outside of the studio, which worked fine, using daylight and a little bit of supplementary light. And then, there was another sequence, which doesn't appear in the finished film, which was a musical number. Because somebody had said, 'Look, you'll never sell this film, certainly not in India and Pakistan, because every Indian Pakistani film has to contain at least 12 musical numbers. So, we said, 'Well, it's not that sort of film'. But on the other hand, they were a little apprehensive. They didn't want to do a Satyajit Ray right away, so they... they devised this musical number. And in order to...
This musical number was supposed to take place in the lounge of a swish, rich man's house, more or less rich man's house, where they invite this dancer in to perform. This dancer, I think she was called Rakshi, she came down from West Pakistan, from Karachi or Lahore, at least three times, and each time we weren't actually ready. Something was always missing, and she'd come all the way and she had to go back again, because we couldn't film. One of the things they couldn't do: there was no expertise in building sets. So a simple thing like joining two flats together and not having the joint show, they didn't know how to do that, you see. And in the end there was some... I remember, there was some sections of concrete pipe lying about in the yard of the studio, for some reason, and the art director decided that this room in which this dance was to take place, was planned... it had a sort of platform. It was on two levels and in between the two levels, they decided to build this decorative wall. Now, because they didn't have proper materials to build a studio set, he said, 'Well, we'll use those concrete sections that are lying out there'. So, they laid down these tubes to build like a decorative wall, that you would look at them end-on. The trouble was that, every time they got to the third layer, one end always collapsed before they could... before they'd finished at the other end. So that was the reason that Rakshi... she'd say, 'Look,' she said, 'I can't stay, you know, those people work on 15 films a month'. And she just managed to find a day or two to come... fly over to East Pakistan, to Bangladesh. But anyway, she came three times.
Finally we did film it with some difficulty, because it turned out that the lighting required for colour, in those days, was quite strong... needed to be quite strong. This is before Tom Jones, remember. So I can't remember if the film stock was 25. It may have been 25 ASA, the Eastman film stock. So we needed a lot of light and that, of course, defeated the studio generator again. It was almost brought to its knees. The Kelvin... the colour temperature was much below what it was supposed to be, 3,600-something, and it was something like 2,800. So all the stuff that we shot there, which was perfectly okay as it went, but it was very, very red. But it was within the realm of being able to be corrected. So, with much to-ing and fro-ing in the end that sequence did get shot, but it was never shown. I can't remember if they put it into... when they showed the film in Pakistan maybe they did put that in, because it was, it did exist, but, of course, there had to be a device in the movie... in the story of the movie to find a reason for the sequence, which was very primitive, that when the leading man takes the leading lady on... they go to hospital, yes, the child has an accident and they go to hospital and they have to spend the night in the village... in the town somewhere waiting for this child to come out of hospital. And they're wondering around and they, sort of, look in a window somewhere and there's this thing. Drawn in by the short and curlies one could say.

Aaejay, as I already said became... Aaejay Kardar, the director, who became a very good friend, hadn't got all that much experience. In fact, he had no experience. He was... he was the scion of a Bombay film movie family, and his elder brother made many, many movies in Bombay. But he had left and settled in Lahore and he had no actual film making experience, although he'd been around films a long time. So he had certain weaknesses, one could say. So the first time... there's a sequence where the two young lovers, you could say, the man who's courting, he's courting the girl. Aaejay said when they first meet can you pan her up and down. I said, 'I don't think we'll do that'. I said, 'You've got two... you've got at least one very experienced actor here, and the boy's okay, so let's find another way for introducing them to each other without panning her up and down'. So that was cut out.
But then there was a very symbolic thing that, when they're actually ready to kiss each other, possibly, because you don't kiss in Indian films either, but when they approach each other, the camera discreetly pans off and there's a very symbolic bit where there's this... there's this inlet from the river flowing along. They'd sat down by the side of this inlet, and there are water lilies floating on the water, and there's a sort of dam that forms. All the water lilies get collected and stow up. And then suddenly something happens and the flow is released, and that was the symbolic end of that sequence. I don't think that's in the movie either. I have a feeling that that turned out to be a little bit too symbolic. Most of the time the... the acting was more than adequate. And the painter was particularly good because he had this very sad, sort of, resigned hangdog expression, that... it worked extremely well. It's not often that you can find a... what is virtually, an intellectual, and certainly a middle class person, playing a fisherman, a poor fisherman from a remote region convincingly. But he certainly managed that, very beautifully too.

My experience of the Third World, again, came to a head, as it were, when we first went to that village. We were invited to meet the headman. The village had a headman, and we were invited to meet the headman and the family in one of the huts in the village. He had his hut in the village. We were invited and we shook hands, and that... and they were... now, would they be Muslims or Hindus? That I can't remember. They must have been Muslims because Bangladesh is... but not necessarily. It's a mixture. I don't remember which they were. But anyway, when you met those people, for all the formalities, you know, we were welcomed in the traditional manner. We shook hands and we sat there and we joined a drink and we were offered sweetmeats and then we all went about our business. But just after... just from that one meeting it was perfectly obvious that there can be no real contact between a westerner and people like that unless you live with them for years. You're not about to understand what it means to be a fisherman in that area, and particularly an area...
The thing that struck me is that, if you live in an area which is regularly flooded and houses are regularly washed away and whole families are regularly washed away and killed, drowned, you develop a sort of fatalism. Because if you weren't fatalistic and you're in that situation, you can't get out of it and you know that sooner or later the floods will come and your house may be washed away, and your wife and your children may be drowned. If you haven't got a fatalistic attitude, you'd go mad. You and I put in that situation, we would go mad, because we couldn't get out of it and we couldn't accept it either. So you have to learn to accept it, that you're in that situation. So that taught me a kind of lesson as to the difficulties of meaningful contact between westerners and people in the Third World.

We had a servant, John and Marlene and I had a joint servant who I believe was called Ahmed, and there's a lovely picture somewhere of Ahmed carrying our breakfast on a tray across the fields to our little hut. Once, going through the village, I noticed that all the women were doing something with rice. What they were doing, they were puffing rice, roasting rice and puffing it, and then it would be stored. I said, 'This is wonderful, Rice Krispies for breakfast'. 'Ah, yes'. But when I asked them, the cooks that were working with us, to do that, they said, 'That's women's work, we won't touch that'. We couldn't get that.
The other thing that I wondered about is that, when we had our lunch, we often had fish, but the fish were always this size, you know, like slightly larger sardines, and yet this river was full of enormous fish. So I said, 'Well, why are the fish always so small'. There was a sort of slightly embarrassed silence, and it turned out to be a money problem. They couldn't afford to feed us larger fish.

Towards the... towards end of the shooting in the village, we moved. I can't quite remember why, but... yes, it was getting very hot. This must have been towards the end of March, beginning of April which gets pretty hot. So, there was a boat available. A strange boat which had a platform on the top, was made available. They had some comfortable cabins and they brought this boat and they moored it at the edge of the river there, and we moved in there, John and Marlene and I and Achtar and Shanti. They had separate cabins, or they shared a cabin each. And, the platform on the top was because it was the boat which, in the days of the Raj, was the... The governor of the area used to use this launch to go around and sometimes he made speeches from this platform on the roof. And one... one night there was a... we were woken up by a tremendous commotion and a big splash, and then it became quiet again.

One night there was a big splash and the next morning it turned out that... yes, Kardar said, 'The bandits tried to rob us but I caught this guy and I threw him in the river'. Only it transpired that the person he'd thrown in the river was actually the local policeman and there weren't any bandits. We never saw any bandits. The captains were always going on, 'The bandits! The bandits!  I'm not going...'  The dacoits, you know, they're called the dacoits in Indian language. And... 'I'm not leaving. If we don't leave immediately I'm not leaving!'  But we never saw a dacoit. The nearest we got was that incident when he threw the policeman in the river.

Half way through the shoot, roughly, certainly a third of the way into the shoot, we had what was called the opening ceremony. Every film in India has an opening ceremony, which is a sort of good luck. Sometimes they decorate the camera. It happens again in my film, The Perfect Murder, they actually show that, it's called the Mucharat, which is the kind of a formality to wish good luck to the film and to placate the gods that they don't do anything bad. So, some officials came down from God knows where, from Dhaka I suppose, and we had this opening ceremony in the village where people made speeches and little fresh meats again, sweetmeats, were served and that sort of thing. Then somebody held an address. One of the officials held a... made a speech and part of this speech was in praise of me and John Fletcher. They wanted to pay us their... they wanted to pay us a compliment each and, no doubt, he'd read up on what cameramen do, and somewhere he'd come across this phrase, so he says, 'Walter Lassally doesn't merely photograph, he paints with light'. Unfortunately, he couldn't find an equivalent phrase for John, for the sound recordist. So he said, '...and John Fletcher doesn't merely record sound, he feels with his machine'.

By and large the labs weren't a problem until right at the end, except for this business of throwing ice in the developer, which I sort of said, 'Oh well, I suppose they're used to it. There wasn't any other way of doing it, so okay'. But the only problem we had with the labs was right at the end, on the very last batch of rushes. He demanded a bribe to hand over the last batch of rushes, which again, bribes were quite commonplace and we hadn't been paying any bribes, as far as I know. But to get the last batch of rushes we actually had to pay him some money.
But before that, there was some very amusing incidents with this guy, Nasir Ahmat, who was a very, very astute operator. Every now and then there were delegations of officials that came down from other places, probably from West Pakistan, to inspect the facilities offered by the Pakistan Development... Film Development Corporation, which included a number of machines which were in the upper floor of this lab. There was this area where there was a film cleaning machine and, I don't know, some machinery, and they were all under wraps. They were all under some cloth. They were covered with cloth. And every now and then the delegation used to come round and say... he'd lift the cloth and he'd say, 'This is our film cleaning machine', this is our so-and-so machine, because none of them worked of course. They weren't even connected to the electricity. But he was very good at keeping the money coming. He also got quite a few trips abroad out of it, where he went to America to buy some more stuff. So he was a very clever guy. But towards the end of the film, as I already said, we had to pursue him.
We had to have a man... A man was put on his tail 24 hours a day so we could get our film stock. He became very elusive. Then one day he came back and he said, 'I couldn't get to him, he's ill, he's in hospital'. I said, 'I don't know, we're going to run out of film tomorrow'. So we investigated this further and we sent the man to the hospital and they said, 'Mr. Ahmat is not yet arrived'. So we said, 'What do you mean? I thought he was... we thought he was ill?'  'Well', they said, 'well, not exactly'. He'd found this method of escaping from his creditors, you see, from the crowds of people that were always pursuing him for something or other. He just said, 'I'll talk to you, if you come to the hospital at two o'clock I'll talk to you'. Then he went to the hospital at 1:45 and got into bed and all these people came in, and he said, 'Yes, I'm sorry, you know, at the moment I can't help you because I'm not well'. He was a really clever operator.

The film... when finally finished, the film went to London to be cut. Post-production happened in London and John Fletcher, in fact, did quite a bit of the editing together with Achtar. Some post-synching was done, not a lot. It was fairly simple to finish. A fairly simple film to finish. But it was in the cutting room for some weeks. It must have been in the cutting room six, seven weeks, something like that. I think there was also problems getting the negative shipped. We were worried about security because there wasn't any dupe negative or anything, so shipping the negative was a bit of a hairy problem. I can't remember how that was solved, but it wasn't the only time where I came across that problem. If it isn't cut and finished in the place where it was initially processed, then there comes a moment when you have to ship the negative, and supposing something happens to the negative. So that's always a problem. Then the film went to the Moscow Film Festival and won, I think it was second prize, the Silver Bear, and Kardar has this certificate. It wasn't the only festival. It went to several festivals. It won several prizes. It became... 20 years later when I made another film in West Pakistan, more than 20 years later, no, about 20 years later, that's right. By that time this film, [The] Day Shall Dawn had become the sort of Birth of a Nation of the Pakistani film industry. You shot Day Shall Dawn, my God!

The only other time I worked in Pakistan, as apart from India, was in 1977 when I was doing a stint, my first stint, at the National Film and Television School as, at that time, Acting Head of Camera. I was visited by a young man called Jamil Dehlavi, who brought with him a film that he'd made partly in India, but mainly in New York, on 16 mm, called The Towers of Silence, or Towers of Silence. Towers of Silence are the funeral places of the... which religion?  Jai... I think of the Jains. I'm not quite sure about that. Anyway, he brought me this film and I was very impressed with this film. It was a very well-made film, very visual, very interesting. He showed me this film and then he said, 'I'm making this new film... planning this new film, this time in West Pakistan, based in Lahore, and would you... you know, can you do it as the cameraman?' I said, 'Yes, it sounds interesting'. He showed me the script, or the idea, at least. At that time it was called Five Rivers. It was later released as The Blood of Hussain, but, again, we went off.
When I say we, I was accompanied by, at that time, by a young chap called Tony Garrett who'd become my assistant. I think that was his first job with me. Then we made several other films together. There was an English make-up man who also did special effects, and an English sound recordist, and the rest, I think, were locals, were Pakistanis. We settled in Lahore. He had rented a house in Lahore which was in the old Catonement of Lahore, the military quarters when the British were there. We settled into this house and we started looking around the locations, and we went... One location was quite far away. It was a good day's drive away in a place called Kalabagh, well to the north. But the main location was a village, a very beautiful village, the name of which I'll think of in a minute. These names escape me now. Which wasn't that far away from Lahore, but it was still three or four hours by car. Anyway, we looked at the locations and I said, 'Yes, very beautiful locations' and then we discussed what we were going to do in Lahore.
The cast at that time was going to be... It's a story of two brothers, one of whom is fairly... what can you call him, not primitive exactly, but rural, and the other one is very civilised, citified. These two... Initially, one of the brothers was going to be played by Saeed Jaffrey and the other one by Salmaan Peerzada. We did a certain amount of filming with Saeed and then... or did we?  Yes, we did. Then Jamil became dissatisfied with it. He didn't like Saeed's performance and he was more or less fired. And we said, 'What are we going to do?'  And he said, 'Well, Salman is going to play both the parts'. I said, 'Yes, well, what about the scenes where they meet?'  And he said, 'Well, you know, I'm sure you can...' I said, 'Yeah, yeah, you can, but it's not, you know, it's not that easy to do these things with very primitive means'. But we did manage in the end to do the few scenes where they do meet, were done in its usual way with some stand-ins and some over-shoulders and stuff like that. But there are a couple of shots where they're actually face-to-face, which we did with split screen.
Anyway, so that involved a certain amount of filming in the city of Lahore. The main bulk of the filming was in this village, Sanjeevana. Thought of the name. Shaitnol, Sanjeevana. It was in part a love story, but it was largely a political story and quite a dicey political story, because it was based on the martyrdom of Hussain, who is the cousin, I believe, or the nephew of the prophet, Mohammed. So they... When the authorities, who had to see the script to approve it all, because, again, it was being part financed, or backed, by the Film Development Corporation, and you had to be very careful that the script was presented in a way that wasn't blasphemous, otherwise he might have had his head cut off. So he managed that quite skilfully, and his brother's a diplomat of some sort. So we didn't have any trouble on that account. We could've had, but we didn't.

First of all, there was the usual equipment problem. That I had... he had asked me to go to Germany and to order a certain amount of equipment and to bring it with me, or to arrange for it to be shipped. That included the camera, the Arriflex, and some lights, where we were going to use the recently-invented Arri Sun. Now, the Arri Sun was a fairly large light which was... It had no lens in the front, it just had a protective glass in the front and sometimes not even that. It was an early form of the HMI bulb. It was a tube light. Not mercury. What's the official... I don't even know what HMI stands for. Halogen Metal Iodide, something like that. Anyway, it was a forerunner of the now common HMI lights. But quite large and fairly complicated. It ran through... each light had to have a choke and a transformer and obviously connecting cables and all that. So these lights were duly shipped out from Germany and they duly arrived in Lahore, where, again, there was a customs house which was quite small, but was full, from floor to ceiling with refrigerators and all kinds of machinery that had arrived and hadn't been cleared. These lights, which are very fragile, arrived in a ridiculously flimsy cardboard box. I can't believe that they survived that journey. But there were only one or two of the little mirrors were broken. I could never believe that those lights survived that journey. We got them out of customs after the usual... well, not immediately, you know, after a week or so of going there every day and arguing with the guy, and the usual amount of bribery went on. And finally the lights were released, but not until we'd already left for the village. They were to follow us to the village. In fact, they did follow up to the village, but as most of the work in the village was daytime work, which didn't need any lighting, I didn't mind that so much. Anyway, it was a fait accompli. We didn't want to sit in Lahore waiting if he would see fit to release the lights the next day, so went off to the village, and I said, 'Well, when the lights come out of customs, you send them on to us'. So they eventually arrived and I connected it all up and they wouldn't work.
Now, we were staying, at that time, in another one of these government resthouses, and the whole place had a big porcelain fuse near the entrance, which was actually broken in half and held together with sellotape. But the maximum load in that entire building was 10 amps, 10 ampere. Nothing. When I first connected the lights and they wouldn't work, I thought, well, I wonder why that is. I thought maybe it has to do with them not being earthed. Because that whole circuit wasn't earthed. So I said to my chief electrician, whose claim to fame was that he had worked on Bhowani Junction. Now, this was a sort of... Anyone who'd worked on Bhowani Junction was automatically a fully qualified film technician, you see. So, this electrician was summoned and I said, 'Look, I don't understand why these lights don't work, maybe it's because they're not earthed, so would you fix up an earth'. He said, 'Yes. Yes, sir'. So he went away and I did something else, and then he came back after a while and said, 'Earth ready, sir!'
He'd connected a wire to a screw, he'd screwed a wire onto the edge of one of the... to the body of one of these lights and the cable, the wire, ran into the next room. I, sort of, followed the cable, and in the next room there was a flowerpot with a dead plant in it, which he'd carefully watered, and the end of the wire was stuck in the flowerpot. So he said, 'Earth ready, sir!'  So I said, 'Yes, thank you very much'. Unfortunately, it was a great embarrassment afterwards to him, because he had an assistant who knew that that wasn't the right thing to do, and it became very embarrassing. Anyway, it turned out in the end that this guy, Colin something, who was the make-up man and the special effects man, him and Salmaan between them, they took some of these things to pieces and they found that one of the chokes... the cable wasn't connected correctly, because it had, like, an eight-core or seven-core cable and he just changed it around, and the lights worked. But 'Earth ready, sir', that was lovely. It took a while for him to live that down.

One of the actresses in the film was Kika Markham. The beautiful Kika Markham who, unfortunately, is a member, alongside with Vanessa Redgrave, of the Worker's Revolutionary Party. That was okay for a while, but there came a certain point when she started to recruit the... she wanted to convert the local electricians to communism and they weren't even... they couldn't even read and write. After a while we had to descend on her and say, 'Look, let's finish with all this nonsense'. You know, we can't put up with that. It was ridiculous. But I suspect that the... excuse me one second. I suspect that the casting of Kika Markham by Jamil Dehlavi wasn't entirely arbitrary, let's say, because he played a part in the film and she is his mistress. So I think that had something to do with her casting. That led to a very interesting scene with a lot of ramifications.
There's a scene where he's in bed with his mistress, in a house in Lahore, and they hear some noise, some people approaching, like a procession, and a lot of noise. He goes onto the balcony, I think she stays in bed, and he goes onto the balcony and he looks over the balcony, and what does he see? What he sees is the Moharram procession. Now Moharram is the month of fasting, and in the month of fasting the Shiites have this ceremony where they flagellate themselves with... either with ropes, but in the case of Pakistan, it was still permitted, and still is today, I believe, that this takes place with chains. You have like a cat o' nine tails, you have a handle and attached to this handle are eight or nine short metal chains, and on the end of each metal chain is a very sharp, curved knife, and you go like this, you see, shouting, 'Hussain, Hussain!' This was going on, in reality, underneath. It was real, it wasn't staged. So I filmed that.
I duly filmed that and in the end result it led to some very interesting ramifications. Because, in another part of this same film, not far from that scene, is a scene where they have a very melodramatic, Hollywood-style shoot-out in a cinema where people get hit and, sort of, fall over the balcony into the auditorium. The reality is effected. The extreme reality of the Moharram scene is, of course, affected by being juxtaposed against this fictional and obviously staged melodramatic shoot-out. So nobody who sees that film is going to know that the blood that you see on those people is real blood, they're really doing it. So the thing becomes demeaned. I said to Jamil... we had some problems towards the end of that film because, first of all, the visual qualities that I found in Towers of Silence... he didn't evince those in his direction or in his co-operation with me in the second film. And I began to wonder if he really made that... if there wasn't some other influence there, which I think, I never discovered entirely, but I think he was working in collaboration with one of the film schools in New York City, and I think he had a lot of help there. Because he never evinced that kind of... there was no evidence of that kind of visual high as, say, with Cacoyannis, who had a very definite visual talent. And he became obsessed with things like blood capsules. I said, 'Well, for God's sake, you know, you've got this Moharram procession and if you do nonsense with blood capsules and you get almost obsessed by that, it demeans the other thing completely. It's not a thing you can easily tie together'. So in the latter part of the film we kind of parted company a bit.

One of the protagonists in the film is a beautiful white stallion and this white stallion was parked more or less in the backyard of the house where we were all staying and given a daily feed or two, and waiting and waiting and waiting because the scene was going to be done in that far location, was not... couldn't be scheduled right away, for some reason. I don't remember why. Anyway, at one point, they foolishly allowed one of the crew members, who wasn't an experienced horse person, to ride this horse into the city. God knows why they did that.

So one day, for reasons I fail to understand, they allowed one member of the crew, who had no experience with horses, to take this horse into the centre of the city and there was an incident and the horse shied, and it became impaled on some railings. It tried to jump over some railings and it became impaled on the railings. Of course it had to go to the vet and it was okay. But it was quite seriously injured, and there was no question of shooting on it for the foreseeable future, so that was sent back to... I think they sent it back, after treatment by the vet, they sent it back to its home, some way away. It belonged to some high-up person somewhere.
In the end that turned out to be fatal. The film could not be finished without that scene with the horse. There's a scene, beautiful scene, where the horse bursts out of the earth. Because it's, sort of, symbolic. The horse is not only just a horse, it's also a sort of symbolic horse, and there's a scene where it bursts out of the earth. That scene was shot some months later when the horse was okay again, by somebody else. It was shot by Colin, in fact, by the make-up man who was also doing the special effects. And, of course, only I am credited as the photographer, so I got the credit for something I hadn't actually done. Although we had discussed it how it might be possible to do that. So you dig a pit, and I suggested that they cover him with brown cork chips, which would look like earth, and the horse could very easily, just at a point, he could be let go and it would naturally fight to get out of there. That's a beautiful scene which they shot in slow motion. But, to cut a very long story short, I couldn't finish the film myself. There were an increasing number of difficulties. The film had been... I would've thought 80% had been shot, and there was just certain things left to do, including this horse scene. So eventually I left and left the film unfinished.
And... and it wasn't until two years later that I suddenly heard that the film had been premiered somewhere. It had been shown at some festival somewhere. But because Jamil hadn't contacted me, he hadn't told me that he'd finished it. He hadn't told me that somebody else shot the horse scene. I would've been perfectly happy to go back and shoot it if he wanted me to. But by that time the relationship had, kind of, cooled to a point where obviously he didn't feel it necessary to approach me. So the surprise... It came as a surprise to me to find that the film had actually been finished.

My first film experience in the United States was in 1969 on a film called Twinkie. That film had come about, my work on that film had come about because either Richard Donner or somebody else on that production had seen Joanna, and was rather impressed and wanted the same sort of style for Twinkie. Now, Twinkie was a story about an American ex-patriot writer, living in London, who falls in love with a schoolgirl just about to leave school. He marries her and takes her off to the United States. That was the story of Twinkie. And, Richard Donner, who became a very well-known director later, at that time he'd only made one other feature before, which was Salt and Pepper, starring Sammy Davis Junior.
Now, the star of Twinkie was Charlie Bronson, who's a very nice man, but like all stars, there are certain problems, and again, that was one of those films where the star and the director were supposed to have had some privileged relationship, either director control... what's it called?  Director approval. Charlie had director approval, so he approved of Richard Donner, but then, like in all those cases, he wouldn't do anything that Richard Donner asked. So we spent the first two... The film Twinkie was shot half in London and half in New York, both times in apartments, flats, overlooking the river. The Thames in London and the East River in New York. And... and at the beginning of that film I had made my usual contract. Kate had been in there to do the contract, as she always did, and we started perfectly normally. And then we soon ran into problems because we started... I think it was, at eight and we were supposed to work from eight till six, with an hour for lunch, which is nine hours work, something like that. Very soon after the beginning, it became obvious that that isn't going to be adequate, because the first two hours of every day, from eight till ten, were spent with Richard and Charlie arguing as to whether he was going to do what he was asked to do. The answer was usually no, and then they'd spend an hour or two arguing. So, after a very few days, Kate was called into the office and they tried to change my working hours. They said, 'Well, we can't cope with... there's not enough hours, we've got to work eight till seven'. And I said, 'I'm not going to do that' and Kate, on my behalf, said, 'No, Walter isn't going to do that, you know, that's too many hours. On the other hand, Walter tells me that the first two hours are always spent with Charlie and Richard arguing, so, if you like, he'll come in at ten, then he can work till seven'. Because we never worked before 10 anyway because they were arguing. And they said, 'Hahaha, yes, not possible'. Then when Kate refused, she was recalled. At some point she was recalled and the producer, or the associate producer, he literally asked Kate again, on his hands and knees. He came crawling into the office on his hands and knees, and he said, 'Please, Miss. Campbell, you know, we've made all these contracts with everybody else's on an all-in deal'. She said, 'No, I'm very sorry, that's your problem'.
Anyway, we went on working eight till six and they had some kind of talking to, and it got less serious, but it didn't stop. It didn't stop. Right through the whole movie. Charles'... Charlie's first response to any request was always no. We're going to do so and so, and so and so. Nope. The climax of all this came towards... in the American section of the movie, where he's taken his bride to America and they finally arrive at Kennedy and his mother and father are waiting there to welcome them, and the director says, 'Right, now you come down the ramp here and your mother and father are waiting at the top... at the bottom', and the girl is not with them at that point, she's somewhere behind still, the bride, the child bride. Anyway, he says, 'You come down the ramp and you embrace your mother and you kiss her'. And Charlie said, 'Nope'. But that time we were sort of, why on earth not, for Christ's sake, you know. So we all stand there looking at him, and then Richard said, 'Well, why not?'  And Charlie said, 'It's too sentimental; to kiss your mother after seven years abroad, you know, it's too sentimental'. Anyway, he did do it in the end.

In the early part of that movie, like I said, it was shot in two flats, one overlooking the Thames and the other overlooking the East River, and Richard Donner had a... he had a number of obsessions. One of his obsessions was with boats, which had nothing to do with the film. Just... the flats just happened to overlook the river. So I got pretty pissed off, if I may use that phrase, when he said things like, right in the middle of something. We're right in the middle of something and then suddenly he says, 'Quick, work quick, Walter, there's a boat'. After a while I, sort of, said, 'Well, so what!'  But he always did that.
And then he had this other habit. He wanted to... none of the scenes started straight, straightforwardly. He says, 'Right, we zoom in through the window into something on the outside, like the Brooklyn Bridge, in the case of the... and then we zoom back and we find ourselves in the flat'. Now why, why would you do that?  Or where... There's a scene in a telephone box where he says, 'Right, we zoom through the telephone box onto a street... a traffic light. So the scene starts with a traffic light and then you zoom back and you find you're in a telephone box'. And I got pretty irritated with that and I said, 'This is really not a good idea'. But okay. I had an operator, Vernon Leyton, for that film, and I left it. I said, 'Okay, if you want to do that, you arrange it with Vernon, I couldn't care less'. I lit the scene and I, kind of, sat down and watched it all happen. Right at the beginning, of course, we had a long testing session, where... to find the schoolgirl. We tested dozens and dozens of girls, and finally ended up with Susan George, who did a very good job, although theoretically she's at least 10 years too old, but it was supposed to be a sort of Lolita, really. But she did a good job. She's a pretty believable schoolgirl, if you suspend disbelief just slightly.
And then there were some other things. There was an occasion when Charlie is sitting there; he's a writer, you see, so he's sitting there at his typewriter going, and then he said to me... it was quite warm, he said to us... the crew, at one point, he said, 'Can I take my shirt off?' I said, 'No, no, you mustn't do that'. If he's sitting there going like that, and he also has a hairy chest, he's sitting there with a hairy chest, nobody's going to believe that he's a writer. It's difficult enough in the first place. But he was a... he was a charming man, Charlie. He took us to lunch several times. It's just that I could never understand how people like Charlie Bronson, and Anthony Quinn can panic at some slight thing when they're asked to do something slightly out of the ordinary, or even something completely ordinary, like kissing your mother and father when you... when you arrive after seven years absence. But they just panic, they're 'oh, I don't know about that, you know'. Then they have to be comforted and talked into it and mollified. It's always struck me as very strange that somebody who's made as many movies as they have, that they should be so unsure of themselves, but they're not the only ones, by any means. It's a very common phenomenon with people... with stars who've done many pictures.

In New York, when we were doing the shooting in New York, we had a fixer who was... I'm almost certain that he was Jewish, but he carried a number of credit cards in different names. Some of the names were Jewish, some were Italian, some were sort of straightforward English, and as the administration changed in New York... If you had an Italian Mayor, he used the Italian credit cards. If you had a Jewish Mayor, then he'd use the Jewish credit cards. We very nearly came a cropper once because he could fix anything. But there's a scene where the car crosses the Brooklyn Bridge and we're in a helicopter, following it from a helicopter, and they said, 'Yes, all right'. And then it turned out that he hadn't got the right permission. He was read the riot act and we said, 'If you ever do that again, you know, you'll never work on a movie again'.

Richard Donner, as I said, had only made one other film and that was with Sammy Davis Junior, and Sammy Davis Junior was appearing at the Copacabana Club at that time. So there came a moment when we were all invited to the Copacabana Club where the customers sit in an extraordinary... they're extraordinarily squeezed. You sit having your little meal, you know, like this. The neighbour's next to you. You're, sort of, fitted in like that. Anyway, we all fitted in there. At one point Sammy Davis said, 'And tonight we have a special guest with us, Mr. Richard Donner, who directed me in Salt and Pepper'. And the spotlight went over to Richard and Richard got up and took a bow, and then Sammy Davis Junior started his song, which was You're Nobody, long pause, Till Somebody Loves You. That was wonderful.

The next film I made in the American hemisphere, is called To Kill a Clown. That was the released title. It was called something else when we made it. And that was... had a very interesting script, somewhat messed about with, finally, but the original idea wasn't bad and it starred Alan Alda and a Canadian actor who's well-known in Canada but not elsewhere, called Heath Lamberts, and Blythe Danner, with whom I worked twice. The lovely Blythe Danner. And it takes place in upper New York State somewhere on the shore of Long Island, supposedly, on the 4th of July, around the period of the 4th of July. But for some reason, of course, the film had to be made in January, so it was made in the Bahamas. And we discovered, to my great surprise, that you could find a beach in the Bahamas which is actually a coral beach, which will double perfectly well for a beach in New England. The coral doesn't show. There weren't any palm trees on this particular beach. And all the scenes we shot there are absolutely impeccable, believable as being on Long Island, or somewhere. And we had two houses built on this beach, the normal kind of American wooden houses.
That was, I think, my first encounter with an art director called Trevor Williams, who was British, and who moved to America and with whom I worked several times after that. And he became a good friend. And he built these two houses on this beach and we all moved into the... it was near the town, supposedly, which is called West End. It's not a town, and Freeport isn't a town either. Freeport is like a movie set. You half expect the... when you open the door in one of those facades, you half expect to find yourself on the back lot, that there isn't really a house there. It looks exactly like a movie set.
Anyway, we all moved to... I had a totally British crew for that film, because it was a British, or at least a semi-British film. I think it was one of those films made under the Eady Plan, and designed for cinema and television, so we had the usual framing problems, shoot and protect and all that, which I've already talked about. And I had an operator, Ronnie Fox-Rogers with whom I've made several films. I started working with Ronnie and with Jimmy Stilwell as focus puller, I think the first one was Joanna, and that was the second one and then there was a third one and a fourth one. Then again we parted company, but I made several films with Ronnie, who was a very competent operator. So we were all in this vast hotel complex in a place called West End on Grand Bahama Island. On the same island, on Grand Bahama Island, there was, in fact, a film studio. Some enterprising person, or so-called enterprising person, had actually built a film studio in that... on that island. So if you went from West End to Freeport, which was a normal asphalt highway, beyond Freeport the road tended to kind of peter out. But just before it petered out, in the jungle, more or less, you came across this, again, it's like a myth, it's like a... mirage, it's like a mirage, you come across this great archway which says: International Producer Centre, all overgrown with lianas and all weeds in the driveway.
And when you go there you find there's nobody there except one caretaker. Because somebody had this idea to build this International Producer Centre here and everybody will come to the Bahamas to shoot their movies, and it never happened. It was much too inconvenient. We were largely supplied from Florida, because there's nothing on Grand Bahama. And, there used to be amusing things like, the milk for instance, or... no, the coffee whitener. A beautiful invention, American coffee whitener, had a label on it which said: a non-dairy product made by Dairy Products of Jacksonville. And the Canadians used to fly in by the planeload. This is January, remember. They flew in by the planeload, made a beeline for the liquor store and got blind drunk. So that was the kind of atmosphere in which we worked. But the actual work went very well.
The idea of these two houses... The plot of the film is that there's this handicapped Vietnam Veteran who walks with two crutches, played by Alan Alda, he persuades the husband of the husband and wife team... of the couple who rent his cottage for the summer, he persuades them to play a game with him, which is a sort of game of control. And his game, which starts... the film starts as a comedy and gradually, gradually, gradually it turns very serious indeed, because he gets them into his grasp, persuading them to play this game. So he says, 'One evening we all have a drink or two', and he says, 'You really want to do this?' And he says, 'Yes, yes, it should be fun'. So he says, 'Right, we start tomorrow, at dawn'. So next morning at dawn, there he is with his cane tapping on the window saying, 'Mr. Fisher!'  And he says, 'What, what, what, what?' 'You're 10 minutes late, Mr. Fisher, already'. Then it starts. This guy has two dogs, two dobermans, and he uses the dobermans to imprison these people. He says, 'Now you shift that pile of...' He behaves like they do in the military, like they were on some sort of detail in the military.

He behaves like he's an officer directing them in some detail in the military, and he said, 'Now you shift that pile of rocks from here to the pier, and don't stop until I tell you'. And he just goes away. Then he says to the dog, 'Charlie, watch him'. And the dog sits there, you see. The moment he does anything wrong the dog just attacks him. So very gradually the theme becomes very serious. And at the end, actually, the husband of the couple, is killed. The director was a very talented Canadian called George Bloomfield who, to my best knowledge, that is his only cinema film. Because it was taken away from him before the end. It was re-edited. They didn't think that... they wanted some sort of, not a happy ending, but it's supposed to end with this guy being... dying. She says, 'But he's dead, he's dead'. It's sort of a terrible shock and that's supposed to be the end of the film, but they didn't like that at all. So, they re-cut it and they put all kinds of flashbacks of their happier days ahead, in the past, on the end. It doesn't work. It's an absolute mess and like always in those kinds of circumstances, in London the film played one week in the Rialto, and died. Whereas the original version would've been perfectly okay. But there's always somebody who thinks, no this won't work, this is not good enough. So they take it away from the director and they re-cut it, as happened to James Ivory with The Wild Party. Exactly the same thing happened, only fortunately, in the case of The Wild Party, the original version exists, but not in this case of To Kill a Clown, which I have here on tape. But it's an absolute mess, particularly towards the end because they didn't like this very sad and somewhat abrupt sad ending, tragic ending.
The producer of that film was Ed Scherick who, I believe, started life as a sports commentator on ABC. The company that made that film was, in fact, a subsidiary of ABC, so that's how he got to be the producer. There was an occasion when he came down to the Bahamas, only once in the seven-week shoot or whatever it was – I think it was seven weeks – he came down once and he saw rushes. We had an improvised little theatre there where we saw the rushes. I can't even remember where the film was processed. I think it was processed in England. All these things are governed by rules. In order to qualify for quota you have to process here and you have to have so many Englishmen in the cast and so many Englishmen in the crew, and all that. So I think the film was processed in London. I'm almost sure. Anyway, he came down to see the rushes once. George told me, 'I wasn't there, I wasn't present at the rushes viewing, because I'd already seen all those rushes'. So he had a selection of rushes prepared for him. Then George told me this story, he said: they're sitting there watching the rushes and Ed says, 'What do you think of the photography, George?' George says, 'Fine, yes, it's good, very good'. 'Don't you think it's a bit dark?' 'No, I think it's fine. Ah, shit, I've got my dark glasses on'. You know, a thing like that could end your career.

That film contains the most effective, I would say, day for night sequence done by my system, which could not have been done... I can say quite categorically that that sequence could not have been done day for night other than in black and white. It could not have been done colour with any of the conventional ways. Well, there is only one conventional way really. It could not have been done that, because it's against the sky all the way. They escape. They make a run for it, at night. They wait till he's gone to bed, the lights go out in his house and they make a run for it. And they daub themselves with make-up to be dark. And there's a boat moored at the pier, and they make a run for this boat, and they untie it and they think they've got away, and then they discover that the boat has a second chain under the water, and they haven't managed to get away after all. But this... the basis of that sequence is a long tracking shot and panning shot where they run along from their house to the beach... to the... along the beach to the pier, and then along the pier and get into the boat. So you're going something, like, at least 180º across the back light, across the sun, basically, and it's very, very, believable moonlight. It's sort of very slightly... It's sort of steel blue, greyish blue and dark, and you have the black sky, but you can very clearly see all the figures. It looks to me, that is the most realistic moonlight that I've ever seen in any movie, and you're completely free to shoot against the sky. You couldn't have done that any other way. It's very successful.

Now that script was considerably altered in its... It's based on a book. It's based on a novel, as they so often are. It was considerably altered. The details of it were considerably worked on during the preparation of the film. I was told that, when an earlier version of the script was... existed, there was a scene where this Alan Alda character bursts through the floor of the cottage where they're living, all covered in mud. Okay, that's one thing. But, at that time, the person proposed to play that part, was Orson Welles. Now, can you imagine Orson Welles bursting through the floor all covered in mud?  It's quite a thought.

The following year, 1972, I made a film in Canada which had the peculiar title at the end, of Happy Mother's Day, Love George. That's almost as ridiculous a title as Hullabaloo over Georgie and Bonnie's Pictures, which is one of the movies I made for Merchant Ivory. Anyway, this was directed... this movie was directed by Darren McGavin, who was a very well-known actor originally, in America, and it was set on the East Coast. We actually filmed it in a town, a little town called Lunenburg, which many years previously had been quite an important sea port, which is, I don't know, some 40-50 miles from Halifax, Nova Scotia.
The story was about a young boy, played by Ron Howard, who later became a famous director, who discovers one day... he's been brought up by adoptive parents and he discovers, one day, some letters in a loft, which give a clue as to who his real mother might be. And he sets off on a journey across the continent to... this all happens in LA or somewhere on the West Coast and he goes across to the East Coast and so on. He goes in search of his real mother, which he finds.
There are certain peculiarities about this story. I couldn't understand, for instance, why all the surrounding characters in that village, in that little town, had Italian names. Eventually it transpired that in the original story, the journey had been made in the opposite direction. In other words, he's living on the East Coast and he goes to the West Coast to discover where his mother might be. And, of course, in Sausalito and around the San Francisco area a lot of people have Italian names, and they were never changed. So it's a bit strange, all these people walking around with Italian names.
The director told me once how he had met the producer... how the money had been raised for this film. He'd met some rich guy, a banker I think, on a beach in the Bahamas somewhere, and they'd come up with this very, very simple scheme, that... he'd done some research, this is the banker, and he'd found that one in six movies pays off. So they then drew the conclusion that all you have to do, if you want to make money, is you have to make at least six movies, and then one of them will pay for all the failures. Which, of course, is slightly flawed logic. But they literally set off with that idea, and this was the first movie to be made under that particular idea, with that particular idea in mind. The lovely Patricia Neal played either the mother or the mother's sister, I can't remember. There was Cloris Leachman whom I knew from the Bogdanovich film, Last Picture Show, and there was Patrica Neal with whom I'd worked in '63 on Psyche, '59-'63. By that time she'd had a stroke and she mastered that beautifully, but she had to have a lot of title cards around the set, because she couldn't remember much dialogue. Just a line of dialogue or so, and then she had to... but she did that again. She'd learned to do that beautifully and it doesn't show in the least in the movie.
But the other sad thing about that movie is that somebody in the upper echelons of the production department had decided, in their wisdom, that the original story wasn't good enough. It wasn't gripping enough so they gave this young guy a homicidal sister, which leads to some scenes that really... it's like suddenly you've gone onto the wrong reel, you know. Are we in the same movie? All these murders are taking place. While he's looking for his mother, his real mother, there's a serial killer around in the village, or in the little town, which turns out to be his sister, and that's all ludicrous and completely unnecessary. But sometimes you find conditions like that where somebody has decided that the story's too simple and it doesn't hold, they have to have something more gripping, like a homicidal sister, who was played by Tessa Dahl, who's Patricia's daughter. She played the sister, because Patricia is married to Roald Dahl, the author. But we had a very nice happy... It was a fairly happy shoot. And Lunenburg is quite an interesting town. It's a little backwater, very interesting houses. I took a whole series of colour photographs, as I usually do when I'm filming. Alongside I have my little stills camera and I take colour transparencies which I've collected over the years. There's now some 3,500 of them, and they've had a new lease of life recently, because I've been having some exhibitions with them here in Chania.

Yes, for that film I had a mixed crew. There were some... the basic crew was British, but we had some additional people. Like the clapper boy, I seem to remember, was on loan from the Halifax TV Station, and the grips and electricians also. I had a grip from England, I think so. And I had... But some of the electricians... all the electricians, I think, were from Halifax Television. That all worked out very well. Again, it's a film made with relatively simple means, but possibly a bit more money than some of those really primitive Third World films. But that is one of the few films that I've never managed to catch up with. I've never seen that film finished. I may have seen it, at one point, near the point when it was made, but I've never been able to get it on cassette. It exists as... It had a new title when it was released. It was called Run Stranger Run, and for a while there were video cassettes about of it, but I've never managed to get hold of one. So that's one of my lost films.

The next time I worked in America was on a strange little film called Pleasantville, which was made on 16 mm, because it was made for PBS Television, public television. And it was... It had in it an old-timer by the name of Gale Sondergaard who played the granny, or the... yes, the granny of the leading character, who was a girl, a 10-year-old, a 12-year-old girl. This film had two directors which, I didn't realise at the beginning, but it turned out to be a disaster. There was a man and a woman. Vicki Polon and Kenneth Locker, I believe. And they'd made what seemed to be a sensible arrangement as to who would do what, how they would direct this film jointly. It was decided... they had decided, this is before I came on the scene even, they had decided that she would take care of the actors basically, and he would take care of the technical side. I said, 'Yes, well, it seems possible'. So, we started and it went all right for a few days. I used to get together with Kenneth in the mornings and I used to say, 'Well, how shall we do this? Shall we track here? Shall we have two-shots, long shots, what shall we do?' And we made a little plan. When we were, kind of, a third of the way into the plan, in the middle of the morning, she suddenly appeared on the scene and said, 'I want a close-up here'. And we looked at each other and we said, 'Yes, but you know in the middle of this tracking it doesn't really fit on... fit in'. Then she used to say, 'Why can't I have my close-up?' It deteriorated to a point where the whole crew divided into his and hers sections, you know. And I was left holding the baby in the middle. That was awful.
And they also had... it was a film with a predominantly female crew. Unusually, the gaffer was a woman, the boom operator was a woman, the editor was a woman, which is not so unusual, but it's the only time I've come across a female gaffer. I think there are more now, but there wasn't then. They sort of all divided along male/female lines. I had a very interesting argument, irritating, but interesting in the long run, argument with the editor, the woman who was doing the editing, who was quite a young woman, who came to me one day and said, 'What you did there last week doesn't cut'. I said, 'What do you mean: it doesn't cut?' She said, 'Well, it doesn't match'. When I went into it, it was a case... it was a night scene and the child is asleep and she's sort of half covered with a sheet, you can just see... you can see sort of a piece of her face. And it starts off with quite a long shot where this sleeping child is in the distance, then you go into close-up. In the long shot the face is largely in shadow, but when you go into close-up, I did something which one always does, that as you want to see more detail, as you go into close-up, I put additional light on so that you see the shadow side. Instead of being black the shadow side is now dark, but not black. And she said, 'You can't cut that together, it doesn't match'. I said, 'This is ridiculous, you know, this is a perfectly standard procedure'. But there were lots of irritating things like that because they weren't really experienced, any of them. So, again, I ended up holding the baby because I was virtually the only fully experienced person on that shoot.
Vickie hadn't made a film before and Kenneth hadn't made a film before, and some of this female crew. The boom operator was very good. But this editor left something to be desired because she just didn't realise that, that matching isn't done like that. And anyway, it isn't that serious, that you shouldn't go for the matching above all else. Sometimes you have to accept a less than perfect match, or some continuity lapse, because that isn't the most important thing, something else can override it. Anyway, it was very interesting and very nice working with Gale Sondergaard. These old-timers are always... they're always so professional and so polite and so unassuming. Wonderful. Like later on, of course, I worked with Katharine Hepburn, which was a great honour and a great pleasure, but every time I met somebody of that ilk, I was always impressed by how nice they were and how professional they were, and how they fitted in. They... she didn't mind playing a part in a television film. She didn't go, I don't do television, none of that kind of thing.

The next film I made in the States was called finally, The Great Bank Hoax, although it's known under a number of other names as well, like The Great Georgia Bank Hoax and so on. Anyway, that was made in Georgia, in deepest Georgia, and had a very nice cast with Richard Basehart and Burgess Meredith and Paul Sand, and, the couple of girls were less known, but the men were very well known. I'll think of them in a minute, it doesn't matter. Anyway, so we were shooting in Madison, Georgia, which is a model town. People go to Madison, Georgia to see all the colonial homes there. Old colonial homes there. But there isn't much in the way of accommodation. There's one motel, which we ended up in, which was either Howard Johnson's or Holiday Inn, one of those. And you could either eat there or you could eat in the local tavern. There was a local, one place, which had been desegregated some years previously when desegregation happened, but it was still, in effect, segregated. There was a front room and a back room, and no black guy would've dared sit in the front room, which is exactly like it was before, only officially it was desegregated.
That film was... most films you get to know, sooner or later, usually upfront, who is actually putting up the money for this film. But in this particular case, there wasn't any kind of presence of the front office. It was totally lacking and the director was called Joe Jacoby and he'd also written the script, and he'd made one film previously called, I believe, Hurry Up or You'll be Forty, something like that. And he was very good. He was a very good director, very efficient and the script was very good. It was about a bank, a little rural bank in deepest Georgia where they discover a discrepancy in the books, just before an audit is due. One of the bank clerks confesses to having made a scheme where he could siphon off the money gradually from various accounts all the time, and put them in his own account. But he hadn't done it as a... as a... he didn't actually want the money, he just wanted to see if it could be done. Unfortunately, the timing of it was such that, between the discovery of the fraud and the due arrival of the bank inspectors, he hadn't yet confessed. So the bank directors devise a scheme to cover up this deficiency, this discrepancy, by staging a raid on their own bank. A bank robbery which they do. And it's very funny, they arrive on a tandem bicycle in the middle of the night, you know. Very funny scenes. Then he confesses and then they have the money twice which is a problem again, because they've just announced to the insurers that there's been a robbery, and such and such an amount is missing, and then he gives the money back so that they've actually got twice the money. They've got the money that they took from the vaults and they've got the money that he's prepared to give back to them. So he says, 'Yes, yes, but we have to think about all this'.
The movie wasn't released.  No, that movie... To my best knowledge it was never released but it exists in the... on the Internet as... under various titles. Perhaps they had a very small release somewhere, but I'm not aware of it ever being released. That's why I haven't got it on cassette either because I couldn't find it. But we filmed for some seven weeks in this little Georgia town. There was one scene where we filmed in a bank in Atlanta, during which I discovered that the First... the First National Bank of Atlanta, Georgia and the First National Bank of Madison, Georgia have no connection whatsoever. I thought one would be a branch of the other, like one might expect, but it wasn't. So when I asked the bank of Madison, Georgia, the First National Bank of Madison, Georgia to transfer some of my salary to England, they said, we've never done anything like that before. I was given a cheque and it could only be cashed in that bank because it was drawn on that bank. So I had to cash the money and I said, 'I'll find a way of sending it', don't... and then I said, 'Well, at least can I have this money in 50s?'  And they said, 'Oh no, we don't have any 50s. We only have 20s these days because there's no call for 50s here'.
And also, that place also had a very interesting liquor store which I found quite common in America where they had these giant jeraboams of wine and beer in enormous quantities. But to get a small bottle was quite difficult. And there was a moment when the waitress in the Howard Johnson's or the Holiday Inn, or wherever it was, came to us one day, having served us for several weeks, and seen that we were all British, she sort of said, 'Do you know, you're not like us you know'. I said, 'Why not?'  She thought a bit and then she said, 'Well, you don't eat grits'. That was the first point. Well the food was a bit monotonous because there was only that place or... or the... or the desegregated tavern. So it was a bit sparse. The choice wasn't exactly brilliant. The movie's not bad. I don't know why it never made it. But, again, it was one of those independent movies. Oh yes, the finance. It turned out, finally, the reason there wasn't the presence of a front office, was that the money had been put up by some porno king. He was a porno movie king who was at present in jail. That's why there was never a producer on the set.

Almost the last sequence that we shot in The Great Bank Hoax was a restaurant scene. Halfway through this scene, or early on actually, the camera jammed. We were using a Panaflex. Usually I'm an Arriflex man, but in America sometimes it was necessary to shoot with a Panaflex for various contractual or other reasons. I didn't mind what camera I used, but with an Arriflex I can do simple maintenance myself, but with a Panaflex I didn't... wasn't able to do it. Anyway the camera jammed and it was a very serious jam, but my clapper boy, my second camera assistant said, 'Look, I used to work for Panavision and I can fix it'. So we let him fix it, which took about two hours or something. He had to get the film out, which was all bunched up inside the camera and clear the gate and refit it all together. We continued, and when we got the rushes back it wasn't... he hadn't fixed it properly. Everybody had streaks running out from their head, up or down from their chin, which meant that the shutter wasn't properly synchronised with the pull-down movement. We'd all packed our bags and we were ready to leave, so we all had to be recalled and we had to do it all again. That was an interesting lesson as to what you can and can't do, and what you can and shouldn't attempt to do yourself, and to always work on a belt and braces policy. To test everything thoroughly, in a case like that.

One of the problems on the film was that Michael Moriarty is a method actor. And, Method actors, generally speaking, are a pain in the arse, but you have to cope with them. He used to develop the scene as he went along. Not during the rehearsals, but during the takes. So none of his takes are the same. You know, Take 2 isn't remotely like Take 1 and Take 4 is quite different again. So, the director is faced with the problem where you either use the take in its entirety, or you throw it away, because you can't inter-cut different takes, as is often done, because he's just doing different acting, different things. It doesn't match. So that was quite a problem with Michael. But otherwise he worked well with Blythe. They got on very well together, and Fielder is a very patient director.
Fielder's one of those directors, he's dead now unfortunately, he's one of the many, many people who died in the last five years. Anyway, Fielder was one of those craftsman directors who never became an auteur director, but he was a very skilful and very patient and a very professional filmmaker. Very professional. And I always enjoyed working with Fielder. Although occasionally we had an argument about just how low the camera angle should be. He liked quite low camera angles and, to my mind... If one can generalise which one can't really do, if one can generalise about these things, to my mind the best angle often on mid-shots and closer shots, is just under eye-level.
There was a wonderful incident when I filmed Lillian Gish in Huck Finn, that she hated the camera to be below her eye-level. She'd just look at you scornfully if you set up the camera low, and she used to say, 'Up my nose, up my nose', until you raised the camera until it was not longer up her nose!  But with Fielder too, we had this argument. I said, 'Don't you think that's a bit extreme, Fielder, I mean, we were really looking up'. The guy, he can't lean back because if he does, you're looking straight up his nose. So we reached a reasonable compromise. But a predominantly low angle is certainly more dramatic than a predominantly high angle. A predominantly high angle is very undramatic, except in certain circumstances, but as a general rule. So that was about the only argument I had with Fielder. And then towards the end of the film it became... they ran a bit short of money, because there's a scene in the film where they go to Paris for a holiday, but we couldn't afford that, and we ended up in Puerto Rico, but only just. That worked out very... I liked Puerto Rico a lot. I went there again for Brenda Starr, but we never shot anything. My stay in Puerto Rico was very pleasant. That was right at the end of the film, the end of the shooting was Puerto Rico. That was very nice.
[Q] This was a TV movie? 
Yes. Too Far to Go was basically a TV movie, but it subsequently... It was a great success, it was very well critically thought of and it was subsequently bought by somebody for distribution. I think Spielberg... I think the Dreamworks Company or somebody like that, bought it and it was released in cinemas. Also successfully.

So the next film I made in the States was The Pilot, which, again, came about... It came about in a rather strange way. I remember having this strange rendezvous. Somebody said, will you meet me in such and such a bar in Manhattan, and this bar had sawdust on the floor. It was a strange place. I think it may have been that pub that's been mentioned to me recently, Irish pub. It may have been that. Anyway, there was this guy called Greg Earls who was the son of a very rich coal mine owner in Pennsylvania, a coal baron. He decided to become a movie producer and he had been found... he wasn't the instigator, actually. The instigator was the author of the script who was also the author of the novel on which the script is based, which is called... all of which are called The Pilot. This guy is somebody called Bob Davis, who used to be an animator for Disney for quite some years. Then he had a severe illness and needed to be hospitalised for... hospitalised. He had this severe illness and he needed to be hospitalised for a while, and he taught himself to write. He became an author, as it were, in hospital and he wrote this book, because he was interested in planes and aviation and so on. And the book is based on a true story. In fact, it's about an alcoholic airline pilot who drinks, not only in between flights, but actually during flights, and how he manages all that, and so on. And that was a story which had been discovered by him jointly with Cliff Robertson, who was to play the...
Well, Bob Davis had found Cliff Robertson to play the pilot, and Cliff Robertson is a pilot. He has his own aircraft, a Beechcraft Baron, I believe, which I've been in. And, he also discovered Greg Earls. Greg Earls was to put up the money. Bob Davis was going to direct and Cliff was going to play the main part. And we started and within the first week it became perfectly obvious that Bob Davis couldn't possibly direct that movie. He was terribly slow. He didn't know about the line. He didn't know... there were all sorts of things he didn't know, which you don't necessarily know by... you don't necessarily learn if you're an animator at Disney. So, a crisis arose at the end of the very first week, where we'd been shooting for a week with the lovely Milo O'Shea. I always adore working with him. He's such a wonderful person, and his wife was also in the movie. But at the end of the first week there was a major crisis and it was decided that Bob Davis would be encouraged to bow out gracefully, which he did, not all that gracefully but he was left no choice. In fact, he was given a... what was it called... something you can't refuse.  An offer you can't refuse.  An offer. He was made an offer he couldn't refuse, to retire gracefully. But before that point I had several meetings with him in his home in Palm Beach, Florida which was very well equipped. And anyway, Palm Beach is a rich man's place. You can't live in Palm Beach if you're not a millionaire. You can live in West Palm Beach, but you can't live in Palm Beach. But both he and Cliff Robertson had houses in Palm Beach, and I was put into a flat in Palm Beach, which was very comfortable.
But there were certain peculiarities about Bob Davis's place. For one thing, he had an Oscar on the shelf, which he said was his, but it was an Oscar without a nameplate on it. And as I happen to know something about Oscars, I realised there was something fishy about the Oscar, but I never asked him to... he said, 'Yes, we won that, it's a joint Oscar, we won it for a... it's a movie for a short film at Disney'. But then why would it end up with him, because you didn't have such a thing as a director in Disney. It was a joint effort. You never... I don't know if there's such a thing as a director quoted on, say, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. I don't think so, other than Disney. Anyway, so that was slightly, slightly strange. There was a lot of palaver and there's a ruling in the... there's a rule in... I think it's the DGA, in the Screen Directors Guild, which forbids an actor to take over a movie that he's acting in, as director. This had to be over this hurdle, which is quite sensible, because otherwise actors would be doing it all the bloody time. So they had to get round, they found a way of getting round this hurdle and Cliff took over the direction, which worked out pretty well. Except for his obsession, and I use that term advisedly, his obsession with cockpit drill.

We spent weeks and weeks with a real... it wasn't a 707, it was a DC8, which is the equivalent, DC8, DC9, DC8 I think. This was parked in a minor airport in the, in the Miami area called Opoloca Airport. And we had this real plane parked there, because for one reason or other it was decided not to use a studio mock-up and... they found it quite easy to get this old plane and they parked it there. We built a scaffold around it and we spent, literally, weeks filming him through the window of the cockpit, going number 3 engine off, check, green light, F, yes, one, check, red light, yes, one, check, tyre pressure, yes, check. It went on for hours and hours and, of course, it was all cut. It all ended up on the cutting room floor, but we spent hours doing it.
And, then there was also a tremendous difficulty casting the two... The two woman parts were very small and that proved to be a problem for casting, because they had very few scenes and they couldn't find anybody of any stature to... who was willing to play those parts. So, in the end they found two minor people, but it wasn't... I can't remember their names. But it led to a lot of arguments too, because Cliff wasn't... Cliff wasn't very good at directing women. Certainly not in those circumstances. But he was fine with Milo O'Shea and fine directing his own scenes. There's some quite good scenes in that. And there's a lot of detail about how he managed to hide this alcohol in the toilet of the plane. There we did have a mock-up. We built a toilet, free-standing, in a space so you could go over the top and film... so how do you film in an aeroplane toilet. It's not exactly easy. So that was a bit of a mock-up. But most of the rest is filmed, first of all, in actual locations, buildings, like the doctor's house, because Milo plays the doctor who he goes to for a cure, because the alcohol has become a problem.
Then the climax of the film, more or less the climax of the film... yes, the climax of the film, is an accident which Cliff saves... he saves the day by getting out of this accident where, on take-off, and beyond the point where you can't stop, you've gone beyond, the speed has reached beyond the point where you can't stop; you're not supposed to stop, at least, an engine catches fire. And then a second engine catches fire from the first engine, and the take-off is aborted at the point where you're not supposed to abort. If that happens you're supposed to have a go-around and come back. No, that's not correct, but anyway, it's difficult to stop at that point. So with all the brakes screaming and knocking down a building on the runway, a little radar hut or something, they screech to a stop at the end of the... beyond the end of the runway, in a field basically. And the escape hatch is opened and all the people use the escape slides and nobody's injured or killed. And that's the climax of the movie. But, that was all done without any special effects crew. They just found a way... There was an advisor, but that was about it. They discovered a way of having a real 707 running along the runway, moving, using the fuel in the wing to power the engines on the right-hand side of the plane, while the left-hand side's on fire. They actually managed to do that. I mean, it's not really on fire. The fire's put in there, mainly smoke, but some flames. But they managed to isolate... that wing didn't have any fuel in it, obviously. But the other wing had fuel in it, which was powering the engines, which were actually making the plane go along. So that... that... I was quite interested to see that this was possible.
But it's one of those instances where I shot a special effects sequence without any... without a special effects expert. But it's very effective. It works extremely well. But it really surprised me that it was possible, technically possible, to do that. And then there's another sequence where he flies the... he's a... his character... he's a very sensitive pilot and he senses things that are about to go wrong before there's any proof... before there's any, you know, something a scientist would not accept. He senses these things. So, he chooses a route which takes him well outside his prescribed route, on the way from Miami to Los Angeles or San Francisco or something. And, other planes that follow the prescribed route get into terrible trouble because there's clear air turbulence, and they have people injured and the plane drops 3,000 ft, out of control and all that. And he avoids all that. And in avoiding all that it takes him very close to the Grand Canyon, so he said, 'Our schedule today permits, gentlemen, permits me, ladies and gentlemen, to show you the Grand Canyon from a low angle which is not usually possible, but as it's on our way anyway and I have obtained permission, we're going to do that, so if you care to look out of the window, you will see the Grand Canyon from a very unusual angle'. And we did all that, but we'd actually broken for the Christmas holidays. This film was made over Christmas and I went home to England for the Christmas holiday. And the aviation pilot, expert pilot, who did nothing else, called Clay Lacey, he handled all that. He photographed that, and I had my assistant, Tom Hoppey, photographed... not Cliff, I don't think Cliff was in there, but he photographed the view out of the cockpit window, from inside the plane. And, Clay Lacey was in his little Lear Jet photographing the plane from outside. And that made a very effective sequence of this giant plane flying through the Grand Canyon. Of course, all the critics remarked on that, and said, 'Mr. Lassally's wonderful photography' and, of course, that's again... that's a piece I didn't actually do, but all right. Compliments are always welcome.

The period between 1978 and 1984 I worked a lot in the States. And the next thing I did is I got a job of doing a whole series of Mark Twain films, which were made for public television. And some of them are made on 16 mm, most of them are made on 16 mm, but two of them, if I remember rightly, two of them were on 35 and the others were on 16. And they had a wonderful production team, which was called the Great Amwell Company. Now, Great Amwell happens to be a village in Essex and it turned out that this name was chosen because the woman member of the production team, Jane Iredale is... The partner, Bill Perry, who produced the films, the series, and his partner is Jane Iredale, whose parents lived in Great Amwell, which is not far from where I used to live, in Suffolk. Anyway, that's how it's... that's why it's called the Great Amwell Company. And I made six... five or six Mark Twain... five, I think it is five Mark Twain movies with them. Mostly in America but in one case, in Europe, in Austria.
The first of those was Life on the Mississippi. We were based in Peoria and we were using the Illinois River to represent the Mississippi, because the Mississippi is unusable for a period film, it's too built-up. But there were stretches of the Illinois River, not far from Peoria which has one of... Peoria is one of those names in the movie industry, and they say, 'If they don't like it in Peoria, forget it, or, they'll never understand it in Peoria'. Anyway, we were based in Peoria and we were filming along this same stretch of the Mississippi... of the Illinois River standing in for the Mississippi; very nice shoot, very comfortable. And I had my usual American crew, which varied just a little bit, but there's a whole series of people who worked with me more than once. Just like I had George here on the Greek films, I had Tom Houghton. Tom Hoppe, Tom Houghton – they were the two Toms who did many of... several of the American films with me. We became a little family. And, the Great Amwell Company, again, was a company where there was a family atmosphere. There was never any undue pressure, and the director was a very nice and very professional, a bit like Fielder, whose name is Peter Hunt, and there are, in fact, three Peter Hunt's, so he's known as Peter H Hunt. A very funny thing happened, not so funny for the person concerned, but one of the three Peter Hunts died and the other two got condolence notices, or their wives, rather. Anyway.
So, Peter Hunt was a very nice person to work with, very professional. So we spent a happy couple of months cruising up and down the Illinois River. There's a very nice sunset sequence there. I used my... I had my Bolex with me and there are some... even on a film of that sort, the Bolex proved to be quite handy. Once or twice I sent my chief grip, actually, I sent him off with the Bolex and he took the long shots of the ship, just to save time, because the schedule wasn't that generous. So the Bolex can come in handy even for quite professional filming, even today. The main camera was an Arri SR.
At one point I got a bit tired of this daily journey which we had from Peoria to... mostly we got onto the boat at Henry, Illinois and we had a converted... we found an old paddle steamer, which was called the Julia Bell Swain, I seem to remember. And this was converted to play two paddle steamers, the Paul Jones and the Alec Scott. In different parts of the movie there are these two boats which are actually the same boat. And, then we had ancillary boats and rafts and all that kind of thing. It was a very nice shoot. But at one time... at one point I got a bit of tired of doing this half-hour journey from Peoria to Henry, Illinois, where we got onto the boat, and I found in Henry, Illinois there was a little hotel called The Hotel Henry, and I said, 'I'm going to move into the Hotel Henry, then I can just walk to work every morning'. And it had a perfectly adequate restaurant where the wife of the owner did the cooking, and it was perfectly okay. So I was quite happy at the Hotel Henry, which had certain peculiarities, one of which was that there wasn't any cold water. We were shooting in summer, and I couldn't understand it at first, but the... both the taps in the bathroom gave hot water, produced hot water, and even the loo, flushing the loo, it was hot water. And I discovered the reason later. They said, 'All the pipes ran across the roof, and they just heated up'. So if you wanted cold water you would have to let it run and run and run, before it became cold.
And then at one point, towards the end of the shoot, there were a few thundershowers, and I looked at the ceiling in my bedroom and it started to sag more and more, which is a false ceiling. And I thought, this doesn't look very good, I think I may have to move out. And eventually, of course, it did burst, the ceiling did burst and the room was flooded, but by that time I'd already moved out, because I could see it coming.
The other thing that I remember about my sojourn in Henry, Illinois is that, at the age of 53, or whatever I was at that point, that produced my first visit to a laundrette, because I've always been lucky enough to have somebody or other to do my laundry for me. And I visited a laundrette for the first time in my life, at the age of 53 or 54, or whatever it was. Some very amazed local housewives had to show me how you go about this, where you found the washing powder, where you put the coins in, that sort of thing. But that was a very pleasant shoot. Then that was followed immediately by... well, not immediately, but in subsequent years, I did four more films.

So, Life on the Mississippi was the first of four or five Mark Twain movies that I made. The following year I made a film called The Private History of a Campaign That Failed. And it's about an episode in the Civil War where a young group of volunteers gets together to fight the coming Yankees. It's a very charming story, very charming film. We had a very good cast. A small group of boys who were excellent, really excellent, and an American actor whose name, unfortunately, I can't remember. He played the colonel in whose service they volunteer. There was one of those lines that I've been speaking about before, which becomes characteristic, and we quoted each other long afterwards, we quoted this, sort of, line. In that line, as he introduces himself to the boys, he explains why he limps, and he says, 'I got this ball in my leg. I got this ball in my leg'. And we were always saying, 'I got this ball in my leg'. Anyway, that was shot in two places, in Pennsylvania and in Upstate New York, in a place called Oneonta.
In Pennsylvania we found an iron village... iron smelting village which had been preserved as a, sort of, outdoor museum. We used that, which we also used on the next film. We also found another sort of... one of these outdoor museums, which exist in America, quite a few. And we used that, and then we moved to Oneonta and the bulk of the film, bulk of that film is shot in Oneonta. Then it has a coda afterwards. It's not... Not only is it called The Private History of a Campaign That Failed, which is quite a mouthful, but then it also... it says, and The War Prayer, because it has a sort of coda at the end which is called The War Prayer, which is shot in a church where Mark Twain's views about war and warfare are made plain. And they were quite strong. He was quite a strong pacifist.

The next film that we made was a year later again, was called Pudd'n'head Wilson. Again, a very nice Mark Twain story. I've got a... Lisa Hilboldt played the main actress in that film. And, I'll think of the name of the main actor in a minute. But that was shot in Harper's Ferry. Harper's Ferry is in the triangle where Virginia... West Virginia and Maryland meet. And, again, it's a sort of model village. It has pieces of it that you can use as period houses, very easily. We just had to put some gravel and some straw down for the road, which wouldn't have been asphalt at the time. But it was relatively easy to shoot there. We always get very good co-operation in America, almost everywhere. In New York it's phenomenal. In New York they, sort of, say, 'Is the lamppost in your way? We'll tear it'. 'No, no, the lamppost is fine, just leave it there'. Because a lot of these states have movie departments which are there to help movies being made, because they want to attract the trade into their State.
Again, the shooting in Harper's Ferry went extremely well. Wilson... the name of the main actor is something Wilson, Ken Wilson. He was very good. He is 6 ft 3, which produces a few problems, the worst instance of which happened in the Bostonians, where we had Christopher Reeve, who's sort of 6 ft 1, and Linda Hunt, who's 4 ft nothing. How do you a two-shot with those two people? But in... in Pudd'n'head Wilson it worked quite well. We had some quite tricky night scenes to do there where I combined day for night with real night and... tricky transitions, where there's an encounter in a little pavilion at night, and there's the... outside there's a sort of party going on. And for various reasons that had to be a mixture of day for night and real night, which sometimes happens. And not that easy to combine.
One of the downsides of my system is that you have to have a continuous sequence of some duration. You can't inter-cut it like shot-for-shot with real night, because it jumps, because the day for night is sort of greeny/bluish, in overall quality. If you inter-cut that with real night it doesn't look good, so you have to have a bit of a sustained sequence. So, if I remember rightly, those scenes in Pudd'n'head Wilson are a combination of dusk and real night, night for night. I don't think there's anything else about that particular film. It involved, again, quite a bit of riverside work and riverboat work. We were shooting on the edge of the water sometimes. And there's a sequence where I learnt the meaning of being sold down the river. That comes from that story, where you didn't sell slaves down the river where the... they'd be back in slavery again, if a slave had been freed. But then he gets into trouble and he's sold again. He's arrested and sold, and they send him down the river. My God, and in that film, it's his own mother who... no, he sells his own mother down the river. That's part of the story. But the collaboration with Peter Hunt on all those films was excellent and... yes, very, very enjoyable. They were all very enjoyable shoots.

The last one of those is called... is Huck Finn, Adventures of Huck Finn, which had been filmed 15 times already, I think. But that's a very nice version and we had Barnard Hughes and Jim Dale from England playing the couple of strolling players, who he runs across. And, we were shooting... that time we were shooting in Maysville, Kentucky. Our base was Maysville, Kentucky, which is an amazing piece of Midwest. If you shoot... If you stay any length of time in a place like Maysville, Kentucky, you realise really that if you only know New York and Los Angeles, you don't know America at all. A lot of America, the bulk of America is more like Maysville, Kentucky. And, there were three... again, the three... there were three opportunities to eat, in the hotel, in a local tavern, and somewhere else a little way away across the river in Ohio, because we were in Kentucky. But we were right on the edge. Maysville is on the border with Kentucky. There's a bridge over the Ohio River. And that time we were using the Ohio River to double for the Mississippi. And we spent a lot of time filming on the river, adjacent to the river, there was some night for night, there was some day for night. There was an extended sequence in a tank, which we had built in a local school, abandoned school. That was quite tricky. It was quite a big tank, and it was... but it was tricky working in there with the night for night. But in the end it was all very successful.
That film was being made on 35 mm. And that was also the occasion, I've already mentioned, where Lillian Gish played a small part. It's wonderful encountering people like that. Like you meet a piece of cinema history. Which also happened to be the first time. I think it was the first time I... yes, during The Wild Party, which I haven't mentioned yet, I was in LA for the first time and I was introduced... I went to the clubhouse of the American Society of Cinematographers, and I met all those people that I knew the names of, having photographed all those famous American movies of the '40s and '50s. And I knew them all by name, and here they all were, but they were all over 80, you know. This little man comes up and he says, 'I'm...' – and he has a nametag – and he says, 'I'm Harry Straddling, how do you do?' That was an extraordinary experience, meeting all these people in the flesh, so to speak. Lovely, really lovely. Quite unique. So it's lovely to meet... Not only was Lillian Gish in that film but also Butterfly McQueen.
Now, Butterfly McQueen is the Negro...
[Q] Prissy. 
The black girl who plays Chrissie in...
[Q] Prissy. 
No, but what part does she play?  One of her...
[Q] Yes, Prissy, in 'Gone With The Wind'. 
Oh, Prissy, in Gone with the Wind, yes. She's got this high pitched voice, usually playing comic characters, as black people usually did up to a certain point in time. They were always comic characters. And she'd fallen on hard times and was living in relative poverty and they dug her up somewhere, they found her somewhere, and she played a very nice little part in Huck Finn. So that's always very nice when you can... where you can do something like this. A little bit out of the ordinary. But it was a very long shoot and it was eventually... it was cut in... There were two versions. There was a two-hour theatrical version and a three-hour television version, both of which were shown.

I first met Ismail Merchant and James Ivory on the stage of the London Coliseum where the BFI, the British Film Institute, used to hold an annual Christmas party. That year they held it on the stage of the Coliseum. I was aware of their work, which up to that time comprised some four movies. The best one of which, or the best known, of which is Shakespeare Wallah of course. And, we had a chat and there was a lot of people there, so it didn't lead to anything immediately. But we established contact. And very shortly afterwards they asked me if I would like to make a documentary for... like to make a documentary with them. And, because by that time I was an established cinematographer, so people like Merchant Ivory and some others, they were a bit reluctant to ask because they thought they're not in my league, you know. They can't pay the sort of salary that they imagined I was getting, which wasn't necessarily the truth. But, I've always put it about the lot of, please don't hesitate to ask, because, generally speaking, I don't... I'm not a stickler for getting my... the salary that I got on the last big feature. So we got together and they proposed me the subject of... which was finally called Adventures of a Brown Man in Search of Civilisation, which is the... nice title. Which is the... It's a study of the Indian poet and writer, Nirad Chaudhuri who was, by then, close to 90. I think he lived to a hundred and something, subsequently. And he was a neat dresser and a little gentleman who had studied in Oxford and who was living, currently, in Oxford. And we went to Oxford and we did some interviews with him and we showed him going about his business and giving dinner parties, and generally going about... getting on with his life. That was made, I believe, for the BBC, I'm not sure. It was a television film; it was made on 16 mm. That then was the beginning of my 20-year-long collaboration with Merchant Ivory.

The next film we made... I made with Merchant Ivory was Savages. And Savages was Merchant Ivory's first American film. Because, up to that point, all their films had been made in India, and they lived in India. Merchant, of course, is Indian, and Ivory is American, born in Oregon. And Ivory had made a... James had made a documentary about Venice and a documentary about some Indian subject, Indian miniatures, I think, which is where he met Ivory... where he met Merchant, excuse me. And Savages was their first American production.
And for Savages the money was given by... provided by some Iranian financier, whose name is on the film. And it was made for a production company other than Merchant Ivory. That's to say jointly. That's very often the case. If you look at the titles, in the early days anyway, you would often see that it's a production... so and so production, Angelica, I think it was called in Savages, jointly with Merchant Ivory... in association with, all that sort of thing. Of course these days you frequently have eight associate producers and five executive producers. I always remind me... That always reminds me of the Olsen and Johnson joke, which is I think is somewhere in Hellzapoppin, where they have this long, long credit list where, everything is done by Olsen and Johnson, and then it says, directed by H E Potter, in brackets, a friend of Olsen and Johnson. The credits often remind me of that kind thing.

Savages has always remained to be one of my favourite movies because it can only be a film. It can not be a novel, it can not be a play, it can only be a film. And the genesis of that film is also very unusual. It came about because James stumbled on an old colonial mansion in Upstate New York, in a place called... tiny place called Scarborough, which is near Tarrytown. He stumbled across this ancient old American colonial mansion, the centre part of which is... dates back to 17-something. Really quite a long way. And not only was it still standing in reasonably good condition, but it was full of all sorts of props of the '20s, cutlery, and clothes, and costumes, and little dolls, and all sorts of junk. And, when they discovered that, they... he decided to write a script around... which is based on this house and was built around... it was build around the house. And that also makes it fairly unique.
And then he engaged two scriptwriters, who were James Trow and Michael... no, it wasn't Michael Moriarty. Anyway, the names we'll have to look up. But there were two separate scriptwriters who wrote different portions of that movie, which had a very simple basic story. It's the story of civilisation told in one day. These savages, which you see in the jungle, wearing mud masks, like they wear in... I believe it's based on the people... a tribe in New Guinea, and they wear these mud masks, and you discover them in the jungle doing their rituals and dancing around. And then they discover the house, to which they're led by the flight of a croquet ball, which arrives mysteriously in the jungle. It says, where spherical objects... perfectly spherical objects were unknown, something like that. And then they become civilised. They don their... they doff their masks and they put on dinner jackets and they give a dinner party. Every Merchant Ivory film has a dinner party in it, almost every one. And then things begin to go wrong. They become a bit decadent and there's a lot of talk about things going wrong generally in the world. There's a frenetic croquet match at the end, and then they all go back separately and severally into the jungle. That's the story. And it's all filmed in a light-hearted manner. It's not meant to be heavily symbolic.
Some critics, later on, after it was first shown, almost stubbornly refused to understand that film. They said it's all this heavy symbolism. There isn't any heavy symbolism, that's absolute nonsense. It's a story which you can follow very easily. It's not highbrow in any way, at all. But they, sort of, said: this is all symbolic stuff. And, a lot of people didn't understand it. They didn't because you couldn't say, 'What is this film about?'  Now, if you say it's about civilisation taking place in the course of one day, then of course it sounds heavily symbolic. So that doesn't describe it properly. So how do you describe it?  People... sometimes people fail to get the point because they can't just relax and sit back and watch the damn thing.
I was in a festival jury once in, I think it was in Poland, and there was a fellow cameraman, an English cameraman with me, and they showed a Slovenian... Slovakian or Slovenian... Slovakian, I think, television film which ends in an unexplained act of levitation. But it's a very funny comedy and it went very well... down very well with the audience there, but this friend of mine, I think it was Ronnie Taylor, was on the jury with me. And he came out absolutely furious, and he said, 'What is that all about?  Tell me what is this about?'  And I said, 'Well, isn't it obvious what it's about?'  He said, 'Well, what about this levitation thing?'  I said, 'Well, you know, you don't have to explain everything'.
I think Savages, very mysteriously, fell into a certain sort of vacuum hole between explainable subjects. And it was never shown on television. They offered it to... They offered Savages to the BBC, and at that time, I think Channel 4 hadn't started. But it was offered to television and it was turned down, and it was turned down in America, and in England it was turned down again after 20 years. But when you consider all the rubbish that they do show, quite happily, on television, that is a bit extraordinary, because it's a remarkable film. They have all these film clubs explained by Derek Malcolm and God knows who, and it never... it was never expected, because... never accepted for television.

						Anyway, the shooting of "Savages" took place in this house, in and around this house. And the opening sequence is in, what seems to be, a jungle nearby, which is actually a New England wood nearby. I suggested to James that we should make it in three parts. That it should open in black and white, then go into sepia, as they discover the house, and then go into colour. And it's like that. He accepted that idea, and that was nice- that was a good idea, I think, aesthetically as well as practically. Because to make a New England wood appear like a jungle, tropical jungle, is much easier in black and white than it would be in colour. I think you'd be more aware that the nature of the plants isn't what it should be. But we got away with that beautifully, and I decided to shoot that in a slightly overexposed way. So you have this very hot sunlight filtering through the branches, but only just. And I dug up the only remaining rolls, in the country, of a Kodak film material, a negative, which had already been suspended. It was discontinued. It was called Panatomic X, and it existed- for some time after that it existed as stills film. In fact, as movie film it had a different name. But they discontinued it. I dug up some rolls of this, because that film, like the Ilford, what's it called, the Ilford one is called Pan F, the Ilford Pan F, and that film had a lot in common. They were the same speed, 16, 16 to daylight and they had beautiful highlight detail, so it was very suitable for this jungle atmosphere with the overexposed sunlight filtering through the trees. And then you have this- so you have this tribe of people marching through the jungle, processing through the jungle, and they find a girl, who is a member of another tribe and they capture her. And then they discover the house. But this whole first section is- was edited by James in a way that looks like a silent movie, and it was intercollated with silent movie-style inter-titles, not subtitles, but inter-titles, like in a silent movie. And- so it says something- When they capture this girl it says something like, a member of another tribe, possibly a seed masher, something like that. There's one or two bits of that which I found a little- a little, tiny bit pretentious, but okay, it's no big deal. Anyway, they're on their way to the sacrifice where it explains that the queen takes a new consort every year, and the old consort has to die, so he's taken to a particular place of sacrifice and a great big boulder is dropped on his head, and that's that. And they're on their way to that and he's tied up to this tree and the boulder is raised, and in that moment, suddenly a croquet ball appears in the landscape. And I believe there are three coloured shots- there're three shots in colour of this croquet ball, slow motion, slowly descending on the landscape, then falling to the ground in front of the high priestess, who later becomes the hostess of the dinner party. And- and she picks up this croquet ball and there's this title which says, in the jungle where perfect spheres are unknown, the arrival of the croquet ball causes a bit of a stir, something like that. So she picks up the croquet ball, and the croquet ball seems to want to pull her, to lead her somewhere. So she follows the lead and they discover the house. Then at the moment- The house has a heavy wooden front door with two parts, two wings, and its all covered in cobwebs. And at the moment when they push the door, and the two wings of the door open, and from that moment on we go into sepia. And then the first section, as they roam through the house and discover all these props, all the masks and dolls and clothes, and God knows what, spectacles; there were lots of different spectacles. And they put them on and they- gradually they doff them. They break- the masks are broken and there's quite a nice shot where the high priestess, sort of, hits herself on the forehead and the mask cracks, and she peels it off. Then there's a certain amount of split-screen work, which is done in the editing, where there's a multiple image on the screen. That's one of the multiple images where they all peel off their masks, and become- slowly become civilised. And then, then it goes into colour. It's divided into chapters which are headed with inter-titles. There's one inter-title which says, the dinner party. By that time they've really developed quite a bit. They've become fairly civilised and they give dinner parties. And that in itself was quite interesting to shoot. Not easy, because I only had an Elemak and a jib arm which is like a primitive crane. A very small primitive crane. And I was operating myself and there's a shot in there which was quite tricky to execute, where the croquet ball, which they've placed on the base of a statue they find in one of the rooms, as a sort of religious shrine. Some of the savages are more religious than others. When they're asked to come to the sacrifice, some just sort of say, none of that. So this croquet ball mysteriously jumps off its pedestal, and rolls down through the hallway and down the stairs, into the dining room. And everything, kind of, stops. There's a sort of frozen moment. I had to do a shot following croquet ball along the floor and then panning and tilting off it and across all the faces. Across the backs of the people on the dining table on one side, looking at them on the other. They're all, kind of, frozen there. There's a frozen moment. And I remember that being quite a difficult- quite a difficult shot, because that type of jib arm, you can't sit on it, you have to operate it and as it- it has two swinging motions, which are independent of each other. You can pan and tilt the camera on its head, but you can also tilt and raise and lower the jib arm. And I had somebody operating that, as one does, but it's a tricky bit of co-ordination to get that right.
					
There's lovely dialogue in that film. The hostess, for instance, to break the silence which this incident causes, says to the English woman... There's an English woman in the... among the dinner party guests, called Lady Cora. Sir Nigel and Lady Cora, two English people. And the hostess, in order to break the spell says, 'Do you know... do you happen to know, Lady Cora, the meaning and derivation of the term bric-a-brac?' And Lady Cora says, As a matter of fact, I do'. And then she turns and says to her neighbour and says, 'Damn, stupid question'. It's full of stuff like that. It's really a laugh.
The script for that was being written by these two people, who were writing quite independently, and they were continuing to write while we were filming. And some of the stuff that was coming out, they said, 'You know, we're going to insert this into the film, was very complicated'. Like there was a scene that was written subsequently where there's supposed to be a movie projector running, unattended, in one of the rooms with a loop of film. And of course, not only do you have to film that, but you also have to film the film that is going to be projected. So I said, 'Look, you know, we've got five weeks, but how are we going to do all this? We've got our hands full up to now', as it is now. And there was a moment when we... we'd walk in... we came back to our hotel, we were staying in a sort of small hotel somewhere along Route 90, or whatever it is up there, and once we came back from work and all the luggage was piled up in the car park. Because the owner, who hadn't been paid, looked up, sort of, found out... he said, 'What is the credit rating of this company?', and the answer came back, the credit rating of this company doesn't exist, it's zero. So they put all our luggage in the car park and we couldn't get into our rooms till he came up with some cash. But he did. Also the salaries were late one week and the... Merchant, who wasn't providing the money, he was just instrumental in providing the money, said to this electrician, Bobby Vee, a lovely man... His name is Robert Vercruse, but he's known to everybody as Bobby Vee. He came to Ismail, and Ismail said, 'Look I've never welched on anybody, don't worry, it'll be perfectly all right, I guarantee you the money will be found immediately'. And Bobby said, 'Look, Izzy' – he called him Izzy, which Ismail disliked intensely – he said, 'Look, Izzy, don't take it personal, but you see, I have this framed cheque on my wall'.

The assistant director quit after one week because it was much too difficult, and for a while I was, effectively, the AD. Eventually they found somebody else. But there weren't... again, it's one of those occasions where there weren't a lot of experienced people around, so I ended up all sorts... wearing all sorts of hats, apart from being the lighting cameraman and the operator. Because they had a wonderful cast of some 20 people, all from the New York stage. When we finished a scene like a piece of the dinner party, or some other scene, they all wondered off into the garden. And I said, 'Whoa, whoa, just a minute, you know, this is the end of this scene, but we've got to go straight on with the next scene. We can't have a long break, we can't afford the time'. So I ended up wearing that hat as well, which became a bit irksome at times. The film was finished on budget and whatever... on schedule and whatever budget there was, because usually Ismail's budgets were something written on the back of an envelope. I don't believe there were any... you know, those budgets they issue, printed forms which go into 27 pages. Never saw anything like that on any Merchant Ivory film. It was always, usually, in my experience, it was a back of the envelope calculation.

A month or so after I came back from the shooting of Savages to England, I received a letter from the secretary of the English union, the ACTT, from George Elvin, who was a good friend, who knew me very well, let's say, to say that they'd received a letter from the American union, the IATSE, sometimes called the IA, which is the main American union, both in Hollywood and New York, although they're separately organised, to complain about me. Because that's very interesting, putting the whole thing in perspective. I'll just read you... I'll read you it. I just need to do that.
'Dear Brother Elvin, it saddens me to have to write to you about one of your honoured members, Walter Lassally. Brother Lassally came to the United States to work on a feature picture called The Savages. He never contacted the union and furthermore, he worked completely non-union. He had no operative cameraman and his assistant, or focus puller, also worked as his electrician. As you are aware, the purpose of unions is to maintain wages and working conditions. If Lassally...' – no longer Mr. Lassally – 'if Lassally, or Brother, if Lassally belonged to this local union, he would be brought up on charges for causing his brother members to lose work and for violating our working conditions. I hope your organisation will take appropriate action against Brother Lassally. Best wishes and kind regards, yours sincerely and fraternally, Harvey Genkins Business Representative, IATSE Local 644'.
And then I replied: 'Dear George, Thank you for letting me have a copy of the letter you received from the IATSE regarding my work on Savages. I won't take up his points in detail as he doesn't have all his facts straight, but just comment on the principle. There is a cinema of ideas as well as a cinema of employers and unions, and just as unions exist to maintain wages and working conditions in the industry, films like Savages exist, fortunately, but very precariously, to ensure the continuance of the cinema of ideas, without which, in my opinion, the industry would soon die. You have known me long enough to be sure that I would not dream of working in the USA, or anywhere else for that matter, in circumstances where there was even the slightest danger that I was poaching work from local colleagues or undercutting their working conditions. In New York, as Mr. Genkins must surely be aware... must be aware, there exists a whole parallel industry of non-union, so-called non-union, in quotes, productions, which in practice, often employ a large proportion of members of the NABET Union, and if this state of affairs is not to the liking of Mr. Genkins, I suggest he looks at the attitude and record of his own Local, which will not even accept a member of the Hollywood Local of his own union, for example, if he wishes to understand how such a state of affairs came about in the first place. I hope you will be good enough to forward a copy of this letter to Brother Genkins. With all good wishes, your sincerely, Walter Lassally'.
And I never heard any more about this matter. But subsequently, on the next... I never heard any more about this matter, but on the next film, Merchant Ivory film, through another set of circumstances, I actually joined the NABET Union. I was a member of the NABET Union for all the work that I did... during all the work that I did in the '80s, because... in the late '70s and '80s... because the NABET Union, which had come out... come into filming, TV mainly, out of broadcasting, it was basically a broadcasting union, and it became quite strong as an organiser of people in the film industry on low-budget productions. A lot of people worked... There's quite a few NABET pictures.

They went on to the editing in the States. And about nine to ten months after the shooting finished, I was just about... I was expecting a call that I should go over there and doing the grading. I got the call and I went over there and they had... Ismail in his usual way had taken the cheapest laboratory that he could find, and there's quite a few good laboratories in New York, but he decided not to use... the laboratory, which, as far as I could discover, the only thing remotely like a feature film, that they'd done up to that point, were Mexican porno movies. And, I went there and we had terrible trouble. Because certain faults that there were, instead of correcting the individual scene... Well, there were certain reels that had an overall colour cast, like the whole reel was slightly too green. It was something to do with the processing, not to do with the individual shots. So they started correcting the individual shots. And I said, no you mustn't do that because then you will end up with the same problem when you put the whole reel... when the whole reel is correctly processed, then it'll all be wrong again in relation to the other reels. And we made copy after copy after copy and eventually the owner of the lab came... went to Ismail Merchant and said, 'Well, surely that's all right'. He said, 'What're you trying to do, bankrupt me?' And we ended up with something that was less than perfect, but we had to accept it.
At the same time Ismail suddenly said, probably a day or two before I actually left London, Ismail said, we're going to use the opportunity of your being in the States to take a few extra shots. Well the few extra shots ended up being half the movie, about, I should think, about 10 minutes of the movie is shot 10 months later, completely separately. The whole of the cellar sequence was very much extended. The sequence with the little train, that was all done subsequently, and several other bits and pieces were shot 10 months after the main movie was shot. But I think the result... I think in the end, the result is very satisfactory and, as I said, it became one of my great favourites, as a movie.  And it was shown at Cannes.  And then it was shown at Cannes, not in the festival, but as... there was a special kind of showing in a little cinema in the old town. There was a tremendous... it was quite a small cinema and there was a tremendous crush trying to get in there. Kate, who was in there, trying to get into the performance, was poked in the stomach by, with an umbrella by some French critic trying to get in. They nearly broke the doors down. They had double glass doors and they took them off their hinges trying to get in to see that movie.

The next movie I made with Merchant Ivory was Autobiography of a Princess, which was a semi-documentary, because Ismail Merchant had found... he was a good friend of the Maharaja of Jodhpur, and he'd found, in the archives, a lot of footage. The Maharaja of Jodhpur, the father of the present Maharaja, had a German cameraman who was part of the palace staff, and he shot a lot of footage of Durbars and pig-sticking and elephant hunts, and God knows what. And all this stuff was lying in the cellar in the palace in Jodhpur.
Ismail came across it and had a look at it and he decided that this could form the basis of another movie. He wrote... Ruth Prawer Jhabvala wrote... their regular scriptwriter, wrote a framing story in which this daughter of this Maharaja is living in London in a little flat in Notting Hill Gate, which was very conveniently across the road from where I was living. And she invites to an annual... there's an annual event where she invites her father's old tutor to have tea or lunch... no, tea, to invite them to tea. This is a sort of annual ritual that happens. And they set up a projector, in readiness for his visit, and they run this material, and he remembers how it all was, because this material was filmed when he was the tutor for the maharaja, for her father. And he was played by James Mason. So this was a little vignette. All the shooting that we actually did was done in a week, or maybe it was 10 days, in this little flat in Notting Hill Gate, and Madhur Jaffrey who played the princess, with whom I worked three or four times, had this magnificent jewellery on her, which was completely real. There were two security guards on the set all the time, because she was wearing something like a million pounds worth of real jewellery. Which, of course, in a film, paste would be just as good. But Ismail does things like that. Then he can write an article through the local newspaper and say, you know, she's wearing real jewellery, which he managed to borrow. It was amazing the things Ismail managed to do. And we had a very pleasant week's filming with James Mason. That all went extremely well and he played that beautifully. A really beautifully judged performance.

The next film we made was The Wild Party in 1974 which was the... which starred Raquel Welch, subsequently, but Raquel Welch was not cast until about a fortnight before I was due to go over there to make the movie. When I heard on the telephone that she was cast, I said, 'Oh no, my God', you know, 'no end of trouble'. He said, 'No, no, we're very lucky' because, as she has agreed to do the film, we get a lot of extra money, and I said, 'All right, well, you'll see, it's not quite as you think it's going to be'. And, anyway, so that was a fait accompli.
The leading man was James Coco who plays this silent movie comedian. Again, quite interestingly, the script is based on a long narrative poem by James Moncure March, which in itself is based on some wild party that they had in Hollywood where some girl was killed accidentally and the... Fatty Arbuckle was the character on whom James Coco's part in that movie is based. So we arrived in Hollywood and moved into our various hotels. And then we were invited to a dinner in a local restaurant to meet Raquel Welch. And I was there with Kate and James, of course, and Ismail, they were all there and formal hellos were exchanged, formal greetings were exchanged. And then Kate, rather... slightly teasingly said to Raquel Welch, 'I hear you had a lot of trouble on your last movie, Raquel Welch'. And Raquel said, 'Trouble? I never have trouble. I call my lawyer every day'. And Kate kicked Ismail under the table, to see what he was in for, to give him an indication what was in store.
And the first week went beautifully well. We did, sort of, various bits and pieces, run-by in the Hollywood Hills and along the seashore, and little bits and pieces. A scene outside Max Factor's office, I seem to remember. And then came the eve of the first big scene. And we rehearsed it and everything seemed to be perfectly okay. We all went to bed and at six o'clock in the morning she rang up James Ivory and said, 'Look, James, I've decided I don't want to play this scene the way we rehearsed it last night'. And she said – and I remember this specifically – she said, 'I want to sit there, I want to put my feet on the table and spit grape pips into a spittoon'. And James at, sort of, six o'clock in the morning... you know, that's not exactly the message you want to wake up to. But from that moment on it was all downhill. She wouldn't do what she was asked to do. And she had to be argued out of it, and they were endless arguments, and it got worse and worse and worse and worse, and reached a...
And then the producers came, the other producers, you know, the official producers, which was Angela Lansbury's brother, I believe, Edgar Lansbury, was the... and somebody called Beruh, they were the official producers. They came and said, 'Look, look, treat her like a spoilt child, you know, like a...' and I said, 'I don't think that's a very good idea, but okay, if that's what you want'. They said, 'No, you must treat her very gently, otherwise she'll walk off'. Well, we treated her very gently and she still walked off. And a whole book's been written about that, so I won't go into that... won't go on about that endlessly. But it was very hard for me because I very often found myself in the middle, because, for one thing, James is not good at dealing with strong women. And, I found a sort of modus vivendi. I used to say, 'Raquel, so you're trying to direct the picture...' and I said, 'No, I'm just trying to get James what he wants'. I used to say, 'Raquel, would you mind standing over there, love', which nobody can really object to. So we found a kind of way of going on. But it was very tentative and very difficult.
And every time I see that film, I can't believe that we made that film in the time that we did. It's like a huge epic. Also, I forgot to say in... for Savages, in the middle of Savages, I found myself photographing a musical number which they'd added. And I said, 'Look, we haven't got the equipment to do justice to such a thing, all we've got is this little Elemack with the jib arm'. But we did it. And again, in The Wild Party, we were often in that situation. We did things with two cameras when Raquel... several times, when Raquel sings Singapore Sally and when they have a big dance number in the garden. It's largely improvised. We had two cameras, but we didn't have two camera crews. I just put my... I didn't have an operator anyway because I was operating myself, so I put my focus puller on the movable camera, and the fixed camera, the long-shot camera, was just running by itself, virtually. So very often we were really stretched to the limit. That film was all made in The Mission Inn in Riverside, which is a landmark building, and it contained all the necessary. There's a big chapel in it, which is like a huge church, actually, and the room which turned into the dining room come projection room, and all that was already in there, in some cases, with the necessary props. But it was very, very hard going for me and it was... as I say, I was astonished. Every time I see that film, I was astonished that we actually managed to finish it in a reasonably fast time. I think 36 days, something like that. It's amazing, it's absolutely amazing.

Yes, poor Perry King, who plays the boy that Raquel's supposed to be madly in love with. At the peak of her being difficult, she wouldn't even look at him. So there's this poor boy trying to play his scene and Raquel won't even look at him. It's very sad. And then she changed... it all changed again. During post-production... oh yes, she walked off and then she said to James, 'You must apologise, I'll come back if you apologise'. And she came back and they arranged this public apology in front of everybody, which the sound recordist recorded, so that exists somewhere. That whole tape exists, where James says, 'Listen everybody, just come a moment and listen. If I offended... Raquel, if offended you in any way yesterday, I am sincerely sorry, and I apologise unreservedly', or something, it was all written down, what he had to say. Then Raquel said, 'I accept your apology', and just shook hands and the whole thing took off again.
But it wasn't... but that wasn't the end of it. She continued to be difficult and then she changed sides completely. At the end of the film when the film was finished and being edited, then she... the producers tried to take the film away from James and re-edit it and then Raquel changed sides and said, 'If you do that I won't do any publicity for you'. But it was re-edited and it was shown in London in its re-edited version, and they made a complete hash of it, and of course, it died after one week. Of course, in many cases, when that happens, when they re-edit a film to make it more commercial, it doesn't do anything of the kind. Then, of course, there's the question of sneak previews, which I don't think that film underwent, actually. But on a later Merchant Ivory film I shall talk about sneak previews, because they were absolutely disastrous. And they're something the Hollywood people believe in like it was the bible. Absolutely extraordinary.

There's a lovely minute in the film where the performance of his new movie, of James Coco's new movie, or rather Jolly Grim's new movie, doesn't go down terribly well and he's terribly worried and he's sitting outside by the little fountain in the courtyard, and Raquel comes out and tries to, sort of, comfort him, and says, 'Do you know, I think it'll be all right'. And he turns on her and he says, 'I don't care a flying fart what you think!'  And we all went...  That movie has some black and white sections in it because we had to film, of course... his film, the film that he was making and showing and premiering, in black and white, and black and white became more and more difficult... Right through the '70s and into the early '80s it became more and more difficult to find the film stock, to get it processed, to find cameras that would run it properly.
And in that particular case, we had a contract with Panavision and they supplied the main camera, and we asked them to supply a couple of wild Arri's, which existed in their care. And the moment we put black and white film in there they jammed immediately. I discovered why that was... was because they had been adapted to run at high speed and that meant certain adjustments to the gate, and they wouldn't... black and white film stock is a different thickness to the colour film stock, so they wouldn't run black and white film stock. We had to... we ended up with some very old Arri, which somebody had, fairly clapped out old thing, which was just perfect for filming those so-called... supposedly silent movie epics... sections, which, I think we filmed them at 16 frames as well. I'm not sure, but I think we did. But it was getting more and more difficult. The lab... I remember the lab in Hollywood would only process that particular... we found a lab that would process black and white, but only once a week, so that it was beginning to become a problem. Black and white was beginning to become a problem.
And in anyway, Hollywood was a disappointment to me, because I thought if I went to Hollywood that would be the mecca of all filmmakers and all the rental suppliers and all the equipment stuff would be perfect, and it wasn't like that at all. To me, Hollywood, first of all, was incredibly shabby. The town of Hollywood is incredibly shabby and the rental suppliers were not a patch on what was going on in London at the same time. The London companies... rental companies were much more efficient than the American ones. So that was a bit of a surprise to me.

						The next Merchant Ivory film was called "Hullabaloo Over Georgie and Bonnie's Pictures", and we couldn't persuade James that that wasn't a very good title. So it stuck. That was made in India on 16mm and it was financed by the South Bank Show, which was a British Television show directed by Melvyn Bragg. James became friendly with Melvyn and they arranged it. It was actually made in such a way that it could be shown on two separate Sundays or Saturdays- it could be shown on two separate Saturdays as part of the South Bank Show. There was the first part of dramatic action and the second part of dramatic action and the link between the two were the pictures, which are mentioned in the title, which are actually Indian miniatures. The whole thing is written around these Indian miniatures and their discovery and their sale, and Peggy Ashcroft plays an English dealer who is interested in them. There's- Larry Pine plays an American dealer. There's a lot of competition, they're trying to get their hands on these miniatures which have never been seen in public, or not for a long time. That's basically the plot of the film. When the unions at London Weekend Television, which was the home of- when the unions at London Weekend Television, which is the home of the South Bank Show, discovered that this film was being made, and it was a location job, which they considered to be a bonus, and they weren't going to get any of the action, they were absolutely furious, but they couldn't do anything about it. Ismail, again, very cleverly outmanoeuvred all that. And then once it had been shown on television, on those two separate Saturdays, they just joined it up in the middle and it became a feature. And lo and behold. Very clever. But it's a nice movie and it was my second film with Peggy Ashcroft, who had quite a- she had quite a lot of trouble adapting to the Third World. I think it was her first experience of the Third World. And getting stuck in a taxi in the middle of Jodhpur with one-eyed beggars sticking their leprosied arms in the window for alms, that was not very- she didn't react to that very well. But she coped with it and it was okay in the end. And we filmed in the beautiful Jodhpur Palace. We were also living there. It was all fairly simple with limited means, and sometimes we were a bit short of lighting facilities. Because there were some quite big interiors in there, on not very fast material. The Eastman colour of that time wasn't very fast. So at times I was a bit stretched. And there were also frequent power cuts. Very frequent power cuts. I remember there's one scene in that film which is an interior, but because of power cuts, it's lit entirely through the windows with reflectors. But it worked. And- For that film, we had to more or less smuggle in the equipment because it was made at a point in time when Louis Malle had just made his Indian film, Louis Malle's India, and the Indian authorities went mad because they thought that he showed all the things about India that they weren't very keen on. And from that moment on, if you just mentioned the word television, you got thrown out immediately, without any further questions being asked. So Ismail said- no, it'll be all right, I'll be there at the airport. We had to go in through Bombay, although we were shooting near Delhi, in Rajahsthan, which is much nearer Delhi. But he said- no, in Bombay I know the people in the airport there and I'll be there to help you through the airport. And, of course, when they actually came to it, he wasn't very much help. He was just shouting encouragement from across the barrier, but Kate coped with all that. She simply said- I'm making a personal film for the Maharaja of Jodhpur and this is my private equipment, my personal equipment, it's not a public film, it's a private film being made for the maharaja. And she got away with it. They more or less swallowed that. Then we had a long train journey from Bombay to Rajahstan because it's a long way away. And when the film was finished and she had to take the material out, it was largely- again, because there's a rule in India that you can't export any film shot in India unless some government representative was present during the shooting. And we didn't have anybody present during the shooting, so again, it was Kate who smuggled the negative out, among her underwear. But it all worked in the end. The film was successfully completed.

You mentioned something about the camera overheating and something about a man with a key.

Right. At the end- the film was made between February and April and towards the end, in the first few days of April, it got very, very hot and the camera reacted badly. The camera jammed, in fact, and wouldn't run. And we had to take it indoors and lay ice packs all over it in order for it to cool down sufficiently to operate again. And we only just managed to finish it. It became- it caused more and more frequent breakdowns because the heat was getting to the camera. We were using an Éclair NPR  which normally functions perfectly well, but in those hot conditions it didn't function very well. And- and also, a similar thing happened there to the- we having to pay a bribe for the last batch of rushes, but instead of that, we were shooting. Some of the last shooting we did was on the Royal Train. The last time we came do the- finish the shooting on the Royal Train, suddenly the man with the key wasn't there. I said, - the man with the key. Where is he? Well, he's gone on holiday. But again, it was just a matter paying the requisite bribe, then he returned from holiday and we could finish the film.
					
						The next film I made with them was "Heat and Dust", which was a major production. And, it came to me while I was working in Zimbabwe. They asked me to do that. It came immediately afterwards, and I was very glad to be working with them again. Because there'd been a bit of a pause, something like four years, in fact. "Heat and Dust" was made in Hyderabad in the south of India, or central south of India, I suppose. Again, we used the maharaja's palace that- or the Nawab's palace that Ismail was successful in arranging for us. No studio scenes. All on location. Quite tricky lighting jobs with minimum equipment, as before. Something like- by that time, though, HMI lights had been developed and I had- I think I had four HMI lights of different sizes, one of which packed up in the second week and couldn't be replaced until much later, so we had to make do with only one 4k HMI. I think we had one 4k, three 175s and two 500W ones. Not 175s, sorry. We had two 4ks, three 1250s and three 500s and two 200W ones which can also operate on a battery, and was useful for car shots and stuff like that. And we had a complement of tungsten lighting. The HMI lighting was mainly used for daylight stuff, daytime scenes. Again, it was used largely reflected, in a reflective mode. That was the first Indian film that I was able to use HMI lights on, because they'd only just been invented. And they come in very handy because they give you a lot of light for very little current output- input. The story of "Heat and Dust" is in two parts. There are two stories which are inter-linked. One is- takes place in the 1920s and the other one is contemporary. When we were discussing how to treat this photographically, I persuaded James- I was able to persuade James to leave that differentiation to me, and I would do it in a subtle way. I wouldn't do it in a slightly crude way by putting on a filter for the 20s sequence and not putting on a filter for the 80s sequence. So the whole film, as all my other films of that period, I shot through some form of net or some form of star filter, which the- later replaced the net, but served the same purpose. And that net is on- net or star filter, is on every shot, regardless of whether it's a close-up or a long shot, or whatever. And that worked very successfully. I was very happy with the results, because it pastelises the colour and, at the same time, diffuses the image just slightly, which is particularly important in period films. So I could've said, right, I'll use the star filter, or the net, on the period sections, but not on the contemporary sections, but I didn't want to do that because I felt that photography without this filter looked awfully crude, and I didn't want anything to look like that. It looked very picture-postcardy, very contrasty. So I said, well, you leave it to me and with a little bit of luck, it should be okay. So, we just- I just put it at the back of mind and when we were shooting the 1920s sequence, if I saw a very exaggerated colour or a lot of contrast, I panned off it or I kept it out of the frame, or whatever. Not all the scenes in this 20s section are very pastel. There are scenes with a whole lot of women wearing very colourful saris, but that was appropriate to the scene. So it's really what I've just said, it's really putting a concept at that back of your mind and then dealing with it if something goes against that concept. And luck plays a big part. There are scenes where the same building plays two functions. The house that is the bungalow which Greta Scacchi occupies in the 20s section, is all- is the place where the- where the- Julie Christie's landlord works in the 1980s section. As luck would have it, the day we photographed the 1920s bit, it was misty and it was a little more pastel than the day when we photographed the 1980 thing. But, you can't plan for that and you can't wait for that, unless you have an awful lot of time or money, which we never did have. So a little bit of luck is an essential ingredient. And of course, those two scenes were separated by some months, because we did all- let's see, I think we did all Greta's scenes first and then Greta and Julie only met up for one day, actually. Greta left and Julie arrived, or the other way around. Except for the Kashmir section where they came back again to meet for that one shot, near the end of the film where they're all in the same shot. But usually, of course, they didn't meet because they were living in different periods. So we shot all the Julie Christie stuff and then we shot all the Greta Scacchi stuff. It was Greta's second film. She'd only made one minor film before that, which I think was an Italian film, because she's of Italian origin. She was very, very good. I liked her very much. Her playing was very good. The atmosphere in that film was very nice. But it wasn't always easy. It had easy bits and it had a lot of difficult bits as well.
					
It occurred to me, both during the preparation and making of the film, and a lot of times afterwards, that there's a very significant difference between the look of Heat and Dust and the look of, say, Ghandi or Jewel in the Crown, because Ghandi and Jewel in the Crown are, to my mind, Pinewood films made on location. Their technique consists in going to an area, taking all the natural people out, all the inhabitants out of it, roping it off, filling it with their own extras. So it's like the film shot on the back lot at Pinewood. And it doesn't have at all the same atmosphere that Heat and Dust had. Where we very frequently filmed in the... well, quite frequently filmed in the bazaars and in the streets, in Hyderabad and elsewhere.
I used my technique again, of having the Arriflex behind my back and saying, 'Look, you stand there', you know, 'you hide round the corner there', because a white face is enough to cause a crowd, particularly if it's Julie Christie, let alone if it's Julie Christie. So I'd used that same technique, say, 'Look, I will come to this point here and you come to that point there, and when you see me putting the camera to my eye, you start your action'.
And we did some tracking shots through the bazaar there, with... all the people that you see are the people who are actually there. They're not extras. You get one or two people looking at the camera, but it's not impossible at all. It gives it a very natural feeling. And it's a hand-held tracking shot, it worked perfectly well. And then there's another shot in the bazaar, treated in a slightly different way, where the landlord and Julie are walking through the bazaar and we were in a rickshaw. We were hidden in a rickshaw, and tracking ahead of them, and simultaneously it was covered with a long lens from a window at the back. And that, again, that worked very well. But you can only do it once, then the crowd gather so you have to pretend that you're finished, even if you haven't finished, and go away and do something else, and then two hours later you can do it again. But you can't work all day. You have to plan it carefully, very meticulously, and you... basically you can only do it once, so you have to be very well prepared and, hopefully, you can get it done. But the separation into... by the style of the photography in the '20s and '80s sections, that worked very well. To my mind, when I see that film now, that worked extremely well, without having any crude separation method, like the use or not use of a certain filter.

We had a very nice cast. Apart from Julie Christie and Greta Scacchi, we had Shashi Kapoor whose an old friend of the Merchant Ivory's, and... Of the Merchant Ivory's, yes, the Merchant and Ivory. And Madhur Jaffrey, of course, plays his mother and...  Sue Fleetwood.  And Susan Fleetwood plays one of the... she plays the... what do they call it?  The memsahib, the town memsahib. Yes, a very nice cast collection. Of course... Nickolas Grace, of course, very good indeed. But there were problems.
There were times when the actors were not getting paid and the agents were sending telegrams, which sometimes arrived and sometimes didn't arrive, telexes. And when they did arrive, Ismail, with Kate's help, used to intercept them and tear them up in the basement, while he phoned frantically to see what he could do to get some more money flowing. Because Ismail usually operated by starting the shooting at the point when sufficient people had promised him the money. Not when it was in his hands. So, almost always, in the end of the first week of shooting, there was a tremendous crisis because all the money had run out. Same thing happened on The Bostonians. Anyway, we got through it and nobody left. Barry Foster and Nickolas Grace, there were a hairy moments when they realised they weren't getting paid.

There was a section in London which was filmed subsequently. Actually, that house that appears in the London section, in the English section of the movie, is actually the home of John Murray, the publisher, who was Ruth Prawer Jhabvala's publisher, and the film is organised from a desk and a telephone in Murray's office. At that time Merchant Ivory didn't even have an office in England, or anywhere. Yes, they had an office in Bombay but that wasn't a great deal of use... great deal of help. So, John Murray, who also became a good friend and who later published my book, for which many thanks, became a friend. And the English section, which was filmed subsequently, also included some shots in Richmond Park, and they were done much later. They were done when the film was almost completely edited. I got a phone call one day where James noted that Ismail had hired a camera and me, in order to film Mahmud Sipra, the shipping tycoon, who had ambitions to become an actor. And I later had new contact with him when he was the producer, or the co-producer, of the film... the ill-fated film, The Bengal Lancers which was started but never finished.
Well, prior to that I had filmed his test, where he just invited us to come to his somewhat palatial office in Mayfair, and filmed him at his daily task, with two telephones and sort of saying: yes, right, well if you can't get through this so and so, divert that bulk loader from Hong Kong to Singapore, yes, well, if the price drops below 300 a ton, then buy. You know, that kind of thing. And we were just there, with a full crew. We had a camera, an assistant and a sound man and assistant, and at the end of the shoot, we were all handed a little brown envelope with 500 or some pounds in it, anyway, quite a lot of money, and that's how I got to know Mahmud Sipra. But James got word of it, you see, that we were doing this shooting, and he said: I desperately need a few calm scenes of a river flowing or some trees waving in the breeze, or something like that, to represent England, which, at the point when they're sitting there in India during a sand storm, and she plays Schubert... Schumann, and I want to inter-cut these scenes. So I said, 'Well, yes, God, we've only got the camera for one day, and there was never anymore money to hire another... for more time'. So I said, 'Well, the only place I can think of we can possibly do it, within easy reach of London, is Richmond Park'. Where... I'd grown up in Richmond, so I knew about Richmond Park. But it had changed considerably in that period.
So we went off to Richmond Park. I went off to Richmond Park with one assistant, and dodging the police, because you're not... let alone shooting, you're not even allowed to stop. All the roads to Richmond Park are lined with yellow lines, you're not even supposed to stop except in the designated parking areas. So, with the police, sort of, on our tail, we found four angles which look beautifully peaceful. But I laugh every time I see that. I have to smile every time I see that stuff because I know that just out of frame to the left is a busy motorway, and just over the skyline to the right are some skyscrapers poking up above the trees. It was all just so, and we got it by the skin of our teeth, because before we were finally told we really have to leave. But it's in the movie. Those four shots are in the movie.

By that time, I had assembled a crew in India which was the only crew in India which worked permanently for Merchant Ivory, because they did a certain amount of local shooting, commercials and a certain amount of stuff. So I had gathered together a crew in India that were the only crew resident in India that were familiar with Western ways of shooting. Because, although India has a large film industry, it's almost entirely confined to the studios, in Bombay and elsewhere, and all they do on location is what they call picturising the songs, which we would call playback, shooting to playback. They call it picturising the songs. And they send the crew off to Kashmir... for instance, we met a crew in Kashmir who were doing that and just that. But otherwise they are not used to working on location. Certainly not used to shooting location interiors. Nobody knows how to do that in India. And I had the only crew gathered together by then, who knew something about that, the grips and electricians, who were efficient at managing that kind of shoot. They were the only ones in the whole of India.

The shot that I always wished had been the end of the film, is a very, very tricky mirror shot, you could call it. It's looking into a window in Kashmir. This is part of the Kashmir sequence, which forms the end of the movie. And there is one shot in the whole film where Shashi and Greta and Julie Christie are actually in the same shot. It's a shot in the latter period of the relationship between Greta and the maharaja... not the maharaja, the nawab. It's in their latter period where she has this little house in the hills, somewhere in the hills, and he comes to visit her every now and then, and there's a piano which you see being delivered, which he's ordered for her. And they're sitting there and she's playing the piano and he's drinking a cup of tea. And, the shot is shot through the window of the little cottage, and reflected in the window are the Himalayas in all their glory, covered in snow, at a brightness of T32, or something. And there inside, lit with lamps right up to the edge of the frame, to try and get some kind of balance.
That was an extremely difficult shot, because then, Julie Christie appears in reflection in the window and they sort of smile at each other. He kind of makes a gesture of smiling at her. And I always wish that that shot had been the end shot of the movie. It should've been. But, it was extremely difficult to achieve, to find an area in which her reflection could appear, without being either over-lit or under-lit. So I placed a tree, there was a tree in the composition somewhere which provided just the piece of darkness within which Julie Christie can appear. That took a lot of preparation and I'm very happy with the result.
But when James came back from America... the film was edited in America and when he came back with what he said was the final cut, just for the post-production sound work, we were horrified. The people who had been in the shooting, like me and Kate and the other people, we were all horrified because the film had all the breathing space knocked out of it. It seemed to be confined to plot, plot, plot, must get on with the story, which went completely against the spirit of the film. And when I asked, 'Why did they do that?'... They'd got the idea in their heads, God knows why. Sometimes people get strange ideas during the editing. They'd got this idea that it shouldn't run over two hours. And by that time, of course, the double feature programme was long gone in the past, and there wasn't any conceivable reason why it shouldn't run over two hours. All right, they didn't want it to run two and a half hours, three hours, but why couldn't it run two hours ten minutes?
It did run two hours four minutes or something, in the end. The final cut, which I persuaded... I and Kate and others, persuaded him to restore certain things which they'd cut out, including some atmospheric scenes, which were leisurely, and which we'd gone to great trouble to get. Because Ismail Merchant, towards the end, he kept saying, 'There's no more money, we've got to get out, we've got to go to Kashmir, it's all ready'. I said, 'Look, Ismail, we have to get certain run-bys, certain scenes of the cars going across the landscape, and I managed to, with great difficulty, to squeeze half a day out of him, where we could do that stuff, before heading off for Kashmir'. Then there was a... So the film was ruined to my mind, and fortunately, we were able to persuade Ismail and Jim that, if certain things were restored to the cut, it would be a much better movie, which it was. Fortunately those things were restored to the cut.

When we went to Kashmir we were met at Srinagar Airport by the advanced guard who'd been up there before. In fact, Ismail, I think, was there before, and we met him at the airport. And, some telegrams, or telexes, were handed to Ismail as he got into the car for the trip up to the mountains to Gulmarg was the place were we shot those scenes. And we'd just left Srinagar Airport and Ismail was looking through his mail, which had just been handed to him, and suddenly he said, 'We're going to be given $6 million!'  And absolutely on cue, the engine caught fire. You know, the engine started smoking, it was like the engine couldn't cope with that news. The car stopped and we all got out, thinking the thing was going to go on fire. But it didn't. It wasn't that serious. It was a wonderful, wonderful... one of those occasions when things happen on cue. But, of course, the $6 million, when he read the details, he sort of went through it very quickly and James was in the car and he said so and so, and six movies within four months, or something ridiculous like that. And James said, 'What was that?'

I was nominated... I was nominated by the British Academy for that film, for the photography of that film, and I went to the ceremony, but I didn't win. The winner was Sven Nykvist who was sitting next to me. It's the only time we ever met. And, to him, I don't mind losing.

Heat and Dust was another one of those films where the lines of communication with the laboratory became extremely extended because, even phoning London was a quite adventure, in those days, from Hyderabad. You couldn't always get through and the line wasn't always very clear. And we used to get strange telexes which had explosions of stars and asterisks and commas and things in the middle. I once received a telegram which said, 'Ru he loo exelet', and that means: rushes look excellent. Only half the letters were there. But I managed to decipher that one. But sometimes it said quite a nasty... no they didn't use words like that, they said, 'Severe scratch left of frame on take ***', you know. So that called for a number of phone calls to London, which, again, were... took a long time getting through, but fortunately, the other end of the line was Les Ostinelli in Technicolor lab. And I've already said how important it is to have somebody at the other end of the line who can give you an opinion, who doesn't just say, 'Yes, there's a scratch and it's up to you if you think it's serious'. He was able to say, 'I don't think it's very serious, this is a cell scratch or this is an emulsion scratch'.
But by and large, we didn't have any severe problems, other than those caused by the lights failing and the big HMI failing. That caused severe problems, and it took a quite a long time to repair. Because India has a quota... Each film that you make in India has a quota of so much equipment that you can import, free of customs, and that quota we'd exceeded before we even started to shoot. So from that point onwards, any time we needed a spare part of any kind, somebody had to come from London with it in his pocket. That was the only way, and you can't exactly put an HMI in your pocket. We did get, though, imported in that way in somebody's suitcase, we got the starter unit which was actually the part that had failed, could be put into somebody's suitcase. But this isn't always the case. So the lines of communication got very, very stretched, both for equipment and for communication with the laboratory. But we made it through to the end.

The next film I made with Merchant Ivory, and the last one that I made with James Ivory, was The Bostonians, in the subsequent year in 1983, which is made in America. It stars Vanessa Redgrave and Christopher Reeve and is based on a novel by Henry James. They'd already done The Europeans, the other Henry James novel. I was actually a little bit... I wasn't upset, but I think... I thought it wasn't the right thing to do to follow Heat and Dust, which is quite an innovative sort of subject, with the two time periods and so on, and they went back to yet another literary adaptation, as I saw it. So I said, 'Well, all right, if you want to do that, it's okay'. But it caused a comment from Penelope Houston, who was the editor of Sight and Sound, who made a very astute comment about the Merchant Ivory output in general at some point. She said, those Merchant Ivory films, they're all very well, but they never go above 50 miles an hour. And there were lots of adverse comments made, rather unfairly, about Laura Ashley wallpaper and all that sort of thing. But, The Bostonians was prepare... I was preparing that at a point in time when Kodak had just come out with a new negative material. One of those type numbers, I think it was 5284, I'm not sure. I managed to obtain some rolls of the previous material, which I'd found to be very satisfactory, and I didn't know about the new one.
But the strategy of that film involved shooting the big finale, which takes place in a huge theatre, the Music Hall in Troy, New York, it's called the Music Hall, and we couldn't light that for 100 ASA film. Impossible, we couldn't have done that. So I planned to use the high-speed film for that, and the first shooting of the film was in these stately mansions in Newport, Rhode Island, which are like museums. You can't touch anything. You can't attach anything to the walls, you can't put anything on the ceilings. It's like working in a museum. But I managed that all right, but I'd used... the strategy was to use the high sensitive film for that... high-speed film for that. When the first reports started coming back, there was a strange... certain scenes suddenly turned grainy, without warning, from one shot to another. The film was being processed in London, so there was a certain amount of to-ing and fro-ing with finding out what was the trouble. It took a while to find what was the trouble. But, James was horrified because those scenes had to look very elegant, and I couldn't tell him what the solution was, because we didn't know what the problem was. We didn't know why one scene should be perfectly okay, and the next scene, shot on the same roll and developed at the same time, should suddenly show grain. So we had to abandon that and shoot the rest of the movie on 100 ASA film, except for the finale, for which I managed to dig up the last 10 or 12 rolls of the previous material, which was okay. Which was slightly slower, it was 320 ASA as against 400 ASA, but it was fine. But that caused a lot of headaches, and there was also... certain scenes had a very, very fine scratch on them. Hair thin.
And there again, they couldn't... everybody always refused... you know, the lab says it isn't us, Kodak says it isn't us, they say it must be the camera. But after a lot of to-ing and fro-ing, it turned out to be a stock fault. And Kodak was always very reluctant to admit any stock faults. But it was a stock fault. It made me think of a story I was once told where Kodak couldn't get out of it. The buck stops here, sort of story. Somebody told me that on some movie they were making on a Mitchell camera in, I think it was, England, suddenly the camera jammed and they opened up the camera and they took the film out. And they found a piece of film where the sprocket holes just ran sideways off the film, and the rest of the film wasn't perforated, so no wonder it jammed. I would've loved to have been there and called the Kodak representative and say, 'You get out of that one'. But usually they won't admit to anything being wrong. But it was very difficult for a while because I had to rethink the whole treatment of the film, to light it with the available means, which again, were limited, and yet work with 100 ASA material and not 400 ASA material, which was a great... made it much easier to shoot big scenes in big locations, indoor locations, because of the extra speed.

And then there was a certain amount of problems with Christopher Reeve and Vanessa. That was my first film with Vanessa, subsequently I made another Merchant Ivory film with Vanessa, and I have the greatest respect for Vanessa, but sometimes she can be a real pain. In this particular film, she had taken Madeleine Potter under her wing. Madeleine Potter is the one who plays the young girl, hadn't made a film before, so Vanessa and she used to go round arm in arm, carrying copies of the novel. Every now and then they went to James and they... look in this scene and this scene in the novel. Don't you think it's much better, you know, there's all this got lost... in transferring to a script it got lost. And James should've said, 'Look, you cannot... if you could film a novel straight off without writing a script, we would do that. But you have to write a script, forget the novel. We have to film the script. Forget the novel'. But he never did that. Because, as I already said, James wasn't very good with strong-minded women, like Vanessa. So, there came a point in time where I took Vanessa and Christopher aside, this was while we were shooting in Boston. Most of the film is made in Boston and Cape Cod, little bits in New York. And I took them aside once and I said, 'Look, we have a problem, and I thought I better talk to you about it because I don't think James is going to, and he would like to, but he's too shy. The problem is that when you take them aside during shooting hours, and say, look I really think that this bit of characterisation, it doesn't feel right and I really think we should change that, and how should we change it'. 'Well, I don't really know'. Those sort of discussions can take place before the shooting starts, but when the shooting has started, and I looked them straight in the eye, I said, 'Look, do you understand, we don't have the time. Like you're talking to a child. We don't have the time for this kind of discussion to go on while all the crew is waiting to shoot the next scene'. And he saw the point and... both of them, and they sort of said, 'Well, what do you want us to do?' Rather plaintively, rather like that. I said, 'It's very simple, get off the director's back and let him get on with it'. And that sort of sunk in and things were all right for a while.
But it wasn't totally effective, of course. They went back to... the old discussions continued beyond that point. I think it was helpful. But it was usually up to me to make that kind of intervention. I very often exceeded my authority as cameraman. Many other DOPs, or DPs wouldn't dream of doing anything like that. They stick strictly to their job, and if there's some discussion which doesn't involve the photographer, they just sit in their chair and read a book until it's all finished. But I could see a situation arising, like many times before, where, at the end of your schedule, you have a beautifully finished half a film, because you haven't got it together to combine quality with speed, a degree of speed. That film wasn't... We weren't pressed for time. We had 10 weeks. We had a nine-hour day, or something like that. We were never particularly stressed, but we couldn't afford lengthy discussions about character and motivation and all that kind of thing, in the middle of shooting. We just couldn't afford it. And I'm the one that couldn't just sit idly by and read my book while that sort of problem was solved. The culmination of that kind of interference came one day when it was the eve of the Labour Day three-day holiday, and we were in Boston and everybody, most of the crew were from New York, so they were all anxious to go back to their families for the three-day holiday. We had a sort of bits and pieces day, where we had to just finish certain bits, certain scenes that consisted of three or four shots, in four different locations. And we got more and more behind, and the last thing we had to do was a scene where Madeleine Potter and Vanessa Redgrave come out of the house, they cross in a relatively narrow... in an alley, basically. They come out of this house, they cross the street and they walk 50 yards up the pavement, and they have to speak four lines of dialogue, culminating in Vanessa's very important line where she says to Madeleine, 'Promise me you'll never marry'. Right.
So I'd arranged to shoot this scene in early dusk conditions in order not to have to light the whole bloody street, but use daylight for lighting the street and just put some lamps in some windows. So the generator couldn't get very close, it was very narrow alleyway, difficulties of access, being pressed for time, so time was of the essence. But we got it all ready and we started rehearsing, we laid this little track, and we started rehearsing and they did their rehearsal. They came out of the house and they crossed the road and they walked along the track, and they didn't speak a word of dialogue. So the first time we said, what the hell's going on here. So, I said let's have another... James said, 'Why aren't they talking?' So he talked to them and said, 'Don't they realise they have to get the four lines of dialogue out in this crossing the street and going along the track?' We've just got the right amount of time for them to speak this dialogue. I'm sure there's enough time to speak those lines. So we go again. Right, start, action. And they come out and again they don't speak the dialogue. But instead of... they're doing this, as they're walking along they're doing this. I thought, what the hell is going on here? So, I went to them and said, 'What is going on here? Why are you looking up at the sky?' And Vanessa said, 'We are looking at the stars'. And that was in order to get into the mood to speak this very important line. So I said, 'Right, that's a wrap, we're not shooting that scene tonight', and I closed the shoot down. We shot that scene somewhere else much later.

For Merchant Ivory productions, you can say that every cent of the budget is on the screen. He doesn't go off buying any limousines and yachts. It's all on the screen. But it's always very tight. It's always very tight. And then I quite regretted... The Bostonians was the last film that I made with James, although I made some more films with Merchant, with Ismail, but not with James, because the next film was Room with a View. For some reason, which I never got to the bottom of, he decided to use another cameraman, and I did a sort of little bit of probing, but I never really got to the bottom of why that was. Because we got on extremely well. We had had our little tiffs, mainly with Ismail, when I was on James' side, I had terrible trouble to persuade Ismail to go to New York in the middle of the Boston shoot in order to get the one or two Central Park scenes in New York before the leaves changed colour. And Ismail said, 'No, we can't, we can't possibly...' I said, 'Ismail, we must do that now, because once the leaves change colour, we can't do it'. And in those kind of circumstances, I was always on James' side. So I don't really understand why that happened. And to this day I don't know why that happened. But that was the last film that I made with James.

Then, the next film was The Perfect Murder which is not directed by James, it was directed by Zafir Hai who was described to me as the most expensive and the slowest director of commercials in Bombay. And Ismail and his brother-in-law, who run a roofing business, put up the money for that movie which was based on a novel by Keating, HR Keating, who came out for the shoot, is a lovely man. It features an Indian detective called Inspector Ghote, and in that particular story a Swedish policeman comes to Bombay to study Indian police methods. And he was played by Stellan Skarsgård who later became famous in Breaking the Waves and other films. But he wasn't particularly well known at that point. A lot of people started becoming famous after they made their first Merchant Ivory film. Particularly after Savages. Savages was Sam Waterston's first film. And The Roseland was Christopher Walken's first film. There's quite a few people who started their careers with Merchant Ivory, or their careers had a big flip.
So, Perfect Murder had Nasirudden Shaw played Inspector Ghote, and Stellan Skarsgård played the visiting Swede. The first thing Ismail said to me when he asked me to make that film, he said, so and so and so and so, this is the film, and I want to make it etc., etc., and I found the most wonderful place for you to stay, and it's right next to the Taj Mahal Hotel. Not in the Taj Mahal hotel, mind you, right next to it. It turned out to be a very, very seedy... the Yacht Club of Bombay, which in the days of the Raj, like about 40 years ago, must have been very elegant. But there were holes in the tablecloths and the waiters had stained jackets. The whole place was very, very run down. But that was the wonderful place he'd found for me to stay. But there again, I ended up wearing several hats, because they... there were certain script discussions that went on. At one point we were shooting a scene and they decided to introduce a character that wasn't in the script- in the scene in the script. He's sort of found to be hiding there and overhearing something, and we shot that scene. Then I sort of thought... I said, just a minute. And I thought about the continuity of the whole thing and I said, 'That character is known to be elsewhere. He can't be in two places at once'. But nobody picked that up except me.
And anyway that whole film- that whole... Zafir Hai was a lovely man, who is very laid back, very polite, but he used to come to me in the morning with the script and he said, 'Today we're going to shoot scene 17'. I said, 'Yes, I know'. And then he read me the scene, all the way through. Then he comes in, then he sits down, then he says blah, blah, blah, and then she comes in and she stands, and I said, yes, blah, blah, blah. Then he closed the script and he looked at me and he said, 'Now, how would you like to shoot it?' And I thought that was his job. But it became my job on that movie. And there was a scene... the only other person that I know to have shot successfully and extensively in the streets of Bombay is Mira Nair with Salaam Bombay. But there was one scene where there's, where Stellan Skarsgård has been kidnapped and he's tied to a bed on the fourth floor of a building in a very crowded area of Bombay. And the inspector is called to the scene and he notices that there's a procession on the way to protest against pornography, because next door to this building is another building which is a sort of pornographic book shop which has some illustrations outside, and a big sign. So he has this sudden idea that he's got to take this sign and put it up on the building where this guy is being held hostage.
And then the procession approaches and they're protesting and they storm this building, the wrong building. And they all storm upstairs, 20, 30 of them, they all end up in this little room and there's absolute chaos. And they succeed in freeing Stellan Skarsgård. But again, he sort of said, 'How would you like to shoot it?' It was shot... it's actually only... it's shot in three shots. That scene is shot in three shots, but what chaos. And that evening... because we shot the whole thing in one day, the procession arriving, changing the sign to the other side and the riot, semi-riot, that ensues at the end, is all done in one day. And that night I went back to the hotel and I went, this sort of screaming fit, because it was extremely hairy. My God, that was difficult.  You had problems with your focus puller.  Oh, yes. We had a focus puller... Ismail is a sucker for somebody coming to him, as they did all the time, saying Mr. Merchant I love your films and I'm a focus puller and I'll work for you for nothing. Ismail can't resist that. So this guy was hired, much against my better instincts, but it was a fait accompli, and it turned out that he was on drugs. He was a drug addict and he was completely useless, and he had to be fired after the first week, and then with some difficulty I got my old mate, Tony Garrett, to come out, and he completed the picture. But Ismail just can't resist it if somebody says, Mr. Merchant I just love your movies and I'll work for you for nothing.

						In 1987 I was asked to photograph the Merchant Ivory production, "The Deceivers", which was only half a Merchant Ivory production, it had a big Pinewood element to it, which wasn't all that happy a combination, at all. It was a very unfortunate combination. But that's the way it was. So I had a, one of those breakfast meetings at the American Centre in the Shepherd's Bush Hilton with the director, Nick Meyer, and he told me that this film, which is based on a novel by John Fowles, is it?  Anyway, this film was a mixture of a deep interior Conradian- introspective Conradian subject, and a Boy's Own Paper Adventure Story, which is true, but it's not exactly a very easy mixture to put into practice. And- we sort of agreed on the general style, and how we were going to tackle it, and we parted quite amicably and went off to- some weeks later we went off to India. And Ismail Merchant very much- took a- very much took a back seat. There was a whole Pinewood-based production department, with a gentleman called Tim Van Rellim as executive producer. I discovered that Tim van Rellim's real name was Miller. Because the Rellim part of Van Rellim is Miller spelt backwards. Now that- sorry. So Tim Van Rellim is actually Mr. Miller and it doesn't exactly inspire a lot confidence. It's like would you buy a used car from this man, you know, and he turned out to be exactly- about as reliable as I had supposed. So that had a very easy- a very uneasy atmosphere, that film, due to the mixture of the Merchant Ivory crew and the Indian set-up which Merchant Ivory was very familiar with, and the Pinewood contingent, who felt very uncomfortable because they didn't have the usual backup, and famous art director called Ken Adam, who belonged very firmly in the Pinewood camp, and who caused me no end of trouble in one particular scene. But generally, the trouble with that film was that they wanted to make it very much more spectacular than the story actually was. So this group of dacoits basically, who are the Thuggies, that's where the word tug comes from, turned into a small army. And at one point I found myself filming a chase on horseback. What do you call it?  Like on, in "Henry V"?

A charge?

Yes, I found myself- At one point in that film I found myself filming a- having to film a cavalry charge, a bit like "Henry V", but without the means, without the necessary means. So it was all a bit blown-up, to my mind. It turned into an epic. It shouldn't have been an epic. It should've been concentrated on the Conradian aspect, but it could've been a very commercial film because it did have a lot of adventure in it and, because of the peculiar circumstances under which it was made, that all went by the board, and it turned very sour towards the end. So much so that, when the film was finished, and I saw the first cut, I said- yes, well, it's not really- I don't think it's awfully good. Then a little while later- and I did some grading at Technicolor and then I heard nothing for a couple of months, and then suddenly, I was invited- they said, would you come to Technicolor for the new grading session. I said- what new grading session?  Because by that time I was doing something else. And they said- oh, didn't we tell you, the film's being re-cut. And what had happened was- I went to this grading session and I sat there, and I said- oh yes, they've taken that out, or they put that juxtaposed with that, but as I sat there I got more and more incredulous that an intelligent and professional person, like Nicholas Meyer, could do things like that. Because there were things there which were just technically completely wrong, amateurish. You can't do that, I said, you cannot have a cut from a long shot to a big face hitting the ground in a close-up, having just fallen of his horse, which you don't see. You can't do that because people will say, well what's happened? But there were things like that in it. Then I got back, there was another correspondence, and conversations with Jim, and conversations with- sorry, conversations with Ismail, conversations with Nicholas Meyer over the transatlantic telephone, and I persuaded Ismail to re-cut the film, yet again, against Nick Meyer's wishes. The final result is a sort of- a bit of a sad compromise, but it's better than the- in my opinion, at least, it's much better than the version that they had proposed as the final version. And the reason that all that happened was that he had in his contract- the reason all that happened is because Nick Meyer had a clause in his contract that, before delivering the picture to Merchant- to Ismail Merchant, as it were, he could have two sneak previews. And there were two sneak previews and the results were disastrous. They said things like, this man doesn't behave like he's a soldier and he doesn't behave like a soldier, or the woman's part is very bad. Oh, and they laughed in the wrong place. That was the, that put the kibosh on it all. Nick said- I don't want anybody laughing in the wrong place in my picture. I said- well, that's very true, but you cannot do anything to 100% be sure that nobody's going to laugh in the wrong place. There was a scene- the key scene that they cut was where the wife of the main character, finds him making himself up again, for the second time, in black face in order to infiltrate this gang of Thuggies, and she said- what are you doing?  And he said- well, I've got to finish this business. I can't leave it unfinished. I've got to do this again. Forgive me, but I must do it. And then she says- the fatal line was- promise me you'll never kill anybody personally, yourself. And that line caused a laugh in the previews, and then Nick Meyer started to- he started to- no, there's a word for that which I can never remember.

Rationalise?

That's it, thank you. He started to rationalise and said, maybe they're laughing because he's a soldier, although he's not in a soldier's uniform, technically he's an official of the East India Company, but it's ridiculous to ask a soldier not to kill anybody. And I said, well, it's not like that at all, it's just that we were aware of this problem when we- I reminded him, we were aware of the problem. And the line was very sensitively spoken. It was a very nice moment, it was very nicely filmed. But you cannot guarantee that some idiot, who's actually come to the preview to see a James Bond movie or something completely different, won't laugh. It's not possible. But you couldn't persuade him of that.
					
This is an appropriate moment for me to comment on sneak previews, which I've always objected to. I've written a whole article about the peculiar phenomenon of sneak previews, which the Americans absolutely swear by. At one point there was David Putnam who wanted to introduce the same system into England. And they quote the... the one film they always quote, which was re-cut as a result of sneak preview reports and then became a great success. But, of course, you don't know if it wouldn't have been a great success, because an audience somewhere in the backwoods in New Jersey, is not representative of the world audience. In fact, the... any statistician would laugh you out of court, at that point. To say, you mean an audience, which has not been representatively selected, and which has come to see a movie on a completely different subject, like they've come to see a comedy and they're presented with a drama, or they've come to see a drama and they're presented with a comedy, is totally unrepresentative. And to take their words like it was the Bible, this is ludicrous. But it's a system that you cannot shake their faith in it. It's quite extraordinary.
And in The Deceivers, it led to that result. And as a result of these sneak previews, which in this particular case... The irony was, that in this particular case, the sneak previews were not imposed on the director, it's the director who wanted to submit himself to that process. Ismail didn't oblige him to do that. And they weren't obliged to listen to the results. But he said, 'I don't want anybody to laugh in the wrong place in my movie'. And then he also said, 'In my opinion the editing process finishes at the point, only at the point, when the producer, or the director, or somebody else...' No, the producer... 'The editing process finishes at the point when the producer physically removes you from the editing table'. There isn't a natural end to the editing. That... that, I think that's ridiculous as well, because one works to a schedule, and budget, on editing as well as on shooting. You should be... also, the sneak preview system... it causes a peculiar rupture in the natural process of presenting a work to an audience, because the natural process should be that the artist finishes his work, whatever it may be, and then he says, 'Look, this is my work, I have finished it to the best of my ability, within the framework available to me'. 'Here is my work, I have finished it to the best of my ability. I like it and I hope you like it'. This is what should be the natural relationship between an author and an audience. But if you have sneak previews in the middle there, what you're saying is: this is my work, I think I've finished it, but if you don't like anything, it can always be changed. This is not a way to produce any work of art. And in this case art is not at loggerheads with box office. They use the previews in order to get a better box office result, but it doesn't have a better box office result, because all the examples they give you. Look what happened to that film, Fatal... the film they always quote is Fatal Attraction. But nobody knows if that film wouldn't have been a success. Just because some preview audience in New Jersey said, 'We don't like the ending'. The whole thing is totally ludicrous, but they're absolutely fixated on it, they won't part with it.

We had a lot of problems shooting The Deceivers, a lot of which were caused by this lack of co-ordination between the Merchant Ivory element and the Pinewood element. Because Nick Meyer insisted on shooting in the town of Jaipur, which was under the control of a, sort of, the Indian Mafia, and Ismail said, 'I wouldn't do that because I have no way of influencing them, dealing with them. Why don't you shoot it in Jodhpur?'  'No, we want to go there. The first night we had trouble'.
The first night we'd set a night scene and it couldn't go ahead because the local mafia hadn't been placated and the people refused to erect the camp... the tents, or something. Anyway, there was continuous trouble all the time, because the local mafia hadn't been paid off, as it were, which is always necessary. And, it culminated in trouble with the authorities, that the man who's supposed to watch all the shooting to make sure that nothing derogatory to India is put in, he wasn't always there. And then one day the police arrived and there was a ludicrous scene where the police went in the back door... in the front door and somebody carrying the rushes went in... out the back door and escaped over the roof of... something ridiculous like that happened. But there was trouble all the time.
And for me, the biggest trouble arose on a night scene... near the finale of the picture you have a night scene where they... the... all the loot is being carried to the place where they can sell the diamonds and the loot that they gather, these Thuggies gather, in the course of their murderous activities. And they go to a certain market in a village and they sell all their stuff to the diamond dealers and the jewellery dealers, and so on. And Ken Adam had decided that he would string wires between the houses and he would hang lampions, so the whole set was covered in these... was surmounted by these 30, 40 lampions which were lit with low bulbs, like they had candles in them. That was difficult... already difficult because I had to light... I had to use the rooftops as well, of the existing houses, in order to position my lights. That's the only place I could've put the lights, and I had to light between these strings of hanging lampions. So that was difficult.
But then, it became impossible, because a wind sprang up and the lampions started swaying, you see, and getting into the lights, of course, and casting enormous shadows. So we finished that scene by the skin of our teeth. So I wasn't very pleased with Ken Adams, who had a lot of experience. But if you were working in Pinewood Studios, the cameraman and Ken Adam would have had certain discussions, and he would've said: yes, I want this, that and the other... And there would always be backup and there would be a way out.
But working in... at that time we were in Khajurao. We were based in Khajurao, where the famous erotic sculpture is, and we were a long, long way from any backup, and communication with the labs was difficult, as always. And... and to deal with things like that under those circumstances is extremely difficult, extremely difficult. So that caused me a lot of headaches. But the bulk of the film wasn't too difficult to make and it was quite exciting and quite... There's some wonderful locations. On the river there... there's some lovely stuff in that film. But a lot of that stuff was cut in the final version. There's a lovely scene where a sandstorm comes up. A lot of that got lost. Basically, the worst thing was that the re-cut, even the final final re-cut, undermined the Pierce Brosnan character, the hero, to such an extent that he was, sort of, in limbo. The preview cards had said, 'We don't like the wife'. So he cut out a lot of the wife, so the poor man is, kind of, left floating in limbo. All his relationship, which placed him in a certain situation, with a wife and then the Indians he has to deal with, that all became very tentative, because certain key elements had been cut out because the preview card said that they don't like the wife. She wasn't very good, but she was adequate. You know, she was perfectly all right, in context. But the final result, of course, was much worse than it could've been.

The last film I made with Merchant Ivory was The Ballad of the Sad café, which was filmed in Texas on a ranch... Nelson, Willie Nelson. Willie Nelson's ranch. And they'd built a special set there which already existed in part. It was adapted from a Western street into the street of a little town somewhere in the mining area. And it was very good. It was very suitable for what we needed. And Simon Callow was the director and we had a lot of discussions in London before I set off for America. And we both admired John Ford and we both admired Night of the Hunter, the Charles Laughton film, and we had a lot of discussions about how to... how that film would be tackled. How The Ballad of the Sad café would be tackled. And I set off fairly confidently that things would be okay. But in fact, it turned out that Simon Callow, who's a well-known theatre director, didn't actually know a lot about decoupage. And very early on in Texas we ran into a problem where a scene had been programmed for three... scheduled for four days. And I said, 'We don't need four days to shoot this scene'. And he said, 'Oh yes, it's very complicated, it has all this parallel action going on'. Which would've been complicated if it had been on the stage, but wasn't at all complicated to my mind, in a film. And he couldn't see that.
And again, we were in a situation where there were very few really experienced people, and his assistant director was very inexperienced, and all he could say was, 'Mr. Callow, you tell me what you want and I'll give it to you'. But he wasn't able to advise him and say, 'Look, Simon, you really don't need four days for this scene, we can easily do it'. In the end we did it in a day and a half. But that sort of problem came up fairly unexpectedly... Well, quite unexpectedly, because Simon is a very intelligent person, very talented, and it's the last thing that I expected, to have these fairly simple, technical problems. But it went more or less all right... the shoot went more or less all right. There were certain altercations and problems, during the shoot, but not an awful lot. And I was able to incorporate a little mini tornado that happened one night, because we were always on the set. So it's nice to be able to incorporate chance happenings that you can only do, like the storm in Electra, that you can only do because you happen to be there all the time. If some freak weather condition appears, you can make use of it, if you're lucky. And some luck, as I've already said, is essential. Vanessa... also we had our moments of friction, but it always was all right the next day. She'd cook spaghetti for everybody and it was fine.

It came to me early on, I can't... don't remember why, but it came to me quite early on that I would shoot that film largely in long shot and close-up, avoiding mid-shots. That would give it a certain character, and I would also make use of split-diopter so that in some scenes you have somebody in extreme foreground in one side of the frame, and on the other side of the frame, you have something in the distance, and they're both sharp, which is only possible with a split diopter, which is a certain sort of lens that you put in front of the lens. There's a very nice shot in that film where Vanessa comes up to be married, in her wedding gown, a big stroppy girl coming up in a white wedding gown, and she walks up to... you see... you're set in the church and you're looking out through... right down the aisle of the church, little church, right out into the landscape behind... into the street behind. And in the foreground is Keith Carradine, whom she's going to marry, singing a hymn, in big, big close-up, like this. On the other side you see, way, way in the distance, Vanessa is approaching with her white wedding gown flowing behind her, and that made a very nice shot. But it was only possible because Keith was 100% professional, very experienced in film making, because he had to sing, and it's not easy to sing and to be asked to absolutely motionless. He couldn't move, not a quarter of an inch sideways because he would've got into the split-screen problem, and he did that beautifully. And the result is a beautiful shot.
And it's this little mining village, just a little village somewhere in the States. It's never made very clear where. But, I don't think it's for nothing that that was the last of Carson McCullers' novels not to be, to be filmed, and there's a good reason there, because it's a very, very difficult thing to bring to the screen, very difficult. For one thing, it ends in a 10-minute-long boxing match between Keith Carradine and Vanessa Redgrave, which is described in the book as lasting four hours, and extremely bloody. To bring that to the screen is really quite a problem. For that boxing match I decided to use a special technique where it's partly hand-held, partly fixed, and as the boxing match progresses, the lighting gets more and more and more top heavy. It becomes... the lighting becomes like a boxing ring, in fact, where it's lit entirely from the top and they get very contrasty. The faces become very contrasty. But that mixture of hand-holding and fixed camera was very successful in covering that scene.
And at the end of that scene Vanessa gave a marvellous performance, but it was completely unusable. At the end of the scene, she's been defeated through a trick, because the little dwarf who's part of the action, jumps from the top shelf in this... in the café, the Sad café, he jumps from the top shelf and he's actually carried on a wire. There was a stunt. And he jumps onto the back of Vanessa who has just about succeeded in forcing Keith Carradine to the ground, and is about to win, in fact, the boxing match, the wrestling/boxing match, and he jumps... he makes this tremendous leap onto her back and it turns the whole thing over and then he wins. You know, he slugs Vanessa into unconsciousness, basically. Then Vanessa is lying there and a bucket of water is thrown over her. And then she played the scene right through to the end in one shot, where very slowly, she shakes herself and rises, and very slowly, head bowed, defeated, very slowly walks back into her office, sobbing, and closes the door. And you can still hear her sobbing in the office after... at the end of the scene. And she played that beautifully and everybody applauded. But I was aware that, as it lasted four minutes, it's impossible. No way that could be in the film. Right at the end of the film, right at the climax of the film, you have a four-minute shot of her crying and walking into the office. Not possible. So, of course, it was cut. It was inter-cut with other things and it came to nothing. Sometimes they get carried away with their performance, without being aware that their performance is not a stage performance, it's a film performance and it takes place in a certain framework, and there's no point in giving a beautiful performance which cannot be used.

Ismail Merchant was absent during most of that shooting and his representatives on set were more than useless. No, it was very hard. I ended up wearing several hats, and I ended up quarrelling with Simon, I ended up walking off the set twice, or three times even, but never for more than 20 minutes. Yes, the last time was... it was Vanessa's last day. Her contract was about to finish. And we had to retake something that I knew, at the time when we took it, three or four weeks earlier, that that would be a retake, because she'd refused to perform a certain action in a way that was sensible. And she did a very inadequate reaction to something that happens in the café, and I knew that'd have to be re-shot, and it was re-shot on the last day. She was sitting in the office in a place which was already pre-lit from many other scenes, because that whole café was pre-lit. I was able to put lights up and just switch from day to night in a few minutes by re-plugging the lamps, so that was more or less pre-lit. And I just put the finishing touches. And then she got stroppy and said, 'You haven't bothered to light me properly'. And I walked off.
And then I was persuaded to come back, and all that. And the next day we had the spaghetti again and it was fine. But you have to go through these things. It's very... It's very irritating. Particularly when you're very stressed having lighting, operating and dealing with all these problems which shouldn't be your problem. Because Simon again... Simon is... being gay, like James, he can't deal with strong women. So again, in that film, there was a moment when she decided she was going to play... because a certain scene had a background of... the theme at the back of the scene... the theme at the back of the scene, the theme at the back of the scene is materialism and there's a conversation with one of the townspeople about, we're not worth a great deal, you know, people like us, they're pretty worthless, and she said, 'I'm going to play that scene at the cash register, and I'm going to...' – during this conversation where he's leaning on the counter and they're having this conversation, and during the entire scene people are going to come up, come up and they're going to pay their bills – 'and I am going to put their money in the cash register and I'm going to give them the correct change'. And we said, 'You know, this is impossible. The sound man's going to go mad, because how do you get all your dialogue in... in between the cash register, the ping, and the cash register closing and opening, and... absolutely impossible'. But she did it. She prevailed on Simon and it was shot that way and it was extremely difficult.
And also sometimes... we'd decided to do it in a certain way, because I took over the blocking of the whole thing early on when I realised that Simon just wasn't... didn't have enough experience to block the thing, so it was me. I asked the actors to come to me to ask where the next setup would be, because I was the one that directed all that. So, again, I was accused of trying to direct the picture and all that. It became very tricky. And at the end when the film was finally finished, God willing it was finally finished, but yes, then we had a very bad relationship afterwards. In the press Simon said, 'Walter Lassally was surly and uncooperative and all this'. And I said... I wrote him a letter and said, 'Really, Simon, that was totally untrue, why wash your dirty linen in public, ridiculous. A pity'. And the film wasn't... to me that... we did justice to the book, which was not easy, and to me, in that sense, it's a success, whatever the box office said.

It was in the '70s that things started to change fairly drastically. And as I wrote in my book, Itinerant Cameraman, which was published in 1985... in the 1970s the road from the studio floor to the cinema, seems to have turned from a reasonably smooth highway into something of an obstacle course. Of the 12 films that I shot between 1971 and 1977, two were not released, one was left incomplete, one was kept on the shelf for three years before being released as a second feature under another title, and two were taken away from their directors and re-cut, with disastrous results artistically as well as at the box office. That's 50% of my output, rather a depressing outcome of seven years' work. Furthermore, many projects collapsed altogether, but that wasn't only in the '70s.

The first film I made on the Continent was in the '70s. In fact, it was just before, it was in 1969. I made a very interesting film in Bavaria called Something for Everyone. Well, it had two titles, Something for Everyone it was called in Britain, and in Germany and elsewhere it was called Black Flowers for the Bride. And it's the... it's the... in fact, it's the film which features on the cover of my book, with me and Angela Lansbury. That was a very interesting shoot. The director was Hal Prince, the famous theatre impresario. And he hadn't made a film before, so by this time, some 20-odd years after Another Sky, I was able to help him much better than I was able to help Gavin Lambert on Another Sky. I'd learnt enough about decoupage and other things that were strictly the director's business, so I was able to help him a lot. And we got on extremely well.
And... It was made in the period when all the... the three major American television channels, CBS, ABC, and NBC, each had a fairly major movie subsidiaries, and that period was quite brief. But during that period I made several films under that kind of umbrella. And, the budgets were usually quite satisfactory. They weren't huge budgets, but they were totally satisfactory. And that film is unique, in my particular history, because I had four weeks of preparation, and that's absolutely unheard of. Usually I was lucky to get one week, and not always very satisfactory. You don't always see all the locations and there are hiccups. But in that case I had four weeks of preparation, which was like paradise. So we stayed, initially, in Munich and then we moved on to a location in Hohenschwangau, which is where mad King Ludwig had his fairy tale castle, that you often see in movies. And we used that castle. We shot on the top floor, which was quite a problem because it's on a mountain anyway and then you have to go... lead the cables up to the top of the castle. The co-owner of Arriflex, Mr. Arnold, was very impressed with that. He said, 'That man is an artist'... he said when he saw the result of that.

In the preparation period there was a slack moment and Kate and I went off to Vienna. We had a little look around Vienna. And when we came back, we discovered that, in our absence, in order to cover a scene where an aging priest has to ride a bicycle through a field, they had ordered a length of railway track, including a set of points. Now, the set of points I never discovered what that was for. But the railway track... they'd got this wonderful idea that as he was a bit rickety, he couldn't be trusted to ride a bicycle through a field, so they were going to mount him and his bicycle on this low railway carriage, like those things that they use, whatever it's called, for repairs. You know, they self-propelled along the railway. Buster Keaton did it in a movie, didn't he? The Railrodder.  Anyway, one of those things. And they were going to mount this bicycle on this railway carriage, and somehow have it propelled. Because it was a field you couldn't see... it was hidden. So anyway, I soon scotched that... I said, 'I think we will find a somewhat simpler solution'. But that's the sort of thing that can happen when the people in charge don't really know what to do and they panic, because you're not around. They do something like that.

There was a very interesting other feature in that movie. And that is that we decided to erect quite a large set, on location in a field, in the vicinity of the castle, which was sort of weather covered. It wasn't entirely suitable as weather cover because if it rained there very heavily you could hear the rain. But they erected what's called an air hall which is like a large tent held up by air pressure, by pressurised air... compressed air. And, they laid a floor in this field, a wooden floor, so we could track throughout the set, which is built in this air hall, which, as I say, was quite large. Usually used for certain sporting events and exhibitions and things. And I would say that was very successful. I don't know whether anybody else ever did that, either before or after. I haven't heard of it. But it was fully described in the American Cinematographer at the time, with pictures and everything. And the... the two art directors, which were a couple called Otto and Herta Pischinger, they built this very elaborate set of a villa, in this air hall, and it was... it had two if not three storeys.
There was a big sweeping staircase that went up and rooms at the top, or at least entrances to rooms at the top. On the ground floor there were three... there were four rooms and a hallway. And the idea of building that all in one piece was that there was a tracking shot planned in the... in the middle of the film somewhere there was a tracking shot where, in a bit of a temper, the countess, which is played by... who was played by Angela Lansbury, she sweeps through these rooms and she throws opens the doors, and then she goes to the next room and then she throws open some more doors and goes on. So it was built in order that there could be a continuous track. In the end, of course, the track wasn't completely continuous because, every time she throws open the door, you have to cut anyway because you cut... you can't go through a closed door and then see it opening. So, there had to be a cut there anyway.
It was an elaborate effort and one of the rooms was a dining room, and that had quite a low, carved ceiling, and because we were shooting in the ratio of 1.66, wide-screen... The problem about wide-screen is that if your... if you emphasise the wideness and you forget the fact that the wider you go, what is implied in that is a lack of height. It's wide but it's very low, as far as height is concerned. So without being able to dig a floor... dig a hole in the floor, I couldn't actually get the setup, a reasonable setup, that would show this wonderful ceiling. I'm afraid they never forgave me for that, but they should've known better, because they knew about the format. They had all these projections with angles drawn on pieces of paper, and they should've known that it was virtually impossible to get a setup that would show the ceiling. I think corners of it come in, but not the whole thing. But the work in the air hall was extremely successful, and, as I say, it provided a sort of weather cover. Except when you had heavy rain, then you could hear it splattering on the canvas.

The rest was exteriors and some interiors in an actual villa which actually is... it's another castle... at the foot of the hill where the magnificent castle stands is another castle. One is called Neuschwanstein and the one is called Hohenschwangau. We shot in that other castle, which... quite a lot of shooting took place in the other castle, which was very natural interiors. Then there's a lake and there's a big scene of boats on the lake. She throws a big party. It's quite an extensive... quite an elaborate film. It was made with relatively small means, as far as equipment goes, but perfectly adequate.
We had a very good German support crew. I had my English assistants with me, or some of them. We had a German support crew, and the Germans, I discovered, very often wore several hats. The chief electrician might also be the grip, and... not the dolly grip because that's a special job. But they overlapped a lot and if somebody was needed to hold the boom for one scene, it might have two microphones or something, then, of course, they stepped in. They did the carpentry. They did the... They did everything. And they worked as a team and I think they were paid... the team was paid and they shared it out among themselves. It was a very, very successful arrangement. I found, working in Germany generally, that the German crews and the German transport particularly, was very compact. The crews were small and the transport was compact. Whereas, in America, I've often been told, how can you make a movie without a 40-footer, which is this ginormous articulated truck. In Germany they do the same thing with two Volkswagen buses.

So we filmed, I think, something like 10 weeks. Michael York was in the film as well as Angela, and some very good German actors, including Heidelinde Meineke... Eva Maria Meineke and Heidelinde Weis, and Wolfried Lier played the sort of butler of the countess. The story is quite interesting. It was adapted from a novel called The Cook, which is... which has an anonymous author. And we never discovered who the real author was. He was very successfully hidden behind some pseudonym. And... In the novel, the Michael York character seduces everybody in turn, by his cooking, by his cooking skills. And that, of course, is very difficult to put in a movie. So he uses more conventional skills to seduce the family. But he seduces them one by one, and inveigles his way into the... worms his way into the centre of the family and becomes the countess' protégé and finally her husband. Well, I won't reveal the whole plot, because it's rather super.

In the middle of the film there is a car accident where some of his schemes, where he's manipulating the people one against the other, are threatening to go severely off the rails. So he stages a car accident in which he's driving this car as the chauffeur, and he turns the wheel and it goes down a ravine, and he just opens the door and jumps out, just before it goes down the plunge... it takes the plunge. And for this stunt, we engaged a famous French stunt artist who specialised in that kind of thing, called Remy Julienne I believe. He prepared all that, and we had two cameras... maybe even three. We certainly had a camera at the top and a camera at the bottom, to show this car cascading down the mountainside.
Unfortunately, Remy damaged his Achilles tendon. He cut his Achilles tendon as he jumped out the car, because the car, being an old car, it was an old... I'm not sure if it was a Mercedes or some... it was an old car which had a... the door opened the other way, not the normal way, but the other way, and that made it very awkward for him to jump out. And his foot was just caught in the angle between the door and the carosserie, so it shows you that... it goes to prove even the most experienced persons, you couldn't have had a more experienced person than him, can have accidents. That wasn't... probably wasn't the first time, but ever since then I've been very conscious of safety on movies which can be quite an issue, because people tend to get carried away. And like I said, on that Greek movie, waving to Kate in the distance, 'Remember it's only a movie'. That's not only a joke, it's something... sometimes one needs to remember that it's safety first. One wants to get the best possible effect, but not at... take any risks of killing or injuring anybody, which both on The Ballad of the Sad café and on Brenda Starr and on... what's the third one?  There's a third one.
There were near accidents which were a bit too close for comfort, all with so-called experienced crews. In that case, from Hollywood. The, sort of, rain towers collapsed, not once but twice, and the dwarf, in The Ballad of the Sad café, who is attached to a piece of piano wire. On one of those rehearsals it broke and he dropped to the ground. Fortunately, he was only two-foot above the ground, but it could've broken when he was at the top of the thing. So, I'm very wary about any kind of stunts which involves risk, that one should be very conscious of the fact that, after all, it's only a movie, and let's not take any unnecessary risks.

I must say that I'm rather proud of the close-ups of Angela in that movie because she was no longer 40, let's say, and there's a bedroom scene, which is very funny actually, cause at one point you start off on a pink dressing gown, on the back of it, and you think it's her and she walks away... the figure walks away from camera and it turns out that it's him. It's Michael York who's wearing the pink dressing gown and she's in bed. They've just made love and, in the prelude to that scene... at the beginning of that scene, there's some very nice close-ups of Angela, which I'm a bit proud of. The film was made, as all my films, were shot through either this net or the star filter which followed the net, and later on again, Tiffin developed another filter which was called Soft Net, which was based on the idea of the net. It was like a net within glass. And that particular type of filter has the advantage that it softens the image. It gives you a degree of diffusion which is nice for the close-ups of the faces and so on. And it also pastelises the colour. And in that... particularly in that bedroom scene there's some very nice pastelised colour and some very nice close-ups.

The film was made for this CBS subsidiary and the front office, so to speak, the people from Hollywood descended on him in the cutting room and gave him a hard time. So much so that, at some point, he more or less threw them out, and they said, 'We're going to show you that this is not the theatre business, you know, this is the cinema business'. And they made his life so difficult that he never made... he made one more film, yes, the Summer Night's Dream, the one that's based on A Summer Night's Dream, but he was pissed off with them. It's so stupid, you know. They treated a man like that, who had considerable talent, enormous talent, but they were going to say, you know, you're not in the theatre now, you know, we're going to show you what's what.

The distribution of Something for Everyone was a bit patchy, and it did have a reasonable run in England and on the Continent, and in America, but it disappeared very quickly. Only a few years later, I found that the two copies that were in England were cannibalised into one copy and then that disappeared, and then there weren't any copies. When you get into that situation, very often, no new copies are made, because there's no demand. I'll give you an example, going back to Taste of Honey. For years and years and years I used to hire... when I used to hire Taste of Honey to show to students at the film school, I always got the copy and I began to recognise the joins and scratches, because it was always that copy. The only chance of making new prints would have been if somebody had decided to have a... retrospective, for instance, after Tony died, you could say, well we're going to have a Richardson retrospective, and it's going to be on television, and then suddenly there's money to make prints. But otherwise, these prints have a relative shelf life, and when it is a relatively short shelf life, and when the powers that be consider that the film has had its run, then nobody bothers to make any more copies. So who cares if the... if they consider that they've gathered in whatever money is to be made out of that movie, and they forget it and they go onto the next movie and then there aren't any prints. So that film disappeared.
Fortunately, not before it was shown on BBC television, and that's why I have a... that's why a VHS cassette of it. But, you become conscious, in incidents like that- through incidents like that, you become conscious of the fact that film is a very ephemeral medium. In another context I also discovered that theatrical release prints are considered to have a shelf life of about 10 years. So the actual material deteriorates. I made the big mistake of shooting my slides, my still slides, on negative film and having them printed in the laboratory and cutting them up and framing them. And I discovered that after 18 to 20 years, which isn't that long, all the green goes out of it and they turn bright mauve. And when I looked into this, I said, well, you know, this is not said, officially anywhere, but positive film just wasn't considered to have a shelf life longer than about 10 years. Of course, there were rows, Visconti and Scorsese and various people, there was a row about The Leopard, because those prints just disintegrated, which is something that didn't happen to the old Technicolor. The old Technicolor, which was printed in a three-strip process, that didn't deteriorate. But the last Technicolor plant in Europe and America was closed down somewhere at the end of the '70s, or early '80s, I believe. Now, if you have a three-strip... a film that's been shot on three-strip, and you have the original three strips of black and white negative, the only place it can be printed is Peking.

The following year I shot Le Mans, for Steve McQueen. I still don't really understand why they asked me to do that film, because it's not my sort of thing. But it's probably because they had the same... it was again working for the same production company that was the subsidiary of CBS, I think. Anyway, I was approached to do that film and the first job in that film was to give a briefing to some 20 camera crews, to shoot the actual race. They had assembled camera crews from Britain, Holland, France, Germany, all over the place. And as I speak French and German, I gave this trilingual briefing to those crews. The plan was... it was a film without a script. At that point there was no script. Somebody was starting to write... had started to write the script, but at that point there was no script. There was, what they called, a racing continuity. The idea was that Steve and his co-driver were driving these two Ferraris, I think they were, and... no there was a rivalry between Ferrari and the other... Maserati, or whoever. As you see, I'm not terribly interested in motor racing. They had worked very, very hard and very, very long.
The first thing they did, actually, to prepare for that film, is to get a mechanic to find a way to attach a 35 mm camera, shooting in Cinemascope, which that film is made in, to a motor car... to a racing car, which is not easy, because the racing cars are made as flimsy as possible and there just isn't a piece of metal strong enough to attach anything to, because they've been pared down to the last possible inch, centimetre, millimetre. But he made it. And after some months of preparation they were prepared. So they had this camera car ready, which was officially entered in the race. By enormous irony, the two action cars were out of the race quite early on, but the camera car finished. Only it had nothing to photograph. Anyway, at that point it was only a racing continuity and, as you know, the Le Mans race is a 24-hour race, and it involves a lot of ancillary activities. There's camping grounds and beer halls and cafés and dancing and God knows what.
So, during the actual race, I found myself supervising, trying to supervise what was going on, not easy. So, I used to enter one of these smokey... smoke-filled beer halls and see a crew working away in there, and I'd tap them on the back and I'd say, excuse me, are you working for us? Because I hadn't seen... there were... I had briefed 18 crews, but just before the race began, they hired... for some reason they hired three more crews whom I hadn't even met. That's how that happened. I wasn't quite sure whether they were working for us or not.
And then the race was successfully filmed, successfully except for the fact that the camera car was the only one to finish, out of our... from our bit. And then there was a break and then a little bit of regrouping. And then the serious filming started. The non-race filming. And Steve McQueen had set his scriptwriters an impossible task. Steve said, 'The film must begin at the beginning of the race and it must end at the end of the race, and there must be no flashbacks'. Well, how do you write any scenes? The only scenes you can write is when his co-driver is driving, and he's having a rest, because the rest of the time that's what you see of Steve McQueen. I don't know if people are going to pay a lot of money to see two hours of Steve McQueen like that in a racing car, but he was obsessed, because he is a racing car driver. He can drive cars in races, and does, and, he was absolutely obsessed. He said, 'I have never seen...' He said to me, 'I have never seen a movie, a racing movie, which gives you the feeling of being behind the wheel of a racing car'. And I said, 'And you never will'. Because every time they've said, 'Oh, what we need is this special piece of hydraulic pneumatic', I don't know, new piece of equipment and we'd say, 'Order it from God knows where, Hollywood or whatever', and whenever this new special piece of equipment used to arrive, usually on the crate it was stamped, Grand Prix, because that was the last racing movie he was in, used that sort of equipment for. There was nothing new.

Steve had given a job to several of his friends, including the man who'd long been his assistant director, who was sort of kicked upstairs to be the production manager. Although they had a very efficient German production manager who built the whole village, that they didn't use, and a canteen. It's a big, big, long, long story. I won't go into it all. But the sad thing was that this... some of these people that were sort of kicked upstairs by Steve, were not adequate to their jobs. And this particular guy, who used to be his very efficient assistant director, wasn't happy, to say the least, in the job that he was given by Steve, as production manager, or associate producer, whatever they called him. And his fingernails started falling out, one by one. He went to see specialists in Rome and in Berlin and God knows where, and they could do nothing for him, because it was a stress-related thing. He should've just been told to go and have a holiday somewhere, which he couldn't do, of course. And I remember one incident where his son was on the set and they had their wives with them, their sons and a lot of people, there was quite a menagerie. There was one incident where we were watching the proceedings from the grandstand, and next to us was... when I say us, it's me and Kate, next to us were this guy's wife and his son. And he said to us, 'Do you know we're going to be rich when this film's finished?'  And I said... and I said, 'Don't be too sure'.

We did have a clever, quite a clever hydraulically operated, sort of a little camera crane, which was sitting above the head... behind the head of the driver, and now that we weren't actually in a race, we could arrange all these things, with more elaborate equipment which didn't actually have to be fixed to a proper racing car. There was this piece of equipment they designed, which had... it had a remote controlled head. It could pan and tilt with remote control, but for some reason it was hydraulic. I don't know why it was hydraulic. It was very complicated and it never worked terribly well. But they designed all sorts of gimmicks and gadgets. And the film was made... from that point onwards the film was made with three units. The 21 camera units all went home except for three. It was totally regrouped. From that point onwards we had the British first unit, we had a French second unit, which was mandatory because the French unions have always been strong and were still very strong then, mandated that on the production company. They said, 'We will allow a British first unit to function, on condition that you engage a French second unit'. Which was significant a little bit later on.
And then I had... I engaged, or I led to have engaged... I caused to have engaged... that's not very good English, is it?  Anyway there was engaged my friend Alex Barbey who was a lone-man third unit. It was he who operated this hydraulic thing. It involved him being crouched in the bottom of the car. It was remote controlled but only from 2-3 feet away. So there were these three units. And then we started filming all kinds of ancillary things, pit stops and run-bys on the track, which, from that point onwards, of course, was entirely at our disposal. And... Meanwhile these two scriptwriters... there were three I think. There was a man and wife and there was a separate person and they were beavering away writing the script, which was never completed, as far as I'm concerned. It was not completed while I was there, because I was fired. There came a point where... well, first of all there was the... they realised that the motor... the racing cars were very temperamental creatures and if you said, 'We will start at 8 am', then the racing cars usually used to arrive on the set about 10, because there was always some problem that had to be tweaked. The racing car is very temperamental. So 8-10 usually went out the window because the cars weren't ready. And then, although we were shooting in June, there were some dusk shots and that created a problem, because if you start at eight in the morning, dusk happens about eight in the evening, which is a 12-hour day and I won't work 12-hour days. And I had it in my contract that I wouldn't 12... it was all laid down.
Kate had a marvellous formula for the contract. It said: Mr. Lassally's salary will be X pounds per week, including all reasonable overtime. Now, this was a wonderful phrase that you couldn't get away with nowadays, let alone... you couldn't get away with a few years later, let alone nowadays. Anyway, so when they discovered that there was a problem scheduling these dusk shots, they suddenly said... they issued this call sheet and they said, 'Tomorrow we're going to work eight to eight', or seven to seven, or something like that. And I said, 'Oh no, we're not', and I took a pencil and I drew two lines across this call sheet, and I wrote across: unacceptable. And all hell broke loose. It was like I'd defaced the Bible, you see. And this was an American shoot, unlike Hal Prince's film which was technically... well, it was technically American and British co-production. But Le Mans was a completely American shoot, on location in France. And nobody defaces call sheets in America.
The director also, John Sturges, a lovely man, very laconic, very laid back, he wouldn't dream of interfering or saying a word about any of the production arrangements. If the producers say we're going to work eight till eight, fine. Directing is that much less stressful than filming, than being the DP. Anyway, all hell broke loose, and the long and the short of it is that I was fired. And the reason I was fired was that... oh no, before that happened, the front office came down from Hollywood and they had a big to-do with Steve, because they were already $2 million into a $6 million budget without having achieved very much, so, of course, finally the balloon burst and they couldn't continue like that. And the front office came down and Steve said, very reluctantly, 'We have to let you go because we looked at all the ins and outs of it, and we can't fire the second unit, so we're going to fire the first unit'.
And so... so I left, but I had a very watertight contract and I was paid off, and that started the road to the Abbey which is a house where we now... where I lived for 25 years in England. Because at the time of Le Mans we stayed in a lovely little chateau, the Chateau de Coulans, I think it was called, and it sort of whetted my appetite and Kate's appetite for something a bit grander than a flat in Notting Hill Gate. That money that I earned on that movie enabled us to actually actualise that dream. So it wasn't a bad result in the end.

The next movie I shot on the Continent was called Gun Before Butter, which is based on a thriller by Nicholas Freeling featuring the detective, Van der Valk, a Dutch detective. This film was directed by an old friend of mine called Peter Zadek, Peter Zadek, Peter Zadek, who shares a similar history to my own. He's also of German origin and was a refugee. He came to England roughly about the same time as I did. And at that time... and started as a theatre director. I would say he is actually principally a theatre director. A bit like Peter Hall. He's made one or two movies but he's principally a theatre director. In fact, there was a period in London when all the theatre directors were called Peter. There was Peter Zadek, Peter Brook, Peter Hall. They were all called Peter.
And... first time I worked with Peter Zadek was on a small documentary that he made called, Simon, which was about a handicapped boy in London, and his various adventures. And I can't remember under what auspices this was made, but it was a little... a nice little film that was quickly shot and it had a certain amount of success. But that was several years before. During the making of that film, or during the making of another film that he made shortly after Simon... this is going to get very complicated. Anyway, there was an incident when Peter Zadek, who at that time was fairly poor, he hadn't got much money, was making this other film which features another little boy and a goat. And my friend, John Fletcher, actually photographed that for him, and I helped out once or twice. There was a particular occasion when they were filming in a pub in East London somewhere in the winter, in the depth of winter. And while they were shooting certain things that didn't need the goat... didn't feature the goat, they locked the goat in John's little van. John had a little van which they used for the shooting. When they finally came to get the goat for the next shot, they discovered that the goat had eaten Peter's only winter coat. It was very, very sad. I can picture his face. He's another one of those people who's got a slightly hangdog face anyway. I can imagine his face, having seen that the goat's eaten his only coat.

This film takes place in, let me get this right, in Amsterdam, Belgium and Germany. And it's all about butter smuggling, which apparently... It's in the '50s. Apparently in the '50s butter smuggling from Germany into Belgium, or Belgium into Germany, I'm not quite sure in which direction, was a major industry, apparently. Mostly carried out by little men who... little old men who crossed the frontier with it sort of all strapped to their waists with lots of packs of butter. Seems incredible, but apparently it's true. So this film is mainly shot in Amsterdam and the problem with that was that Amsterdam is full of cars, and if ever a city should be a completely pedestrian zone, it's Amsterdam. But it's actually full of motor cars. And to clear a sufficient area for us to film and not have any post-1950 motor cars in shot, was a major nightmare. So in that film most of the long shots are looking steeply upwards, so you have the tops of the houses in the background and not the street, which is full of motor cars.
And, Peter had an assistant with him that worked from... that he brought with him from the theatre. And I thought this guy was extremely efficient because, at the time before tape recorders were all that common, he had this little tape recorder, and when Peter said, here I want this that and the other, he said, all very, very efficient. Then I discovered, when we came to shoot one of the main locations in Amsterdam some weeks later, I discovered that this guy had actually prepped the house next door to the one that we were supposed to be working in. So that mitigated a bit on my opinion of his efficiency. And again, that film, which was made with a small crew and relative means, the art department was virtually non-existent. There were lots of scenes in police stations and the customs posts and things like that. And we were... there were lots of scenes in police stations and customs posts in the Netherlands, and on the wall we were absolutely hounded by this map that kept appearing in every one of those sort of sets. There was this map on the wall, which said: First Map of the Netherlands. It's obviously intended for use in schools. It's not meant for operational use in a police station. And I kept saying, 'Not that bloody map again', you know, it's not right.
And on one occasion we had a shot... we had a scene to do in a customs post, in a sort of temporary customs post on the border somewhere, and we were shooting in a house in Amsterdam and we looked out of the window and in the road there was this workman's hut on wheels, like a gypsy caravan that they used to use there, the road repairers used to use. I looked at this thing, I said, 'That wouldn't be a bad...' Because we hadn't found a location for this hut. We hadn't found the place where we could shoot the interior of this customs post. So we said, 'Yes, let's investigate'. So we sent them off to investigate, and they said, 'Yes, yes, fine, we're going to do that'. So we did all our shooting in the house and then when it came to the shooting in that hut, we opened the door and it was completely empty. It hadn't been prepared at all. So that was less than perfect.
And then the film was never released. It's one of those that I've mentioned earlier that was never finished. It was finished but it was never released because the... Nicholas Freeling's literary agent had pulled off a very successful, quite... a very clever coup. He'd sold the works of Nicholas Freeling twice, twice over. And, we had bought... the company that I was working for had bought the rights to this particular novel called Gun Before Butter. And, Thames Television had bought, at the same time, the rights to the character, Van der Valk, with their own new scripts. And both of us were making the first Van der Valk film, in our case it was the Van der Valk film; in their case it was the first Van der Valk programme with the series, and they were both ready at the same time. A court case developed in which they said we'd paid all this money to say that Nicholas Davenport is Van der Valk and can't suddenly have Frank Finlay being Van der Valk as well. We spent all this money publicising... big posters saying: Nicholas Davenport is Van der Valk. So this court case developed with the net result that the film was never shown, except on German television. I have a copy of it dubbed into German. It was supposed to be finished in English and German. It was shot entirely in English, which also surprised me, because the principal production company on that film was actually German television, and that they would allow a film, which they financed almost entirely, to be made in English, that surprised me. But then the Germans are so used to dubbing that it isn't really that surprising.

The producer on that film was Michael Birkett who's actually Lord Birkett. He directed the second unit for one day. Well, not the second unit, he directed us in some second unit shots, one day, when Peter had to go and give an interview somewhere, because he was about to become director of the theatre in Essen or something. And he had to leave for one day. So we said we'll do those various pick-ups, and Michael Birkett was the one who officially directed that. And we did the various bits and pieces and then we wanted a shot of this car crossing this railway bridge. So you're in the car and out of the window you see all these girders going by, you see. They said to the local people, 'Right, we're going to do the shot now of the car driving across this bridge', and they all looked at us blank. They said, 'You know that big girder bridge'. We explained what we wanted, a shot out of the window with all the girders going, and they kept looking at us blank. And I said, 'This is impossible'. You know jolly well there's... this is not in... by the way, this is not in Amsterdam, this is in Cologne. We were in Cologne. There was a short section of that film made in the area of Cologne. They wanted this shot. They kept looking at us... staring at us blankly. Then, of course, it transpired that this bridge, which everybody knows and everybody's seen, is not a road bridge, it's a railway bridge. So it pays to do your location scouting.

The next film that I made in Germany was The Clown, or Ansichten eines Clowns, which is a novel by Heinrich Böll. It was my first film with somebody who became a very, very dear friend, the Czech director, Vojtech Jasny. The way I met Vojtech for the first time was also quite interesting. I was in Greece shooting the documentary, The Greeks, which is set in Crete, all round here. It's made all round here. And Kate and I were staying in this government hotel, the Xenia, in Chania, and one day the phone rang and an extremely distant voice said, 'Walter?' 'Yes, yes', I said, 'speaking, speaking'. And it turned out to be an American writer and producer called Arnold Perl. He said to me, 'We're making this film about one of the stories by Shalom Aleichem and we want to look at it like Chagall. And I said, 'You know, this crackling news came over the wire, and I said, 'Yes, well, yes, that would be nice, but it's possibly a bit of a tall order I expect, but tell me more'. So they said, 'Where are you?'  And I said, 'Well, I'm here in Crete'. 'Well, we want to come and talk to you'. I said, 'You mean you want to come all the way to Crete to talk to me'. 'Yes, yes, don't worry, we'll come and talk to you. How long are you going to be there?'
So they came and they talked to me and they explained it in detail. In fact they wanted to make a film a bit like Fiddler on the Roof, with that kind of look to it. And I said, 'Well, yes, but as you know, I'm a cameraman and who's your director?' And they said, 'Well, we don't have a director yet'. So I said, 'Well, that's a little bit upside down. I do think you ought to find a director first, because maybe we don't get along or maybe he's already got his own cameraman, preferred cameraman'. Then I said, 'Well, for a subject like that I suggest to you that you look in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, because there you might find somebody who is very much in line with your... with that type of subject'. I didn't think of Israel because there aren't many directors in Israel anyway. Not well-known ones.
So they set off and they found Vojtech, Vojtech Jasny, and eventually there was a meeting between us, but the project collapsed. I can't remember why it collapsed, but it collapsed. But it led to my friendship with Vojtech, whom I first saw in Prague on the year of the Prague Spring and subsequently the Prague invasion. I remember Vojtech's wife, Kveta being very nervous and Vojtech was really a bit out of that kind of thing. He wasn't too concerned. Vojtech was just finishing one of his movies, called... in English it's called All My Good Fellow Countrymen. And this movie was just about finished when the Russians invaded. And he managed to finish it and they showed it. After about three months the Russians and the new Czech authorities twigged onto the fact that this was actually an anti-regime film. It wasn't exactly a communist-friendly film. And it was banned, and he had to leave the country. Not immediately, but he was sort of eased out. And the film wasn't shown for many years. Many years later it... it existed... For many years there existed one 35 mm copy dubbed into German and one 16 mm copy which is somewhere in Canada. Vojtech emigrated. He went to... initially to Salzburg where I met him several times, then to Munich, where again I met him several times, and then to America subsequently. But he was living in Munich at the time when he offered me The Clown. And I was delighted at the chance to work with him. He's a lovely man and very talented. A very poetic director and there's not many of those, there's really not many of those.

We started in Bonn and we did the big villa there and the flat which... in the story the flat's been given to him by his dad, which is supposed to be in Bonn, was actually in Munich. For various reasons it was more convenient. The production company, I think, was based in Munich, something like that. So, we worked for a while in Bonn and then we worked... Cologne and Bonn and then we worked in Munich. And in Munich I was able to use the first HMI lights which the... my colleague and friend, Jost Vacano, who was a bit of a gadgeteer, he had developed them himself. He had adapted a flat-fronted quartz light to take an HMI bulb, because the actual bulb was quite small. I had worked with the forerunner of the HMI light, I already described this, I think, for on Blood of Hussain and on Something for Everyone, which I didn't describe at that point. But Something for Everyone we... the scenes in the... it's called the Sängersaal, the Singer's Hall, at the very top of the castle. That was actually lit entirely with these Arri Suns which was the precursor of the HMI. Because the HMI came out in about 74/75. And Jost Vacano had made his own. As soon as the bulbs were available he designed his own lamp by adapting one of these quartz lights, and they were the smallest HMIs I've ever worked with. Because when they were commercially produced all kinds of safety regulations were put in place. It had to have a thick glass in front and all sorts of other things. So I never had the chance, again, to work with such small, really small, HMIs, but they were very, very convenient because you could fix them up, say, on the curtain rail and shine them at the ceiling. Most of my work with HMIs has been using them in the reflective mode, nearly all the time. Usually a mixture, but nearly all the time. The principal lighting was used in the reflective mode and I used to use HMIs to light all my day interiors.
But, in that particular film, the things I did in Cologne, the lamps weren't available yet, to me. I hadn't heard about them. That was lit in the conventional way with orange filters on the windows and tungsten lights inside, or no orange filters on the windows and blue in front of the tungsten lights, which is not a very efficient way of going about it. Work with Vojtech was very pleasant. He's a lovely man. He's very gentle, very quiet. But very talented and very efficient. Well, efficient within that... I wouldn't say he was the most efficient director in terms of time, but he was perfectly, perfectly okay. The film was made in something like eight weeks. I think we had something like eight weeks which was perfectly adequate. Heinrich Böll came to visit the set a couple of times. And when Helmut Griem, who played the clown, asked him advice, Heinrich used to say, 'Look, don't ask me because this book, to me it's somewhere in the past, it's what you English call old hat', he said. In fact, that was painfully true because by the time that film was made, the subject was a bit old hat. The subject is about the Catholic community just after the war and the clash, possibly, between the Catholic aspect and other aspects in Helmut's character, where he goes back to his family who he's been separated from, really for some time. They don't approve of him at all. And it leads to the breakup of his relationship with his girlfriend. All very nicely done.

That film, The Clown, had a very good cast. There was Helmut Griem who played the clown himself, then Hanna Schygulla played his girlfriend and Eva Maria Meineke played his mother. Hans Christian Blech played Hanna Schygulla's father, who runs a small tobacconist shop. And Heinrich Böll came down a couple of times and whenever Griem would ask him advice, he used to say, 'Look, for me this is a bit old hat, ask the director'. And there was one occasion when... We got quite friendly. Kate was there, as she always was on location. Not all the time, but quite a lot of the time. We got invited to dinner one day by Böll, and he said, 'Come to dinner, we're celebrating'. And I said, 'Oh lovely, where shall we go?' We decided a certain restaurant, you know, and then I said, 'By the way, what are we celebrating?' And he said, 'My doctor is dead'. And apparently, his old doctor, the one who died, had said to him for heart condition, whatever he suffered from, he said: no alcohol. And the new doctor had said, 'Well, I don't know, I don't think we have to be quite as severe as all that, in moderation', and Böll said, 'Well, what does that mean?' And he said, 'Well, let's say not more than a bottle a day'. Böll promptly produced one, sort of, three-litre bottle of red wine. But he was a very nice man, Heinrich Böll, very nice man. As was Jasny.

Now that film contained a black and white sequence. Quite a few films that I made in the period after black and white ceased to be the norm, contained black and white sequences. And as the years went by, as I've already mentioned, it got more and more and more difficult because, the people that understood black and white, had either retired or died. And to get it properly processed was a problem, to obtain the film stock could be a problem. But in that sequence... in that film there was a World War II sequence, and I've always found it impossible to think of World War II in anything but black and white. Somebody else might be able to, but to me World War II happened in black and white. So I proposed to Jasny that it should be black and white, and he readily agreed, and we shot those scenes in black and white. Which works very well, yes, it works very well in the film. That was 1975 so the real problems with black and white hadn't really started yet. It was still possible. Although The Wild Party... The Wild Party is '74, and already in Hollywood, there was already problems with black and white. But in Germany the problems hadn't really started. There were labs very much used to developing it, very much running a bath still every day... every night, which had stopped in Hollywood. So I didn't have any problems with that.

When that film was shown, I would say it was a modest success. But a few newspapers pointed out the fact that this topic is really... it's a little bit passé. But they all said it's very well made, very well acted. And then I received the best compliment I've ever had for my work, which I still treasure. It was a half a line, and it said: 'Photography...' Wait a minute, what did it say? Yes. Photography, in brackets, very discreet, precise and without gimmicks, close bracket, Walter Lassally. Now, I've never had a better compliment than that. That's my best review ever.

That same year I made a second film with Vojtech called Ivo, or in German it was called, An Attempt to Escape, Fluchtversuch. And it was made in Austria and Yugoslavia, Slovenia. It was much more of a flawed film than The Clown, which was pretty much all of a piece. But Ivo had problems. It was sponsored by Austrian... money from Austria and also the production... a lady called Pia Arnold who was, by profession, a production manager, had managed some quite expensive American productions on location in Germany, she was the producer of that film.
There were quite a few problems. The first problem was that the cast was a mixture of Yugoslavs who were used to a very naturalistic tradition of acting, and Austrians who were the complete opposite. Who were from the Burgtheater and they all thought they were Sarah Bernhardt, so the postman talking to the landlady, said something, 'I think you have a letter today, madam', you know, that sort of thing. And Vojtech, not being a native German speaker, that didn't grate on him to the extent that it grated on me, but basically it was a problem that you couldn't... you could mitigate against, but you couldn't avoid, entirely avoid. That was an ongoing problem right through the film.
Now, the story is about a group... a family of guest workers, so-called guest workers from Yugoslavia, who are working in Vienna. And there is a father and a brother and the young son, who is keeping house for them, and the mother stayed back in Yugoslavia. So there's this household of three or four, with the son keeping house for them, and they go off to work every day and he's at home getting harassed by the landlady and the neighbours, and God knows what. So he's very unhappy and just before Christmas he decides he wants to go back to Yugoslavia, and he just takes off and he hitchhikes his way back to Yugoslavia, along a road that is famous for the number of accidents along there. It's the road going from Vienna to... through Graz into Yugoslavia, into Lubliana.

The story of Ivo is about a group... a family of guest workers who working... from Yugoslavia working in Vienna. There's the two brothers and the son of one of them. While the two brothers go off to work every day, the son keeps house for them. He's a 10-year-old, 11-year-old boy. The mother's back in Yugoslavia. The son is there all day and he has trouble with the neighbours, he has trouble with the landlady, they don't really like him very much, so one day he decides he's going to... just before Christmas, he's going to light out and he's going to hitchhike his way back to Yugoslavia. So the film takes place... About a third of the film takes place in Vienna in that house, and the rest of the film is on the road towards Yugoslavia, and then it finishes in Yugoslavia. That's the one film... I never even had a dolly on that film, because nearly... the house... the flat, the initial flat is too small, as is the house in Yugoslavia, that we shot in, too small to use a dolly effectively. The rest of the film takes place on the road, so if we have a dolly shot it's in the car, or in a truck or something. So that film was made without a dolly. It's the only time I worked a whole film without a dolly.
We had a mixed crew, we had a... no, we had a German crew, part Austrian, and that's one film I didn't have my usual German assistant, because as George was my usual assistant in Greece and Tom Hoppey in America, I also had a German assistant called Peter Arnold, who did most of the German films with me. But that was an exception. That was somebody else whose name was Adi. His real name was Adolf. But, of course, nobody likes to say that their name is Adolf, for certain reasons, so he's known as Adi. Adi Gürtner.
And, the shooting went pretty smoothly most of the time. Most of the time it went pretty smoothly, but all the time I was aware of this problem, which obviously wasn't going to go away. It was going to cause problems in post-production. There's a lovely scene in that movie where the hero, the 10-year-old, half way to Yugoslavia, he meets another 10-year-old in Graz. In the railway stations in Graz he meets this other 10-year-old who was a very interesting child who had been all over Europe. He'd been kicked from pillar to post, as a sort of a refugee, and ended up in Vienna, but he was of Russian origin. They have a wonderful scene together in a restaurant. He makes his money by kombines, what they call kombines, in Greek, you know. He works the railway station. So he says, 'I'm going to invite you to dinner' and he goes to... they have a dinner in this restaurant, and at the end of the dinner, he says, 'Well, I've got to go now, got to get on with it'. That's a good example of what went wrong in the dub, because he says in German... he says, 'Muss jetzt gehen, du weisst schon, Geschäfte!', which is almost Yiddish, and it should've been translated as: 'I've got to go now, you know, business'. They translated it as commerce instead of business. He said, 'I've got to go now, you know, commerce'. I mean... And she spent a lot of money on the dubbing. Completely thrown out of the window.
The film was never shown outside Austria and Germany. A great shame.  You say it should've been in black and white, you thought.  Well I thought that with that particular subject, it needed to be made either in 16 mm with some forced film in order to get the realism. Because, as I've already said many times, colour tends to glamorise things, and I would've liked to have found a way of making that either in black and white or in 16 and blowing it up, or giving it some sort of grainy quality. But they were totally opposed to that, because it was partly financed by Austrian television, and they wouldn't consider it.

Unfortunately I only made two feature films with Vojtech. Then our ways parted again, except for the following year we made quite an interesting documentary about the painter, Ernst Fuchs which brought us back to Vienna again. But apart from that, I never, unfortunately, had the chance to work with Vojtech again. But I did tell... In the course of all this work, I saw this film that he made in Czechoslovakia which was banned for all those years, and that... it's such a lovely film. It's about the story of a small village in Bohemia, between 1945 and about the time of the Russian invasion, not quite up to that point. And you get to know the characters in that village. One by one everybody becomes a friend. It's so intimately made, that at the end of the film, you feel you've known those people all your life. And I said to Vojtech, very sincerely, I said, 'If I'd made just one film like that, I feel I could die happy'.

I was lucky enough to be able to make two more films entirely in black and white and they were both shot in Berlin. And, in those years, every time I visited Berlin I used to walk through the streets with this silly grin on my face, because I just loved hearing the familiar accents. Berlin has a very colourful local accent, just like Cockney in London. And I just love to hear that. So I used to walk through the streets with this silly grin on my face. So the first of these black and white films was for a director called Hans Noever whom you could say was a sort of on the edge of the German new wave, if there is a such a thing. With Fassbinder and the others. Wenders and Fassbinder.
Noever was a sort of minor character in that respect, but a very interesting guy, full of humour, very funny, and quite talented. He wrote the script as well as directing this film which is called Die Frau gengenüber, which means, The Woman Opposite, or The Woman Across the Way, it was called in English, because there's already a film called The Woman Opposite, I think. And this film is set in... it uses Berlin as the big city. It's doesn't... it's recognisably Berlin, but it doesn't have to be Berlin, it's just the character of the city. The city is a character in the story.
The story is about an obsessive husband who keeps thinking that his wife, who is completely innocent, is deceiving him in some way. So he devises this plot that he says he's going away for a few weeks, and he disguises himself, he dyes his hair and he moves into a block of flats which has a direct view onto the balcony of the flat that he's living in with his wife. Then he just spies on her, as it were. Before that, he's introduced his wife, who's a shy country girl, to his friend. He's an insurance assessor. So in the office where they work, he has his friend, and before he goes away, he introduces his wife to this friend, more or less to see if she's tempted, or if he can catch her doing something she shouldn't be doing, which indeed he does. But it's very much due to him that he's put them in that position. And the husband is played by a Polish actor, Franciszek Pieczka who was excellent. He was really excellent. And the wife was a relatively unknown German actor. Well, she was sort of known in Germany, but not well and she wasn't a star. The friend was played by an amateur, actually. He was also the assistant director. I think he used the name Jodi Buchman as the... for his acting work. And as I said, the city is this sort of character in the plot. We used the S Bahn, the overhead railway, the overhead Metro, in Berlin. There's an underground but there's also an over-ground. We used that as punctuation in the story. Every now and then you just get this shot of this little S Bahn train going across the picture. That worked very well, and the black and white is very... I think that film wouldn't have been a patch of what it is, in colour. It wouldn't be anything like as good. Because the black and white, as I've said many times already, enables you to stylise things, and you're not distracted by extraneous things, as you might be if it were in colour. The S Bahn, for instance, is yellow and red. Much better that it's in black and white. Much better.

I visited East Berlin which was quite a procedure. You have to go to a certain station and show your passport, and they look at you. There's a mirror above the thing. They look at you from on top and from underneath, and God knows what. But it was interesting because I wanted to see what was going on. It was my first opportunity since... more or less my first opportunity since that festival in '51, before the wall was built... before that wall was built. So that was interesting for me. And... but it's a mixed experience; a bittersweet experience. Because a divided city is never particularly pleasant. West Berlin had a pleasant, slightly rural, slightly small town atmosphere at that time, which was quite pleasant, which is all gone now. I used the opportunity, such as it was, to explore a little bit the Eastern side, but the real opportunity to do that came much later when I made a film in Berlin. My third film in Berlin was made immediately after the fall of the wall. But in that film I'd already started, and I became aware of theatre in East Berlin, which was very, very good. And the one thing... the one... the community which suffered quite a bit after the... what they call the Wende, the changes, was the theatre community. They were quite on hard times because German... Berlin had three opera houses. There were two in the West and one in the East, or one in the East and two in the West. Of course, they couldn't sustain all that theatrical activity after they were reunited. So some of the theatre people actually suffered a bit, and the audiences.

And then I made a second film in Berlin, also in black and white, three years later, which was called Engel aus Eisen, The Iron Angel, and that was based on a actual incident which happened during the blockade, when the airlift was on. There was a gang of youths who were staging fairly spectacular robberies. And the leader... oh no, the name's gone out of my head again. The leader of this particular gang was the hero of this. Well, if you call it that, the main protagonist of this film. But we had a... Yes, Gladow, his name is Gladow. There was a real Gladow, so in the film he's called something else, but it's based on the real Gladow, who was this leader of this band of youths who committed some robberies during that period.
The first problem with that film was the cast, because we had to find half a dozen or eight young men between the ages of, say, 16 and 22, to play the gang. And it was almost impossible. In England it would've been a doddle. It would've been terribly, terribly easy. In America too, but not in Germany. In Germany, anybody who's had any acting training immediately behaves like they have to declaim their lines. They cannot play plumbers and electricians and gang members. They're much too theatrical. They are incredibly theatrical. It's a real problem. We went through dozens and dozens and dozens of people before we found somebody who could play that part, but only just. Because, in the end, even he had to be dubbed because he looked all right, but he had this high tinny voice, so he had to be... the whole thing had to be dubbed.

That is directed by Thomas Brasch who was mainly a poet, and a very good one, living in Eastern Germany. He's one of those people who fled Eastern Germany at some point, but quite late on in his career. And he was now living in the West. And the actor, Hilmar Thate who's also a very good actor who played in that film, Katharina Thalbach was in that film as well. Hilmar Thate was one of those actors who had permission to work in the West. There were a few people whom they trusted to work in the West, because they knew they'd come back. Sometimes there was a bit of pressure. He had his whole family in the East and he couldn't afford to light out on them. But Thomas had started... he was actually living in the West at that point, but only just.
And, there were some very interesting sequences in that film. Like there was a sequence of a robbery in the main power plant of the city, which we staged... I suggested that we stage it a bit like the scene from Metropolis, or something like that. It was almost silent. There was no dialogue, and there was all these staircases and people coming out of trapdoors, and it was very, very well done. Very, very interesting. And then there's a big climax where he's finally cornered by the police and there's a shoot-out, and he's taken away on the back of a donkey cart and all the... or a horse and cart, and all the neighbours are standing around, shouting, 'Berlin is not Chicago!  Berlin is not Chicago!'

When I was preparing that film I was in Hollywood to make... for a commercial, just for a few days. That's another story. There was a company in America that made commercials and they had planned a commercial with... which was the Pot-scrubber 3, which is a dishwasher. This commercial consisted of a dishwasher and a working surface and another white machine with a tabletop on top, and Debbie Reynolds dances on top of these three machines. In the background there's a huge velvet black background and there's a big electric sign with little light bulbs that says, 'Debbie Introduces the Pot-scrubber 3'. But I was making this commercial in Hollywood, and I was only there a few days. So one of those days I was still pretty jet-lagged. The phone rings at three o'clock in the morning and this voice says, 'The film that you sent us for testing, this black and white film for this... in preparation for Engel aus Eisen, the film you sent us will only run in Russian cameras'. I said, 'This is crazy'. You know, this man is crazy, ringing me up at three o'clock in the morning. They're never conscious of the time difference. Many, many times have I had a phone call and people say, 'Oh, is it three o'clock in the morning?  Oh, I'm sorry'. So, I thought, this can't be true.
But it turned out to be true in a very strange way. In a hurry, in London, I had purchased a 50ft role of this particular Ilford negative that I wanted them to test. It turned out that it wasn't a movie roll, it was a bulk-loading stills film. And something else I didn't know, bulk-loading stills film negative has positive perforations. The shape of the perforation, there's a negative shape and a positive shape. This particular negative, for God knows what reason, has positive perforations, so it jammed in the Arriflex which wasn't able to handle it. But the Russian cameras had such huge tolerances they were able to... you could put anything in there. You could probably run sausages through it and it would still... So that turned out to be true. But at first I was... If you can imagine, getting a phone call like that in the middle of night, I was totally mystified.

Each time I shot a film in black and white it became more difficult. Then I did a workshop in Berlin, again in black and white, and the same mistake was made there that I already encountered in... a problem in the labs I already encountered on Engel aus Eisen, happened again a few years later. I think 10 years later in a workshop that I did in Berlin. I said to the same guy in the lab, who was still there, I said, 'Don't you remember, we had this same problem, we solved it then. We just have to do the same thing again'. Because, there was a mismatch between the negative and the positive. The negative was Kodak and the positive was Agfa, and if you don't adjust it in a certain way, you get rock-hard images, you know, contrasty to a degree you wouldn't believe. Exactly the same thing happened. They hadn't learnt anything, or they'd forgotten about it because black and white has become something of an experiment.
Every time you make a film in black and white, either commercially or for the students, you have to consider it like an experiment. Everything has to be set up and tested, thoroughly. Because, with colour, which is now the norm, you can hand your stuff in, usually in the evening, and next day you get it back and there's no problems, normally. You can't do that with black and white. You have to test it all. Is the negative development all right, is the temperature... that's a big problem... is the temperature of the developer correct? I'll tell you a story about that which is linked to this. Because they cut corners. If the temperature of the developer is slightly raised you can get... instead of a development time of eight minutes, you only need six minutes, but the result isn't the same. You get more grain.
Exactly the same thing happened to me in colour, in Hollywood, in a major Hollywood laboratory. I was working with the students in the American Film Institute, which is not like the British Film Institute, it's more like a film school. They were using Eastman colour, whatever, at the time in 16 mm, and it was dreadful. The results were terrible. Terribly grainy. I said, I don't understand this. We use the same material in 16 mm, in England, and there isn't any problem. So with some difficulty I penetrated the holy sanctum, you know, the holy inner sanctum of this laboratory and lo and behold, there was a very interesting hand-written notice pinned on the side of the machine, which said something like, 'Push one, push two, push three', which means forcing the development. Then it said, 'Pull one, pull two', which means pushing it a stop, pushing it two stops, pushing it three stops, pulling it a stop, pulling it two stops. Interestingly enough, on the 16 mm machine, the changes were made by changing the development time. But on the 35 mm machine they were made by changing the temperature of the developer. You can't do that because it alters the granularity. So there was this... and the upshot of all that was that there was this major, and I really mean major, Hollywood laboratory, regularly processing Eastman colour, a whole degree centigrade too hot. Where the law, the norm, that Kodak lay down, is plus or minus two tenths of one degree, that is the leeway, because that process, which is known as the hot process, has a leeway of two tenths of one percent... two-tenths of one degree. And they were processing a whole degree hotter than it should've been. As a result, of course, the results were dreadful. And when I went into it a bit further, I realised neither Kodak nor the laboratory, nobody has any interest in correcting this. Because, if people say, 'Oh, this stuff is terrible, I'll use Fuji', you know, 'I'm not going to use that film, it's dreadful'. If they use Fuji they get the same result because the fault is not with the material, the fault is with the development. If you go to Kodak, as it were, if the people say, you know, that material is fine on 35 mm, but in 16 it's terrible, so they say, 'Why don't you shoot on 35'.

In the period when I was waiting for one of the Mark Twain films to be ready, I got a phone call to take over the shooting of The Magic Mountain, which was a big German epic. I believe it was the most expensive German... post-war German film. It had run into problems. It was produced by a well-known German producer, and the director was Hans Geissendörfer whom, up to that point, I had never met. Kate told me about it and I said, 'I don't want to do that, take over somebody else's movie', because it had been Robby Muller, who's a friend of mine, was the cameraman, and he'd just been fired. I said, 'There must be a good reason. I don't want to take over a film like that'. So Kate said to them, blah, blah, blah. Walter's got a problem because you've got a six-month schedule and he's waiting for this American film to be made. But there was a factor there that we didn't know.
The man inquired what film that was and we told him, and he said, 'Ah, but we're co-producing that film as well, and we can arrange for it to be postponed'. And we were caught. So, I had to say yes, and I set off with some misgivings, obviously, for Montreux in Switzerland. In a little mountain resort called Vevey above Montreux there was a very depressed crew, all sitting in the hotel, bar, mainly. I introduced myself and I was introduced to the director, and the first thing I said to the director... I said, 'Are you absolutely sure you really want me? Because I don't normally do that sort of thing, and for God's sake, Robby Muller is a... you know, is a very good cameraman'. So he said, 'Ah, yes, well, I didn't want to do it, it's the producer, the producer fired him'. And then I got... the whole story came out.
What they'd done at that point, they'd done two weeks shooting. They'd done a snow storm in the mountains, which was all scratched, because they'd used a brand new Moviecam which... I would never use a brand new camera for just that reason. Much rather have an old clapped out camera that's just come off some other movie, rather than a brand new camera from a factory, which is always trouble. Anyway they'd used this new Moviecam and in the snow storm conditions that they were in... in the mountains there, somebody hadn't paid attention, or there was something wrong with the camera anyway, so when they got the rushes back they were all scratched. And then... that was bad enough, but the following week they did a huge ballroom scene, a huge sequence in the ballroom of the Grand Hotel Montreux with 300 extras, and the principal, Charles Aznavour and Rod Steiger and Marie-France Pisier... it had a big international cast that film, from three or four different nations. And they'd used a available light technique, which Geissendörfer had worked out together with Robby Muller, but they hadn't told the producer about it. And when he saw the results he just went mad and he fired everybody.
Well, we couldn't fire Geissendörfer because... he would've done if could've, I think. But he couldn't fire Geissendörfer because Geissendörfer had partly written the script, or he had some rights to the script so he couldn't be fired. But Robby Muller could be fired and he was fired. That was because... I can quite... I can sympathise with the... I do sympathise with the producer in this case, although I never saw the material, but I can imagine what it must've looked like. Because here is this enormous ballroom, very high, and at the very top there is a glass dome, 300ft up, I don't know, very high up. And all they'd done for the lighting, is they'd replaced the bulbs in the chandeliers, which hang above and which round the room they'd put 100W bulbs instead of 40W bulbs, something like that, which isn't very much in terms of colour movie shooting at 100 ASA. And they'd put two HMIs in through the dome at the top, through... there's trapdoors, but the trapdoors are vertical, so the HMIs were set... must have been set, because I looked at it all, they must've been set at an angle something like this, through a vertical trapdoor. So, God knows, more than 20ft candles couldn't have arrived at the bottom, because it's a long way up and the angle isn't favourable. So I said, 'Yes, well I think I understand'. But I still said to Geissendörfer, 'Are you sure that you want me to do this?' And he said yes, so we went ahead.

We started shooting and we soon... I soon discovered differences between me and Geissendörfer. He objected to the way I lit the exterior of the sanatorium, because The Magic Mountain takes place largely in a sanatorium for the tubercular patients. And it's set on the eve of World War I, 1913, and it's a totally unfilmable novel, in my opinion. Because there is absolutely no action, and I mean none! The subject is the conflict between state and religion in 1913 in Germany. Not exactly your most commercial subject. Anyway, they... so there was this exterior of the sanatorium, which had four rows of... it was a four-storey building and it was lined with balconies. So I would set up on the street... on the opposite side of the street, looking up at this building, night shot... a night scene. And on each of the balconies there is a little lamp, a little table lamp, with a red shade, a red cloth shade. I lit that and when they saw the results, either at the shooting or at the rushes, they said, 'That isn't right. All those balconies should be red. The light in the balconies should be red, because here's this red lamp'. And I said, 'Yes, but if you do that it doesn't look good, because the red lampshade against the red background wall wouldn't even show up'.
So I did something which is perfectly normal, I lit the balconies normally and then the red... and maybe slightly warm, but the red lampshade stands out against a more or less neutral background. To me it looked fine. But they had this strange idea that this is what it should look like, which is not true. It isn't true. Who's to say, anyway, what it should look like?  We come back to the question of what is realism?  Or what is naturalism, for that matter. Anyway, that was the first hiccup.
Then the hiccups only increased. Because I was using a star filter at that time, which had replaced the net. The star filter had a slight background... a slight drawback, which the net also had, but to a slightly lesser extent, which is that it produced stars on light sources, like candles, and on specular reflections. Now, there's a scene where Charles Aznavour carries this silver-topped cane, this is an exterior mind you, and every now and then, as he walked with his... swung this cane, a little star, kind of, blinked on the silver handle on the star, and  Geissendörfer went absolutely mad. He said, 'Oh God, that star, I can't stand it, this is not... it's like a commercial, you mustn't... you mustn't use that filter!' I said, 'Okay, okay, calm down', but I can't just leave it off. I'll have to find another way of softening the image to please me, you know, to be the sort of image that I'm prepared to sign to... sign for. So I devised a... I used a low-contrast filter together with a diffusion filter, and it wasn't my ideal way, but at least it didn't produce any little stars. But his reaction was totally over the top.

There was another instance where we'd shot the scene of... the hero's best friend is dying. And, he played it beautifully, and I'd been asked... and it's a hospital room and there's a little table lamp on next to the bed. And the friend... so the dying friend is lying in the bed and the hero is sitting in an armchair some six to eight feet away from the end of the bed. So I put a little spotlight on the hero's face, from sort of the angle that the... it's called extending the light into the distance. Because normal light sources like table lamps don't throw the light any distance, they don't produce any light further than about a foot away. So that's a perfectly normal technique. We went to see the rushes and this guy, who'd just played his death scene beautifully, had to sit there while Geissendörfer discussed with me, for an hour at least, whether the scene really looks... really looks as though there is only this one lamp on in the room. He just became impossible. And the climax of all this is the ridiculous duel in the snow, which is the only piece of action in the whole movie, as far as I can see. Where... they chose to play this duel, to stage this duel, in a field, which is covered to a depth of approximately three and a half feet in snow. So I have to act this out, which I can't do in this circle. So there you have these two people standing back to back with their pistols, and then they start walking, and they go like this, through the snow. And this is supposed to be a dramatic moment, not a comic climax. It's absolutely ridiculous.
And then there was a scene where... everybody was playing in their own language. Rod Steiger was speaking English and Marie-France Pisier was speaking French, there was an Italian actor who was speaking Italian and it was all going to be dubbed into the respective languages at the end. But Charles Aznavour, for some reason I never discovered, was playing in English. And he was walking up and down in this... outside this snowfield studying, you know, repeating his text. There was a mistake, there was a typo in the text, where two words were transposed, and he kept rehearsing it with these two words transposed. And nobody corrected him, because there weren't any native English speakers there. And I didn't correct him because I'd be very interested to see if that goes right through to the final version. Because this is a ridiculous way of going about things. Well, I never got that far because, after four weeks or so, I got fired.
At the point were we moved to Berlin, I'd shot for four weeks in Switzerland and in Montreux and surroundings, and in Interlaken, I did quite a lot of stuff, and then we were due to move to Berlin where the previous team,  Geissendörfer and Muller, had prepared the studio, had built the set of the interior of the sanatorium, they'd built in a studio in Berlin. And they had decided that it was basically a TV studio so it had all these hanging lamps, which you could move along rails, and put in any position. They shifted all the lamps down... they'd run them down the rails right... like parked them at the end of the stage, and they were going to use, again, something like the available light technique, and I said, 'I'm not going to do it that way', because first of all, what's the point of doing something that you know your producer won't accept. There has to be some agreement. And I also said to him, at one point, when I was getting rather angry, I said, 'Look, you don't hire Renoir if you want your painting to look like a Max Ernst'. So, anyway I got fired. And... they found a way of firing me. This studio... in this studio in Berlin, something happened to me which had never happened to me before, I had an office with my name on the door. And in this office there was a little refrigerator and when I was welcomed to the studio, there was a bunch of flowers and in the refrigerator there was a half a bottle of champagne. But my days in that studio were numbered, less than a week. When I got fired, the name had gone from the door, and the bottle of champagne had gone from the fridge. That's the end of that story.

Shooting in Berlin gave me the opportunity to visit the flat where I was... where I grew up. The first time was in '51 when I went to that World Youth Festival, and at that time they'd divided the flat into two and I only had access to one half because the other half had refugees from the East in it, who were very suspicious and they wouldn't let me in. But by the time Die Frau Gengnüber was made, the flat had been reunited into one flat. It was a six-room flat, I think. The funny thing is, when you visit a place like that, where you grew up, it all seems terribly small, because in your mind it's much larger. That was particularly true, not only of the flat, but of the little park nearby. There's a park with a lake in it where I used to go skating in the winter, and the slope where we played with the toboggan, all that seemed miniaturised to the way that I had it in my mind. Of course, this is common knowledge that this is what happens when you have... your memories date back that far. But it was very nice. It was an architect living... a young architect was living in the flat, and he welcomed me and we discussed old times and new times. Anyway, that was a nice experience for me.

So during the '70s I also worked in England and elsewhere, and one of the films I made in England was called Malachi's Cove. It's one of those films that suffered an unfortunate fate towards the end. It was never released until much later. And that was a film starring Donald Pleasance and... what's her name?  A young girl who was just getting started. I should study these names beforehand. Anyway, it was a studio-made film, directed by Henry Herbert, who is actually the 18th Earl of Pembroke, I think I've got the number right, and who is the owner of the famous Wilton House which has an even more famous cube room in it. He was a very nice man. All my experiences of the aristocracy have been very pleasant. There was Sir Aymer Maxwell, the producer of Another Sky, there was Henry Herbert, there was Michael Birkett, and they're all very charming. So my experience of so-called blue stockings was entirely favourable. And... where was I... I've lost the track again?
[Q] Cornwall and the small stage. 
Yes, Cornwall and the small stage, yes. I made... That film was made at Bray Studios, and a short section was filmed in Cornwall. I had the job of matching studio scenes in Bray, where the studio... it's a small stage and the studio wall was only just behind the set wall, so when you look out of the window... when somebody opens the door, when you look out of the window of this cottage in the studio, what you see is a backing, and that has to match the real sea landscape that we photographed in Cornwall. And I used a trick, which comes from the theatre, which is, if you haven't got much space between the camera and the backing, which was to use a large theatrical gauze, like the ones they used in the theatre. That is placed is about 3ft, 4ft, from the backing towards the camera, and that, kind of, gives you a bit of distance, it gives you the feeling of distance. And that worked extremely well. When I see that film now I'm quite pleased with the results. And I've thought of the girl's name, it's Veronica Quilligan.

The storm sequence, yes. There's a storm sequence in that film which... we had a very short schedule and the storm sequence had to be shot while we were in Cornwall, and that turned out to be quite tricky because of the logistics of it all. First of all, a storm is only believable if it happens in cloudy weather. Well, storms in England tend to be in cloudy weather, so that wasn't a big problem. But having a storm within the schedule, that was the problem.
So we picked a certain inlet, the Bossiney Cove, I think it's called, in North Cornwall, and we did get one day of suitable weather, but only just. So it's a bit touch and go, but in the finished film it's not bad. Then that film was not released when it was finished because it was made with Canadian Tax Shelter money and I discovered that films made with Tax Shelter money, they're not always keen to release them at all. The last thing they want is a big profit. That's the last thing they want. So that particular film... I'd forgotten all about it, when three years later, I was walking past the Odeon Kensington one day, who was showing My Fair Lady, or some other movie, and I was just glancing at the pictures outside the cinema. In those days they still had pictures outside the cinema, and suddenly I looked closer and there was my film, only the title was The Seaweed Children. It'd been released as a second feature, without me knowing anything about it.

The next film was in Israel. A very interesting film. Again, it came to grief at the end, but it was a very interesting film. Initially it was a British/Belgian/Israeli co-production with a young director, very talented young director, who wrote the script and whose first film... in fact, it turned out to be his only film, but that was his first film. He then turned to commercials and became a very successful and very rich director of commercials, but he would've dearly loved to have made another film. Anyway, the story of that film is... to call it science fiction is slightly misleading because it all takes place in the desert. And the first thing you see is a string of old American motorcars making their way across the desert, on a road across the desert, in, sort of, convoy, at night. And again, I used my day for night system. That worked pretty well most of the time. And then the next morning you have the day scene and these cars have parked in a circle, in a dip in the desert, in a hollow in the desert, and right round is desert. You don't see anything but desert. And that was quite a problem to find such a location. We spent a long time looking on the road and by helicopter, and we finally found such a location in the Sinai desert, in a piece of land that was, at that time, occupied by Israel, and is now back in Egyptian control, some miles from El Arish. That had the advantage that you could pan... make a 360º pan and not see anything but sand dunes, and yet you were within very easy road... access of a asphalt road, which was hidden by one of the sand dunes.
The first time I went there, when we were actually shooting... preparing the shooting, we went there to see if the preparations had been completed, because they built a little canteen there, all... just beyond the dip, where the asphalt road finished, they built a couple of buildings so we could have sheltered accommodation for eating and cooking. And... we came over this little dip, to look at the actual location, and there... lo and behold, what we saw, was in the far distance there was this group of little men, and they were sweeping the desert with brooms. Hard to believe, but true. And what they were doing was that this area had a few green sprouts that were coming up through the desert, which turned out to have roots about 8ft long, to find any water down there, and these had been pulled up in the immediate vicinity of our location, because you didn't want to see anything but sand. So they'd been pulled up and in order to do this work, they'd used a four-track vehicle of some sort, four-wheel drive vehicle with tracks, and the little men were erasing the tracks of this vehicle. That's what they were doing.
And the... the story is that this... inside this circle of old American cars there is a lone wanderer who is camped there and who finds himself... in the morning he wakes up and he finds himself surrounded by these cars. And then the bulk of the movie takes place in that setting, and gradually some contact is established between him and the people in the cars, but not much. Most of the action takes place between the different groups in the cars. There's a homosexual couple, there's a normal couple, there's a young girl who's in love with her young boyfriend, there's a single man who plays a trumpet, and they have contact. But they have virtually no contact with the man in the middle. The only contact with him is the little girl, who belongs to one of the families, goes and sees him and plays with him, but more or less... they ignore him more or less. And then towards the end of the film there's a terrific sandstorm and all the cars disappear. The cars and the people, everybody, it's all wiped out, but not in some sort of holocaust manner, they just disappear. They just disappear and the man finds himself one day, after the sandstorm, he finds himself alone.
And then at the end of the film he wanders off, and he is followed by a little boy, and it's sort of left open whether the little boy is his son, or whether it's himself as a young boy. It's kind of left open, because he has a medallion with him with a photograph of... again, is it a photograph of his son, or is it a photograph of himself as a boy? We don't know. So that's how the film finishes, with him tracking off, and all the cars and all the people have disappeared. It's a sort of fantasy, but it's very well done, very well staged, very well acted, although with a mixture of actors. Some were playing in English, some were playing in French, some were playing in Hebrew, and the idea was that it would be dubbed at the end, into... there would be a French version and an English version. And actually what happened was that the French version was completed, it was shown at Cannes, it died immediately and nobody took any notice of it, and so the producer abandoned it, and he said, 'I'm not going to make an English version'. So the thing was just abandoned. A great shame because it's a very interesting film. It more or less works. There are weaknesses, but it more or less works. And poor Claude Zaccaï, the director, never got another chance.

The next film I made was in England and was called Memoirs of a Survivor, based on Doris Lessing's novelette. And that is also fantasy, largely fantasy. It takes place in London, or in some city. Actually, it is London, but it's not all that recognisably London. There's a tube station in it somewhere, so it must be London. But, after not... it was misunderstood... a lot was misunderstood because they thought it was after some holocaust event, some atomic bomb or something, but it's not, it's just that the conditions in the city have deteriorated to such an extent. The government only functions off and on, sometimes there's water, sometimes there isn't any water, you buy an egg and when you crack it open it's got a chick inside because it's past its sell-by date. And Julie Christie plays a character who is only identified as D, the initial D. In the credits, it says D is played by Julie Christie. And, it also has an animal in it, which is described in the novel as half cat and half dog, so that was a little difficult to cast. But David Gladwell, the director, whom I'd known since early days of the BFI, when we used to go and see his... he made a series of slow-motion shorts. He's a very clever user of slow motion. All his shorts... nearly all the shorts he made were centred on slow-motion sequences. And this was his first feature, but it wasn't the first time that I worked with him. I'd worked with him a few years earlier doing supplementary shots for a film called Requiem for a Village.

I'd made a film with him earlier called Requiem for a Village where I wasn't the principal cameraman, but I did a lot of supplementary shots. Rather like I did on Together, with Lindsay Anderson, but more so. Anyway, that was his first feature and... first real feature, full feature. And, it was made under somewhat unfortunate circumstances, because it was ready to be produced, the script was ready, but the money wasn't there, and then suddenly the money came through, but, they said, 'But you must make it before the end of the year otherwise the money goes back to whatever'.
So, the preparations were somewhat inadequate, particularly the preparations for the split-screen work, because a major feature in this film is in the flat where D lives. There is a wall that proves to be penetrable. She can walk through the wall. She discovers that...  she walks through the wall and there's a whole different world, partly Victorian world, which is on the other side of the wall. So we had to find a way of doing that, and there are various ways of doing it but we weren't... we used a mixture in the end. We weren't totally prepared. And the art department was very deficient, because all they could think of... to set the atmosphere of this post-holocaust, but not post-holocaust, disrupted city, let's say. The atmosphere of this disrupted city, all they could think of was to fill the street with black- overflowing black rubbish bags. That was about it. So that... it left certain things to be desired.
So for that reason it's not a complete success. To my mind, the Victorian sequences, the things that happen beyond the wall are very successful and very well done. Those I like. The realistic side I don't like all that much. It has shortcomings. But it's a film which didn't have any kind of a success. It came and went quite quickly. And it's a shame because it was made the year before Channel 4 started. It's a perfect Channel 4 film. But as it's made before Channel 4 started, it came and went in the cinemas very quickly and also on television it never caused any kind of... there wasn't much critical success and David never made another film. Another one of those who never made another film. He went back to his work as editor and he still works as editor.

As I look back over my work, I become aware of the fact, one can't help but become aware of the fact, that my contribution varies. The degree of my contribution varies. Films like Electra I think I made a great contribution. Other films it's rather less than that. One of the films where I could make a very major contribution was called Fragments of Isabella, which is a Holocaust memoir. A memoir of a Holocaust survivor, Auschwitz. It originated as a slim little memoir and then it was turned into a play, and from the play we turned it into a film. And the play was performed as a one-woman play by an Irish actress called Gabrielle Reidy, who was nothing less than magnificent. Absolutely magnificent. And she was able to adapt herself... not having done much film work at all, she was able to adapt her performance which she played on the stage all over the place, into a film performance within the space of 24 hours, which, again, she did brilliantly. And the director was a little Irish leprechaun called Ronan O'Leary, who became a very good friend. I made another film with him the subsequent year.
But that film was made with very minimalist sets. You couldn't really call them sets, they were surfaces rather than sets. There was a section that takes place in Hungary, before they're arrested and deported. There's a section in Auschwitz and there's a section in America when they've been rescued and manage to emigrate to America. And all these different locations were represented in the studio in a symbolic kind of way. So, as I say, there weren't really sets. There was a corner of the room a couple of times, different corners of different rooms, but the rest were just surfaces. There was a wooden wall, a wall of tiles, a wall of wooden boards, a wall of bricks, a wall of stone, and rigging the changes on these different wall surfaces, the atmosphere for the piece is entirely created by the lighting. So there the contribution of the cameraman is crucial.
The Auschwitz section we did in black and white. It's another one of those films which is partly in black and white, at my suggestion, who else? And that worked extremely well. And all you see of Auschwitz is a wooden wall, which is supposed to be the outside of a hut, or possibly the inside of a hut sometimes. Then it was inter-cut with a few newsreel scenes, which I didn't really... that was a little dicey. That if you had too much of that, that would clash with the stylised presentation, but it works. It's just okay. And Gabrielle is the only performer except for... right at the end she is shown nursing a baby. But other than that she is the only performer, and she sustains 50 or 55 minutes of film entirely on her own. And in my opinion, if that film had ever been shown in LA, she would've been... certainly nominated for an Oscar because it's a brilliant performance, absolutely brilliant performance.
But for me it was very interesting because the task of the cameraman there is crucial to create the atmosphere with very little, very little indeed. So that's a very, very interesting movie, to my mind. But just as an aside, it occurred to me... I wondered... at one point I wondered why Heat and Dust wasn't at least nominated for an Oscar, because The Bostonians was nominated. Then I realised that in order to be nominated for an Oscar, your film has to have normal, or really considerable, exposure in the LA area, because 90% of the people who vote for you, are in that area. And if your film hasn't been shown there and had some publicity there, then they simply don't know about... they don't know that it exists. So there's no chance any film that hasn't had any exposure in the LA area can even be nominated for an Oscar. Anyway, I wanted to talk about Fragments of Isabella because I always wished that that film... It had a very inadequate release. Ronan is partly responsible for that. Also the production company, there was some embezzle... the producer disappeared with some of the money, anyway, long story, and it wasn't properly shown. But it was shown on television, Irish television twice, and British television once, so I do have a copy of it, which is... forms very interesting material to show to students, for instance.

As of the... late 1970s, I made several movies for American television. Two with Katharine Hepburn, the lovely Katharine Hepburn, and one with Lucille Ball. They were all made in the same way. American television movies are made very much in a pattern. Even with a star like Katharine Hepburn you cannot get more than $2.5 million. That was true in 1978, 1988 when we made that first film. In 1992 it was still true. I don't know about now. But $2.5 million was the top budget, and 22 days was the top schedule, even with Katharine Hepburn. I went into it at one point and said, 'Well, why can't we make this film more comfortably in 25 ten-hour days, 250 hours, instead of 22 12-hour days, which is 248 hours or something'. The reason turned out to be the actors. The crew's salary would be the same, the actors, having, let's say, seven days work in a 22-day period, is very different from having seven days work in a 25-day period, because there are three extra days where he could be working somewhere else. So that is a crucial factor why you cannot get any extra time. Absolutely crucial. So you'll find that 22 days is generous. There's a lot of American television material which is shot in 14 days. So 22 days is generous, but to me, it's absolute hell, because to make a full feature, and I've never made a difference between... in my mind there's no difference between a cinema film and a film made for television. My work is the same. I take the same kind of care. I want the same kind of result. Because a film that is made well for television could also be screened in the cinema, there is no difference. But America is the only country where I found you still can make a differentiation between a TV movie and a theatrical movie, because they're almost like two separate industries. The top budget for a TV movie is $2.5 million, the bottom budget for a theatrical movie is something like $12 million. In between there's a huge gap into which black hole fall a number of subjects which just cannot be produced because they're too expensive for television and too cheap for the cinema people.

The first movie in that period was with Lucille Ball, this is 1985 now, and it was a film called Stone Pillow, which was Lucille Ball as a tramp... as a bag lady. It led to some thoughts, on my part, to compare that kind of subject, that kind of movie, with something like Cathy Come Home, quickly points to some very important differences. You could not make Cathy Come Home for American television. Impossible. If you want to make a movie about a bag lady and about people living in shelters and on the streets, and so on, you can only make it in a very theatrical manner, and with Lucille Ball as the star. If you wanted to make that as a semi-documentary, forget it. American television wouldn't finance it, no way, no way. And don't forget that on American television, well into the '80s, there were two documentary programmes a week. CBS has 60 Minutes, and then ABC copied it with 20/20. That was it. Until the many channels started, outside the ABC... outside the... what are they called?  The cable channels.  No, outside the cable channels. The original broadcasters, you know, CBC...  CBS and ABC.  The fixed broadcasters, outside of that, there wasn't anything in the documentary way.
Anyway, Lucille Ball is not to be compared with Katharine Hepburn. Katharine Hepburn is a lady, no more said. Lucille Ball... I'll just tell you a couple of things about Lucille Ball. She had a makeup lady, on that movie, who was called Katie Biehr, spelt B-i-e-h-r, it's a German name, Katie Biehr. And when Lucille saw this, she said, 'I can't go around shouting: Biehr, Biehr, I shall call you Baker!' Now why she can't call her Katie, God knows. Anyway, that's what Lucille Ball was like. And once she had a fainting spell in the middle of the... it was very, very hot. We shot in New York City in summer, and it was very, very hot, even at night. And on one take she fainted, and all hell broke loose, and ambulances were called and God knows what, and heart resuscitation, but she recovered very quickly. And then when she discovered that night's shooting had been cancelled, she was absolutely furious. You know, why the hell did you do that?

But working with Katharine Hepburn was a very different experience. A very nice experience and I'll always be grateful that I was given the chance. There's a very nice... the same director, by the way, for all those films. It was the two Katharine Hepburn movies, and for the Lucille Ball movies was a man called George Schaefer, with whom I'd made half a film in Ireland because that was a film about Irish children being given the chance. A Catholic boy with a Protestant boy being given the chance to go to America and live together. A group of children, obviously. And that had an Irish section, which I photographed, and an American section, which somebody else photographed. That's where I first met George Schaefer. And then he gave me the chance... he asked for me for those three movies. In the interval between the first Katharine Hepburn movie and the second Katharine Hepburn movie, there passed... there was a seven-year interval. But she always said, this is going to be my last movie. Then, of course, it wasn't. But that first Katharine Hepburn movie was called Mrs. Delafield Wants to Marry, and it's a very nice movie. And there again, as with Angela Lansbury who was rather younger, I'm very proud of some of the close-ups of Katharine that I managed to get in that movie. And it was very well thought of as... it had what counts as a success in a TV movie. It had a good quota of people watching. What do you call those things?  Audience. Good audience figures.
And, but... during the making of the first Katharine Hepburn film, they showed... the Lucille Ball film had just been finished, so the Lucille Ball film was actually shown on television in the period that the Katharine Hepburn film was shooting. So one day, they said, 'Look, it's on television tonight'. And it turned out to be Election Day, or the pre-election period and we switched on the television to watch this film, and every 15 seconds the movie shrank to a quarter of the screen and on the rest of the screen you had some election propaganda. But they didn't stop the movie. The movie just carried on, you know, and then it went back to full screen again, and 15 minutes later the same thing happened again. It was unwatchable. And that's the only time that movie was shown. Maybe two years later, but that was the principal showing of that movie in... we were in Canada, we were shooting in Vancouver. The Lucille Ball movie was shot in New York, and the two Katharine Hepburn movies were shot in Vancouver, so it must have been Canadian elections.

Katharine Hepburn had been suffering from Parkinson's disease for some 20 years. It's even visible in The Lion in Winter which is a long time earlier, but she controlled it beautifully, really beautifully. She used to wear high-collared dresses or scarves or something, and she controlled the shaking head very, very well. I mean, you can see it, it's there, but it's beautifully controlled. She's such a professional, 100% professional, and such a wonderful person. She's a wonderful person.

I made one other... it wasn't actually a television movie it was a... yes, of course it was. It was a... what do they call it? Pre-school movie, or post-school... pre-school something. It's a movie designed to be shown when people... basically for people at school. It was called Mystery on Fire Island and it was shot quicker than 21 days, that particular one, because it wasn't a 90-minute film, it was something like a 50-minute film. That was directed by a dear man called Bob Fuest who's made some English features, and some English television. At one point during the making of that film, he turned to me and he said, 'Do you know, you and I, we're just hired guns', he said. Which is very true. The American... the attitude of the American producers, in general, is very different. I discovered that on Le Mans, but not only on Le Mans, that the Americans tend to think of you as an employee rather than as a member of team, creative contributor, and you keep hearing things like, so and so and so and so... we want you to do so and so and so and so and so and so, and then they either say, or it's implied, remember you can always be replaced. And sometimes you were. I was replaced on Brenda Starr, for instance, but I won't go into that now.

I think I already mentioned earlier that, unlike some cameramen who graduated from documentary to features, I continued to make documentaries and shorts of various sorts, right through my career, right through to the end, and, in fact, beyond the end of making features, I was still doing some documentaries. I must have made close to 100 documentaries and shorts in my career. Including some very odd ones, very odd ones where I was in the office of Merchant Ivory in... during the making of The Bostonians once, and the telephone rang and they said, 'It's for you'. I said, 'Who knows that I'm even here?', you know. I picked up the phone and this voice said, 'My name is Jonathan Power and I'm making this film about the influence of the mealy bugs on the cassava crop in Africa'. And I said, 'I beg your pardon? You sure you have the right number?'
Well, it turned out that my name had been given to somebody in... the lab had given him my name, and he was about to make this film. He was a journalist called Jonathan Power. He still writes very interesting... he works for the New York Times basically, or the Herald Tribune. He was a very interesting guy and he knew personally Colonel Obasanjo who, at that time, was... it was during one of his stints as Prime Minister... as President of Nigeria. And that's what the film was about. The influence of the mealy bugs on the cassava crop in Africa. He told us, 'We started with a shoot in Rome, we did a little shoot in Rome in a conference that was totally boring'. I said, 'I don't want to do that, it's boring'. And then we were all due to go to Nigeria and we were all at the airport waiting for him to come, and it got later and later and later, and he didn't show up. So in the end I said, 'Well, God knows what's happened to him, we'll have to catch the plane'. So we caught the plane and there was, apart from myself, there was a sound recordist and an assistant and Kate, and that was it. But my assistant was black, a Cockney Londoner, but he was black. And when we got to Lagos there didn't seem to be anybody there to meet us. The reason for that was, that they were told to expect a part of four, and what they saw was a party of three. Because they looked straight through this black guy. Really, it's most amazing. And he went through... round Nigeria with staring eyes and his mouth open, because he couldn't believe... he was a Londoner, you know, he was a Cockney and a Londoner, he'd no contact... that sort of life was totally, totally strange for him. That was one of the weirder things that I did, but I did a number of weird things.

I did a little short with Joan Littlewood once, which was to promote her Fun Palace. She was... she had a scheme going that what Londoners needed badly was a Fun Palace, so we made this little promotional film with her. It showed things like stripteases and the penny... Pyramid of Pennies in a pub and people doing stunts riding on top of an aircraft, a double winged aircraft, firing at balloo... all sorts of weird things. But in the end the film proved that Londoners were having a wonderful time. The last thing they needed was a Fun Palace. That led... proved to be counterproductive.
Of course, I made a number of documentaries with Lindsay, which I've already mentioned, with Tony the one, with Karel. Then there was the lovely man... a lovely man named Michael Gill with whom I worked many times, at great intervals. I shot a film with him called Peaches... The Peaches, which won the top prize for fiction at the Oberhausen Festival in 60-something. Then I continued to work with Michael, and for Michael I made a series of documentaries for television... I photographed a series of documentaries for television, which were the story of the garden, which were called Nature Perfected. First of all there were six, then they expanded it to 12, and of those 12, I photographed four, parts of four, or even five. And I directed three myself, directed and photographed. The one in Japan... in China I directed, the one in India I directed, and the one in... there was one in France which I directed, which focussed on Versailles and some of the Loire Chateaux. I always liked that kind of work. It's sort of leisurely, but it's interesting and it's a one-man operation, basically, where you have... usually it's 16 mm, you have an assistant. It's a small-scale operation but the results are normally pleasing, which is not always the case with the features. You must have all noticed by now that it's not always all that pleasing on the features. You take pot luck.

When Tony Richardson very generously gave me that one half of one percent in, at the end of Tom Jones, we went out and bought equipment to be able to make television films and many other- 16mm. We bought an Éclair NPR, we bought a Nagra and we equipped a cutting room, and then Kate and I made these two documentaries, almost back to back. The first one was called "Dan" and it was about a gypsy who had recently been housed in a proper house, but whose- most of his life was spent in gypsy caravans. And, he had a stall in the Portobello Road, and Kate is in the movie saying- hello Dan, or- and we could- and then talking to him and he comes out with all these wonderful anecdotes about how his eighth child was born. They kept getting girls and they were trying for a boy and the eighth was also a girl, so he said- oh, well, when Babs was born we said, yes, okay that's the lot, we can stop there. And that film- what inspired me, at least in part, to make that film was that we were uniquely film- we were uniquely placed to make that film, Kate and I, because Kate was an old friend of theirs, and Kate and I could perfectly well cope without having any other people involved. She'd do the sound, I'd do the picture. We'd have- the camera would be partly hand-held and, at that time, we still needed a cable connection between the camera and the sound, which caused a certain amount of friction with me and Kate. I was pulling on the cable and she'd be dying to say stop it, and she couldn't talk because the camera was running. But anyway, that proved to be a very successful venture, in those terms. Because it had occurred to me that, if the BBC, say, were to want to make this film, first of all they'd have to get to know Dan and his wife, who was extremely shy. Although they lived in Aldershot, which is only, what, 10 miles from London, she'd only been to the West End three times in her whole life and she was some 30-odd years old. So that's how shy she was. So a team from the BBC would've had to spend hours and days and weeks getting ready to do that. And then, even then, they wouldn't have had the same result, because they would've arrived with their tripods and their lights and their assistants and there paraphernalia, and they wouldn't have the easy-going relationship that we can just sit down, get the camera out and start filming. So that I always- that was the point in making both that film and the subsequent film was called "The Greeks", which is about the subject of immigration, emigration from Greece, partly temporary emigration in the form of guest workers. So that film is made half in Chania and the area of Chania, around here, and half in Germany, in the area of Oberhausen, which I knew a little bit from the festivals. And again, it's made by Kate and me, two people, and George helped us on one sequence in Pireas, which forms the end of the film, very dramatic climax, where a boat leaves for Australia and families are separated, probably forever. So that, again, was very successful to make. And as I speak German and Greek, I could make it in Germany and in Greece without too many difficulties. And the first one was shown on British television in the Granada region only though. And the second one- I mistimed the second one because it was ready just at the point when BBC 2, who were- the obvious customer would be BBC 2, and they'd just switched to colour, and they wouldn't buy anymore black and white films. So I mistimed that one. In my view, they were both successful. And "The Greeks", the second film, "The Greeks", has enjoyed a new lease of life where it's caused considerable interest here, because it's become an historical document. It was made 30 years ago, so it's become an historical document. Nearly 40 years ago. It might be shown one day on Greek television. I'm still hoping. But it was shown during my exhibition of pictures. I had an exhibition of my photographs here recently, twice in fact. It was shown during that and it attracted quite a bit of attention and interest.

One of my documentaries was quite early on, in 1953, I think it was. I went to Romania with Tony Simmons and we made a documentary about the World Youth Festival, the next one. The one in '51 was in Berlin. They had them every two years at that time. So the next one was in Bucharest. And we went off to Bucharest, and Bucharest at that time hadn't seen many foreigners. We were quite, sort of, unusual animals to roam the streets in Bucharest. And there was a little old lady who met us in the street, and she heard us talking English, and she got into a conversation with us and was very interested. And then she said, 'You have a queen in England?'  And we said, 'Yes', because Queen Elizabeth had just been crowned, the previous year. So we said, 'Yes, we have a Queen in England'. And she said, 'I know, Victoria'. That was really lovely.

And another very unusual film I made was... it was called The Battleship Potemkin Survivor. It was made for Italian television, RAI. There was a journalist called Malcolm Montaldi that a friend of Kate's... He was the boyfriend of a girlfriend of Kate's. He had... he unearthed this project. God knows how they found this man. They found a man... would you... this is all... do you know, truth is much stranger than fiction. That's one thing that documentary filming teaches you. They found this man who was a survivor of the original Battleship Potemkin. And what was he doing? He was running a fish and chip shop in Dublin. We went to interview this man. We showed him the movie, Battleship Potemkin, and we filmed his reaction. And he said, 'Oh no, it wasn't like that at all. Eisenstein must have invented all that'. I said, 'Weren't there any worms in the meat?' 'Oh, yes, yes, but not like that', he said.
That film... unfortunately, that is another film which just disappeared. Malcolm Montaldi died a few years later, and when we got onto RAI and said, 'Where is this film?'  They said, 'Oh well, you know, somewhere in the archives, but we'll have a go'. But they never found it. They never found it. Such a shame because what an extraordinary subject. What an absolutely extraordinary subject.

Well, the biggest documentary project that I was ever involved in was this Canadian film, Labyrinth, that I already mentioned, which was a multi-screen thing for the 1967 Montreal Exposition, World Exposition. And that was filmed all over the world in many different countries. In the whole of 1965... I was working for the Canadians for that project through nine months of 1965. We started in Montreal where we spent hours and hours preparing. They had an experimental setup set up there with the multi-screen theatre form, which was a cross form. There were five academy format screens in a cross format. One, two, three, four, five. And they had taken an old National Film Board of Canada film and they had re-edited it for five screens. And that was very interesting and it taught me the difference between seeing things sequentially and seeing things simultaneously. There's a big difference.
For instance, if you inter-cut a baby crying into the middle of a war scene with canons firing, you think, oh you know this is a bit... what would you say? Naff, a bit naff, let's say. If, on the other hand, you have a war scene playing on four screens and on the fifth screen you hold, throughout all these battles, you hold a shot of a baby crying, that has a completely different effect, and is much more subtle, much more subtle. So that taught me a lot. Then we went all over the world. We went to England, we went to Greece, we went to Cambodia, we went to India, although we didn't shoot in India because the Indo-Pakistani war broke out and we had to move on. But it was one of those occasions when... Ethiopia we went to. It was one of those occasions when I'm aware of... you become conscious of the fact that how lucky you are to be working in this kind of work, where your work takes you all over the world, to many interesting places, like Angkor Wat which I had the chance to see before it was all half destroyed. You have the chance to see all these wonderful places, and somebody else is paying the bills. It's a wonderful opportunity. And the Labyrinth project itself, when it finally reached Expo, when it was edited and finished, it had the biggest queue. There were queues round that building throughout the entire run of Expo, and it took an average of four and a half hours to get in, once you joined the queue. And I said, 'Not even... not for the second coming would I wait four and a half hours'.

I've often taught students... told students when I was teaching film, that, to my mind, the similarities between the film medium and the television medium far, far, outweigh the differences. I think get that firmly fixed in your head. That the other thing that I say is, when you're looking through a camera, it's the eye behind the viewfinder that counts. It doesn't count... it doesn't matter whether you're looking through a film camera, a video camera, what sort of film you have in the camera. Of course, you must understand your medium, you must know what you're working with. You don't need to be an electronics experts to operate a video camera, but you must know enough about it to operate it efficiently. But the thing that really counts is to develop the facility to see, which I'll come back to when I talk about film schools. So I've always said that the similarities far outweigh the differences. And nowadays I am very happy with video. I'm very happy to work with video. Unlike my colleagues, I think the attitude that there's something special about the quality of 35 mm film. It isn't true anymore. I regret to say it isn't true anymore. There are many, many of my colleagues, with whom I disagree fundamentally on that point.
Certainly from 1992 onwards, 1992 I think was... I did two things in 92. I attended a conference about high-definition television in Dublin where, by the way, I met George's son, who was attending that conference, and that put me back in contact with George, with whom I'd lost contact with, almost. Slightly later... Somewhat later, probably around 94/95, there was a demonstration at BAFTA in London where they had a setup to show high-definition television and project 35mm side by side. And they'd made some tests in Hollywood where they had an actor walking through a set, which was, in some cases, like four stops over, and in other places it was three stops under. And he walked through this set and they filmed it with a high-definition television camera linked to a Panavision camera, 35. And then they transferred the film to video and the video to film, and they re-showed it simultaneously, and there was virtually no difference. In 1994, let's say, 94/95, the only difference then was that, at that time, video was not able to cope with fine highlight detail. Like I talked about in the clouds in Zorba the Greek. There is a fine highlight detail there, because I chose that very sensitive, very insensitive but very detailed Ilford film. So video has a cut-off point. Most video cameras have a cut-off point. If the light gets too bright they cut out, because it might damage the electronics otherwise. But other than that, there was no difference. So whenever somebody comes to me and says, 'No, no, no, there's this imperceptible something', I say, 'Yes, but I'm afraid to say that is largely in your mind'.
And also with film and television, the other thing that I point out, is that television gets the blame for a lot of things which are nothing to do with the television medium, as such. They're to do with the idiots that operate it. Nothing to do with the medium, at all. The medium is not responsible. So I say to them, look... I said to them, say, in the mid-'90s, I said to them, 'Look, what's actually happening here is, the cinema screens are getting smaller and the television screens are getting larger, and very soon they're going to meet in the middle, and this debate will become academic, totally academic'. Which has now happened. I think we're now in a situation where, within some... in my opinion, within something like five years, you will not see a foot of film shown in cinemas anymore, other than specialist things like IMAX and Show-scan and the big screen stuff, which is not cinema, that is bread and circuses. So, if my prediction is correct, there will not be... you will not be seeing films. They will all turn into video cinemas. You will have somebody pushing a button in, say, New York, and your film will appear simultaneously, if you wish, in 3,000 different cinemas, in 20 different countries, or staggered, or what-have-you. And no intelligent person will be able to tell the difference between what... now there is a difference. But there won't be a difference, very shortly. And after all, if you think the whole thing through, the pure video process... in making images through video, what we're talking about, is photons being turned into electrons, and back into photons. That is a very pure process. Much purer, much purer than going via the chemical detour. Because the chemistry needed to separate red, green and blue, is not perfect. It's nothing like perfect. There's an overlap, but it's very imperfect. So to go through this chemical process, on the way to an optical process... you know, you start with light entering a lens and you finish off with light coming out of a lens onto a screen. But in between you go through an extremely clever, but very complicated, chemical process, which is all about compromise. It's all about compromise. That chemical process is all about compromise. And it's a small miracle that it's as good as it is. But the purely video process, photons, electrons into photons, is a much purer process. So once they get the remaining little niggles ironed out, there's no doubt in my mind that video's the future.

In the last 10 to 15 years I've done a lot more teaching than actual shooting, and I'm not sorry about that. I've always enjoyed teaching. And as I already said more than once, the results when you're shooting are not always satisfactory. Teaching, on the whole, is satisfactory. Once or twice you can be a bit irritated. Like, I was the Head of Camera at the National Film and Television School in Beaconsfield close to London, from 1988 to 1992. And in 1992 I became... I became 95, yes. In 1992 I became 65 years old. I was 65 years old and Colin Young, the Head of the School had to retire... was forced to retire and I could've carried on, but I said, 'No I think four years is enough, I'll go as well'. And then the school changed character a bit anyway. As I say, I got a bit irritated occasionally, but on whole, it was a nice experience. But you get a bit irritated when you're sitting there in your office twiddling your thumbs, because I'm not a person born to sit behind a desk, quite the opposite. And sometimes you're sitting there and some student comes in, and you say- yes?  And he says, could you give me the telephone number of Studio Film Laboratories. And I look at him, and I said, what's that on that board behind you? That is a bit irritating. And I think that... I've often said, that the National Film School students are very, very lucky indeed, having survived the selection procedure, which is complicated and very time-consuming, they had the best teaching staff you can imagine. Much better than the London International Film School, which is the competition, as it were, in London, who just can't afford that kind of personnel. The National Film School have always had this policy that they will engage working professionals, and if they need time off to exercise their profession, so be it. I made... In 1990, while I was Head of Camera there, I made three movies, two of which were feature movies, one of which was "Fragments of Isabella". No, it was the subsequent one. It was called "Diary of a Madman". So there was "Diary of a Madman", "Ballad of the Sad Café", and the German movie that I haven't talked about, which is called "Die Erbschaft", "The Inheritance", were all made in 1990, and I just took a holiday. I took leave from... leave of absence from the school and it all worked perfectly well. So I enjoyed teaching. It's very gratifying to see, when at the end, some of the people that you taught have made it. Not everybody, obviously. Very few people made it. I tell them, the students when they're coming in, that they must be prepared for a period of 10 years to elapse between them leaving film school, with or without some piece of paper, which is more or less unimportant, and when somebody... you're a cameraman, not when the National Film School says you've completed the course, you're a cameraman when somebody's prepared to pay you to be that cameraman, and that involves a degree of trust. Because it's a business, where being a cameraman, is not a risk-free occupation. If you get it wrong it can be very expensive for the producer. So, to get a chance, they say, we'll give you a chance to make your first movie, that is quite a big step, and you must be prepared to wait 10 years. Unfortunately, some of the people are much too old. It was always one of my beefs that the entry age is much too old. The entry age, average age of entry into the National Film School, at that time, was 26. And there were some people close to 40 or even over 40 when they left. Now, I'd made, I don't know, 20 movies by the time I was 40. So that isn't right. I think, in any case, that film schools that offer a two or a three-year course, during which you cannot really do anything else, except in the holiday periods, is not the best way of dovetailing it into the film industry, which is largely freelance. And many film schools, like the National, also run short courses. And I think that is much better adapted. You get a foot in the industry, a foot in the door, in whatever capacity, and you learn as you go along. And in your spare time, you take these short courses. That is a much better preparation than a three-year course. I don't think it's the perfect way. Another very good way is the way that's practiced in the workshops all over the world. Like the American Film Institute do that. The best example is the Rockport, Maine... The International Film and Television Workshops in Rockport, Maine, which are run by a very interesting guy called David Lyman, and I've taught there something like eight times over the years, between... I think the first time was 83 and the last time was 1990. They're very well organised and they're very concentrated. And I used to get letters saying- God I've just realised how much I learnt in that week that I spent with you in Rockport. And I've done it in Los Angeles. I've done it in Rockport. I've done it in London, obviously, in Berlin in both the... both sides of Berlin, the East and the West, in Munich. But there's something funny about German students. They differ from, say, American students in... if they have some expert, like Walter Lassally, has come to teach us, they expect to sit there, and almost like you put a funnel through their head, and you pour in this wisdom, and they just absorb it, you see. But if you say to them, no, look this is not a lecture, this is not a seminar, this is a workshop. A workshop means that you work. We give you the opportunity to do some work, and if you're about to do something extremely stupid, I'll say, I wouldn't do it that way if I were you. But that's about it, you know. I give you the opportunity to do some filming, and I will give you certain bits of advice, and I will tell you certain principles, but after that, it's up to you. And the Germans don't like that. They're a bit... particularly the... actually in Berlin it wasn't bad, but in Munich it was particularly obvious that they thought they'd paid their money and they weren't really getting value for money, because they had to do it themselves. A bit like going to one of those Japanese restaurants where you have to do all the cooking yourself.

I called the last chapter of my book Plus ça Change, which means that in many ways the industry is exactly the same as it was when I joined it. But there are significant differences. Technically, the revolution that's overtaken sound is not comparable to what's happened to cameras. Cameras, if anything, are getting heavy again. I think I already mentioned that. So, other than the change to video, which is inevitable, and it's going to happen gradually, fairly gradually, but fairly quickly, I think not all that much has taken place on the camera side. The biggest changes are the changes in the industry. I think, what's happened to Hollywood and the American industry in general, is really tragic. Because Hollywood, after all, had the knack of entertaining a very large and very varied audience, very efficiently over many, many years. In the '20s, in the '30s, in the '40s, in the '50s, and into the '60s, and they have lost that knack completely. The knack of speaking to the intelligent as well as the stupid, to the young as well as the old, is not in demand anymore. What's in demand now is films for seven to 17-year-olds. Now, I don't mind that, but why should they be the only films that get made? Why can't we have films for intelligent over-40s? In fact, I once proposed to somebody we should make an intelligent film, and in the publicity we should a health warning: teenagers stay away, you might be bored to death, but on the other hand, if you come in, you may learn something. You may learn to appreciate adult movies.
But it isn't a question of entertainment versus art, either. Hollywood managed to combine very beautifully, very nicely, entertainment and art. And art versus industry is a trade-off that has always existed. It wasn't a question of: do we make an art movie or do we make a commercial movie? Sometimes, of course. Sometimes people set out to make a deliberately esoteric movie aimed at a relatively, but deliberately, small audience. But a lot of the time, this is a trade-off that... It's not the first time we've been asked to make this trade-off and they found a way of doing that perfectly naturally. So none of those things are... should be obstacles. But to make a good film... well, it's always been difficult.
I've always thought, but particularly in the last 20 years, I've thought that any halfway decent film that manages to get itself made and finished is nothing short of a small miracle, because the obstacles that are strewn in the way are tremendous and mostly unnecessary, mostly unnecessary. These days first of all you have too many cooks making the broth, the credits are sometimes longer than the film... that old joke of Olson & Johnson, the associated producer is the only one associated with the producer, but now you have eight executive producers and four associate producers, and three co-producers, and God knows what. Merchant Ivory pointed to that very subtly... well, not all that subtly, and very effectively in, I think it's Remains of the Day, where there's a running title at the beginning listing all the sponsors, which goes so fast that you can hardly read it, and Merchant Ivory present, you know... I think they made that point beautifully, just by that little device.  And of course, all this runs up the bill too, all these producers and executive producers and associate producers.  Yes.
And the costs, the spiralling costs, I just can't believe it. I can't believe it. I do know... I'm absolutely convinced that, given a few experienced people in the few key positions, given an adequate amount of money, not a huge amount of money, and given stars who don't want to be millionaires overnight, because it all goes to the tax people anyway, you can make a decent movie. And very, very often, it's occurred to me very often that the quality of the emergent movie is often in direct, reverse proportion to the amount of money spent on it. Because if a movie is very expensive and requires an enormous amount of organisation, it's more like organising a battle, a field battle in the army. The artistic aspect is bound to get drowned in circumstances like that. And it did get drowned, or nearly drowned, in The Deceivers, quite often, because they wanted to make it big and expensive, and in the end everybody lost out. It's a great shame because I'm convinced that... the thing that is the greatest shame is that the audiences exist. I'm quite convinced, that there are people over 40 who haven't gone to the cinema for a long time now, because they're convinced that there's nothing there to interest them, and they're nearly always right.
And secondly, there's a pool of talent out there who'd love to make some more nice movies, but they can't do it because they can't be connected with the audience. For one reason, because there's this gap, in American terms, there's this huge black hole between the most expensive television movie and the cheapest movie movies. There's a lot of very nice movies that could be made in that area, but they don't get made because they're too cheap for the movie people and they're too expensive for television, which is a terrible shame. Anyway, I count myself as semi-retired. And if a nice project came along, with nice people, preferably in Greece, but not necessarily. It could be Turkey, which is next door. And if it's got a good story and adequate time, adequate time, very important, then I'm still available.
