wolfgang.suschitzky

Born in Austria, Wolfgang Suschitzky (1912-2016) trained as a photographer and became one of the first in his field to take portraits of animals.  After coming to England he worked with Paul Rotha as the cameraman on various documentaries and films such as “No Resting Place”, “Ulysses” and “Get Carter”.

I was born at a very early age in Vienna in 1912. I remember clearly that when I was brought home from the nursing home by my parents, my sister said, ’What did we need him for?’ She was four years  at the time. My father was a very progressive man for the time. He left the Jewish community because he said he did not believe in any God. He was an atheist and declared himself konfessionslos — in German — which means without any religion. My parents were loving parents, they were very good. My father tried to install some culture in us, took us to the National Gallery and other galleries, and of course he had books at his disposal, being a book seller, and later publisher. It was the first social democratic bookshop in Vienna, and later, also a publishing company. My mother spent most of her time in the kitchen because my father came home for lunch and for his little nap after lunch. He opened his shop at eight o'clock in the morning and came back at six o'clock, so he did need a bit of rest some time. I went to school, primary school. We learnt writing, in two kinds of alphabet. We used slate… slate plates with a hard instrument to write with. We… you could wipe the slate afterwards and use it again. I was a very naughty boy. We played all sorts of tricks with… with my chums in the park, every afternoon. We rang people’s doorbells and so what… the usual things that boys do. My father knew the counsellor for education for Vienna and this man had the theory that a corrective (sic) education is better than an individual education at home. So my father put me into a boarding school, but we... we could go home on, weekends. That is if I wasn’t detained for being naughty. Even at school I wasn’t very peaceful, and always up to tricks. Of course, not having any religion, I didn’t attend the class at the time of religious lessons, and my colleagues envied me. I could go into the park and read a book or just wander around.

When I had finished school, my sister influenced me, I believe. She had done a year at The Bauhaus in Dessau and done some photography. My real interest was zoology, but I realised I couldn’t earn a living in Austria with zoology, so I went to photographic school, the only one in Austria — in Vienna — and did three years there, but didn’t do much photography. It was mainly learning how to retouch and how to do all sorts of arty printing like bromoil and carbro and so on. But we did learn some optics and chemistry and how to do a decent print, so it wasn’t all lost. By that time, the Red Vienna had disappeared, more or less. It was a social democratic town, and the right wing Christian Socialists — they called themselves — took over, and the situation became very bad. We had our own kind of fascism in Austria called Austrofascism. Parliament was dissolved, trade unions were forbidden, trade unionists were imprisoned. So, I thought there is no future for me in Austria. I had met a Dutch girl in my class at the photographic school and we decided to go to England where my sister by that time had established herself, married to an English doctor called Tudor-Hart. Her name was Edith Tudor-Hart, and she was a very good photographer.

The situation in Austria was very bad indeed. It was full of Nazis, especially in the provinces. A town like Graz was almost taken over by national socialists who were forbidden at the time, but they were tolerated by the authorities, not the left, and in 1934, there was a small — not so small — civil war, about 2000 people died, the army shot with artillery into working class flats. So, my Dutch friend and I decided to leave in 1934 after this civil war. My father was desperate by then, being known as of Jewish origin and a socialist. After I had left he committed suici... suicide in 1934 still, and both his children were away, and anyway, he had suffered from depressions as well. That was a very, very sad thing for me. Of course, he was a great man. I realised that later on in life, not so much when I saw him every day. But, I met interesting people, some of his authors who came and had lunch with us or met people who came to his shop. I spent quite some time there, and at Christmas I helped wrapping books. We had quite a good trade every Christmas because books were a popular present to give. My mother stayed on and my uncle, with whom my father had started this bookshop and publishing firm, stayed on with his sons, until 1938 when the Germans, took over with great applause from the Viennese and Austrians, and my uncle and his wife, had to flee. They fled to Paris where they had a sister... where they had a daughter, who had lived in France for quite a long time, but the Germans caught them and they ended up in Auschwitz. My mother was... still there and she was a partner in the bookshop after my father’s death, and we managed to get her out in 1939, I believe. Edith — my sister — was instrumental in getting her out, and she ended her days in England in a home for Jewish... for Jewish people.

I wasn’t able to stay here with my... Dutch friend, but we married here in Hampstead, and then went to Holland because I could stay with a Dutch citizen... married to a Dutch citizen. After a year in Holland, my wife left me, which was great luck because had I stayed there, I wouldn’t be alive anymore, I'm sure. So, I got... got myself a job in... in Holland photographing postcards for newsagents. I had to... I was sent to... all over the country, made contact with the local newsagent, and found out what views they would like photographed. I had a wooden camera given to me by the company who made... printed these postcards, but after a few months, in the winter there wasn’t anything to do for me, and I tried again to come to England, succeeded to get in as a student in 1935. Here my sister could help me, put me up in the beginning, in her house. I started to photograph children and took portraits and sometimes helped my sister when she had a larger job given to her, like the new bui... new block of flats in Kensal Rise, which was built for the Gas and Light Company. For the opening we made a brochure with photographs of the very modern building, or there was a hospitals, South London Hospital for Women, who wanted a brochure, and I helped her with that. But in 1937, I had the great luck to get an introduction to a documentary film maker called Basil Wright who had a look at photographs I had taken and liked them but he said ‘I have a very small company, only three people; I haven’t got any work for you, why don’t you go across the road to Paul Rotha’, who was a producer at a company called Strand Films, in those days. There was most of the British documentary movement of the ‘30s.

Rotha looked at my pictures and liked them and he said ‘Well, you can be an assistant here, but I can’t pay you anything because you haven’t got a work permit’. But I of course accepted that and was appointed an assistant to a young man who was engaged on a series of zoo films. So, we set out every morning before eight to the zoo or to Whipsnade. Julian Huxley was then secretary of the Zoological Society, and I always had my still camera — as we called it — with me, and I took pictures as we went along. We had all facilities we needed. We had holes cut into fences to put our lens through, or we could enter cages of animals who... which were not dangerous. And I think I was one of the first who took animal portraits, not just zoological pictures — four legs and the tail — but real kind of animal portraits.
What sort of equipment did you use for that?
I used a single lens reflex camera in those days, two and a quarter square, and did all my own printing. I had a darkroom partition in the flat we had, and by then...no, it wasn’t in ’37, but two years later, I had met my wife to be at my sister’s. I met her in her darkroom, in my sister’s darkroom. She was changing her skirt. So it was a good beginning, and we liked each other almost immediately. She was Hungarian, but had worked in Vienna at the Montessori school and my sister had a Montessori certificate. She went to a course of mont... Maria Montessori in London, where she must have met her future husband, Alexander Tudor-Hart, who was a doctor. He came to Vienna to study with a famous surgeon who had a new methods of treating fractures. Anyway, they got married and lived in London a few years before I got here.
My animal pictures were liked by Julian Huxley and I became very well acquainted with him and his family, who lived above the zoo offices. And sometime I did special photographs for him, like one night in the blitz, he wanted a pheasant photographed who... which every night had two of his... her offspring under her wings, on either side, and I had to spend a night at the zoo and there happened to be a... biologist called Haldane — Professor Haldane — who was a friend of Huxley’s, and he stayed the night there too and he had a theory — he was a statistician — that few accidents happen on the first floor than in the cellar. So we slept on deck chairs in the zoo, on the first floor.

I had great luck, as I had luck all my life, really. I forgot to mention that. Great luck to... live through two world wars, to escape the holocaust, to find a wonderful wife who brought...- who gave me three lovely children who later became valuable human beings. I escaped internment, I think it was because I had photographed a girl and the father came with her to see her being photographed, and afterwards I learned that this man was a policeman and he had kept several cards of refugees in his locker. So I wasn’t really a... a dangerous alien because this policeman had protected me. Also, I had taken a job for a medical firm by then, after the outbreak of the war, doing advertising photography and photographed their laboratories, and that was considered a protected... protective occupation. And I had to stop working on films at the beginning of the war, but in 1942 I was asked to be a cameraman again because most of them were called up and there was a shortage. So I joined Paul Rotha again, who had his own company by then, and I made a kind of newsreel called Work Around Warfront of what happens in the factories, how the women took over, and how fighter planes are being made and other technical new items, which affected the war and should be of interest to the public.

The interesting thing about documentary film in the ‘30s was that we were all amateurs, really. John Grierson, who started documentary and the concept of documentary films, surrounded himself with university graduates who were film enthusiasts, but nobody had taught them. They had read Eisenstein and Pudovkin, but there was no film school and the technicalities... they had to learn on the job as it were, and I had no idea about the grammar of film. But I knew a bit of photography and that helped of course a great deal. My colleagues were all very tolerant and I could always carry my camera with me as well, but of course, they were amateurs like myself, and one was astonished to... to hear when I told him you can take pictures without sun. You don’t have to wait for the sun, and they turned out all right. So that was a useful new thing for this particular director.

What had attracted me to the documentary movement was that they stated that they want to make films which are useful to society and that I did appreciate and I was very glad to join them. During the war, I was still considered an enemy alien of course. I refused to have a German passport and I got a stateless document as an identity document. I was allowed to travel anywhere in Britain with my work, but not into ports. I was not allowed in ports, and one time I forgot this restriction. We were... we were in Liverpool.

Well, we had a short film to do in Liverpool, and I never considered it as a port, but in the hotel one morning at eight o'clock there was a knock at the door and there was the secret police who had seen my signature in the reception book, and they were pretty tolerant. They understood what I was doing, and I didn’t have to go to prison.

The work during the war was interesting for me, and I hope useful too in some ways. Paul Rotha... his company, split up in the ‘40s and we formed the first cooperative film unit in Britain. We joined the cooperative production societies, which was... was quite a surprising number of organisations who organised themselves on a cooperative basis. They even lent us some money to... to start off, and we had a manager whose main job was to get us work, and we had one or two producers, and I think four directors, and two cameramen, myself and a chap called Peter Hennessey. And... we all...w each had a share and we each had a vote on any meetings we had and it worked well and lasted for about 12 years. I was able to get unpaid leave... leave if somebody else wanted me, and it did happen that large organisations like Shell or BP wanted a cameraman and I could go off for a month or two and make films for them, and later on in the ‘50s I got quite a lot of work from the NBC New York — the National Broadcasting Company — the first thing was a... an interview with Nehru in Delhi, and then we made a documentary film about India and the political situation, and later on a programme about South East Asia, which included Burma and Thailand and Malaya. So, very interesting jobs I had, but was still part of the cooperative, which was called DATA.
What sort of equipment were you using?
In filming in England, we only had one camera, which was a clockwork camera which had 200’ magazines and was rather clumsy. The Arriflex was invented by the Germans as a combat camera and was the first one with a mirrored shutter so you could see what you were filming. But we... of course if we had to record sound, we had to have a camera and blimp which made it soundproof and was an enormous box, too heavy for one person to handle, and rather clumsy and difficult to operate. We had of course, professional operators from the studios which we could engage for those jobs which needed sound. The sound was an optical sound in those days. The op... camera had to be set up very carefully, completely level. It had to be... I don’t really know the ins and outs, but there was a camera... a sound cameraman and his assistant, and maybe a third person to play out the cables for micro... the microphones.

My first feature film was with Paul Rotha directing a... a film in Ireland called No Resting Place. It was shot in 1950, one of the first all-location films. We had no studio shot in it at all. The locations... if we needed a police station, we could find one in a small place. The film was about tinkers, casual workers who went from one farm to another. It had wonderful actors in it, mainly from the Abbey Theatre in Dublin. Jack MacGowran was one of them, Eithne Dunne was another one, and the only English actor was Michael Gough, who had to have an Irish accent of course. We had terrible weather in Ireland. I think we only had two full days sunshine. The rest we had to wait for breaks in the clouds, or wait for the rain to stop, and we had a bus to sit in and I lost quite a lot of money playing poker because I never learnt to play poker before. But it wasn’t really a lot of money, no. We played for pennies. But on the whole it... it still looks quite good. Rotha came with sketches of set ups every day. He was very conscientious, but of course we never were... were bound to these sketches. We always found that we had to alter the sequence we shot it and the points of view we had to alter for practical reasons. The film is still being shown, and I am invited to go to Limerick in May for a performance there, having a conference about émigré people, artists and photographers and film people, and that I am invited to go there  to introduce the film. It was also shown at the National Film Theatre not so long ago.

No Resting Place was Rotha's first feature. I did several others with him, I think three more, which didn’t see much distribution. Rotha did one other film in Holland which... for which he used a Dutch cameraman. But I got a reputation through this film of being able to work on location economically and fairly fast, and other people asked me to be cameraman on their films — on their features — and altogether I think I did about 20. There was one called The Small World of Sammy Lee, which was quite successful, with Anthony Newly in the lead, and I did several films with Hickox — Dougie Hickox — whom I knew from making commercials. He made... asked me to do... do commercials, and later we did Entertaining Mr Sloan, which has become quite a little cult film. It was great fun to do, and Theatre of Blood, which was a spoof on a film, again becoming a little cult film. It had Vincent Price in it and Barbara Jefford, and again, wonderful actors, all about a sort of ham actor who was panned by all the critics and he tries to make suicide by jumping in... into the Thames, but is rescued by a group of... never do goods, who... who wash him and bring him back to life, really. And with them, he takes revenge on each of these critics in the way the Shakespearean plays treat their victims like... in... Othello. The woman is killed by Othello and in the... in the vengeance, she is also killed by a hairdresser, I think. And Vincent Price plays all these people who... killed all these...kill all these... Des... Desdemona gets smothered. Des... Yes, that’s right. Drowned in a barrel or something, is that right? Yes, Desdemona gets... gets... what do you...  Smothered. Desdemona gets smothered by Othello. What else was there? One of them gets drowned in a cask of Malmsey and others get... oh, and poor old Morley, he plays a... a queer whose love is two poodles. And he gets murdered by being served a pie made from his poodles, stuffed down his throat by Vincent. Anyway, we had fun making, and Vincent was a real gentleman. When he came on the set the first day he shook hands with everybody, all the electricians and everybody, and he always queued up for his own lunch. He didn’t ask the assistant director to get him the lunch like all other actors do, and he married one of the actresses we had, Coral Browne. He met her on this film and married her later on.

I worked with Harry Watt on short films in Scandinavia mainly, and the most famous film now in... in my career was Get Carter with Mike Hodges, who is a very underrated director. We shot the film in Newcastle. It was transposed, the original book was set in Scotland, I believe, and it was very pleasant work to do. Again, all location, no studio. The... Michael Caine was in the lead. He was very professional indeed. He was always there when he was wanted, and he always knew his lines, and he is a very good actor, which comes through in the stoical way he treated the part. And it has become — everybody has seen it — a real favourite film with many people.
What kind of look did you try and give the film?
The camera work on it... it was very influenced by Mike Hodges who has a very good eye for setups and he of course conferred with his operator and myself, but he influenced all of us, and much of the good look is due to him, I confess. My main task was lighting on location, very moderately, and waiting for the right daylight and setting the exposure on the lens. It was a very pleasant film to shoot because we all got on very well, and the Newcastle people were very cooperative. Anything we needed, any official permit to film in the streets for instance, also the... we always had a lot of children around watching us, and on one occasion I saw a little girl smoking and I said, ’Aren’t you a little young to smoke?’ And she said, ‘Oh no, I'm on the dole’. That was a terrible time in Newcastle, the unemployment was very, very big, but it has changed, I understand. I haven’t been since. But the filming is still remembered. They wanted to tear down a car park we had used because it never parked any cars. I don’t know what was wrong with it, but it was an enormous car park, and the council of Gateshead — where it was — wanted to pull it down, but there was a Get Carter Society in Newcastle and they protested, and I believe it’s still standing.
How did you light the interiors?
The... the interiors where we worked were very carefully chosen. They were ordinary houses. The first really very difficult part for me was a very long bar. He... when he arrives in Newcastle, he goes to that bar, and there was nowhere to hide lamps. It was so difficult, but somehow we managed with very small lamps, to hide them behind bottles, or behind other things — boxes — that was a very difficult interior, but other pubs were more easy to do. There’s one or two others feature in the film, because one of the characters works in the pu... in the pub, and Michael goes to see him. And the rest was ordinary houses.

I also — before Get Carter — did Ulysses, James Joyce’s Ulysses, which was shot all on location in Dublin. I forget which year it was, but... I can tell you... 1967. It was shot in 1967 in Dublin. The director was an American called Joseph Strick, who was very nice to work with. We had a five day week, he didn’t like to work on weekends, and we all took flats where we stayed, not hotels, which was very nice, on the weekends. We did our own cooking and so on, and it was a very pleasant film to work on. The extras were again some from the Abbey Theatre in Dublin. The main one was Milo O'Shea who later on also played in the film I have mentioned with Vincent Price... The Theatre of Blood. The Theatre of Blood. Mil... Milo O'Shea played also in the Theatre of Blood... Barbara Jefford. And Barbara Jefford played there too. It was an honest attempt at an impossible task, I thought, having read the book twice, once in German and once in English, but I think it was nothing to be ashamed of. The script was fair and the acting good. It was a film which ran in Oxford Street at the Academy’s theatre for almost a year. We had lovely incidents. One, we had taken over a house to represent it — Bloom’s House — and one day there was a knock at the door and outside was a beautiful young nun, very pretty, and she said, ‘I heard that you... you are filming Bloom’s House in here, could I come and watch you a bit. I am... I am a Joyce scholar’. So the book was forbidden in Ireland at the time, you couldn’t buy it or read it, and she was... a nun was a James Joyce scholar. And everywhere where we went for permits, there was always one official who was a Joyce enthusiast and it was quite easy for us to get these permits. I... what else to say about it. We started in one of the Martello Towers, which were built to ward off Napoleon — the invasion of Napoleon — and never used, luckily. Mick Roëves, who is still acting, as he was the young Stephen Dedalus, and... and again, I don’t think it was anything to be ashamed of having worked on that.

Another well known film I worked on was a short film called The Bespoke Overcoat. That was made in 1950, I believe. Hang on. 1955. Oh. The Bespoke Overcoat was made in 1955. It was Jack Clayton who was given £5000 by his company. He was a producer for Romulus Films, and wanted to do a bit of directing... directing experience, so they gave him £5000 to make a short film, and it was Gogol’s Bespoke Overcoat transposed into a Jewish milieu, and it was shot in a disused church in the Marylebone Road... very primitive equipment, very primitive dolly we had for tracking shots, and not much lighting, wonderful actors, Alfie Bass and Kossoff... David Kossoff. David Kossoff. We got on very well with both of them. I had a wonderful operator, and we had much fun with Alfie Bass who kept us laughing.  We... for instance, he was made up as an old man, and on tea break we went out to the bus stop and queued up in costume, David Kossoff as well. Nobody took any notice, nobody looked at us. We were queued up at a bus stop. It was very difficult to work. There was an upstairs room, a small room, where David...where Clayton wanted to do a tracking shot around the death bed of... of Alfie Bass. He is lying and we had this very clumsy Winton dolly, which was... the room was so small that he wanted to start at the back of his head, go all the way around and ending up at the profile on the other side. We had to move furniture while the dolly was moving, and the sound man had a terrible job because it made noises of course. But Ron Robson, the operator, had to climb over the arm of the dolly, but he succeeded in getting the shot. It was very, very difficult, and we were next to another church which was still in use, and when the organ player next door wanted to practice, we had to stop and send somebody over to prevent him from playing because we could hear it through the walls. The film was very successful. It got an Oscar as the best short film in the next year, and then the following year, and it is still being shown now and then on television and now and then at the National Film Theatre. So, after 50 years, it’s quite an achievement, I think.

During all my film work, I carried a camera wherever I went, and continued to take a lot of stills, as we call them. And had such good chances like photographing Nehru and other heads of state like Beneš, a Czech president who had his government here in London during the war and others. Of course Julian Huxley and Sean O'Casey I photographed a lot, and got very friendly with him and his family. And my photographs found appreciation and in 1982 it was, I had my first big exhibition here in London at the Photographer’s Gallery, which was then run by Sue Davis, a wonderful woman who did a lot for photography in this country, and is still active. I subsequently had other exhibitions. I published children’s books, photographed in... in colour in those days, which was rather early colour. The most known one was called That Baby, about a young boy who expects a sibling, and it was made by... with the help of a psychologist who worked with Anna Freud, and was found very useful by parents who wanted to introduce the problem to their young son, or daughter. There were other children’s books — alphabets — and later I did a book in ’57, I believe, with Julian Huxley writing the text, about animals. That was mainly, it was called The Kingdom of the Beasts, published by Thames and Hudson, long out of print, unfortunately. In those days it was very difficult to get photographic books published because-it was a very expensive process. Photographing was the best, but you had to have an edition of about 20,000 to make it pay. I subsequently had exhibitions in Amsterdam and in Vienna, and a book published a couple of years ago in Vienna, in two languages, which is still about. I think most of your photos have been black and white, haven't they? Most of my pub... yes, my most... all my photographs exhibited or published were in black and white, except the early children’s books, and... sorry. Do you prefer it? I prefer it, and I never learnt how to print colour. I did all my own printing for exhibitions, and the pictures in my last book were all scanned from my prints.

I started out using a... a Rolleiflex when I left school, but soon wanted to use longer lenses for portraiture and for animals who I could get near to, and started to use single lens reflex cameras. In those days there was the Primaflex, a German camera, later an Agiflex, an English camera, which was quite good except I had some difficulty with the spacing of the negatives. They sometimes overlapped a bit, and when the Hasselblad came to Britain, I was one of the first to buy one, and that was my main camera for many years, with three lenses, 80mm, 150, 250. But in my old age it became too heavy for me to carry about with the three lenses, and I switched over to 35mm, a Canon camera. And now I play about with a digital camera because I can put it in my pocket, but I also have a... a more professional digital camera with a very good lens — a Zeiss lens — a Sony camera. On the film side we used Arriflex mainly after the war, even for sound; they did cameras which were almost soundproof.
Has film stock been getting faster over the years?
Film stock certainly got faster for stills and for film. It was quite difficult in the early days to film in poor light, something which can be done easily nowadays. But when the fast films came I... I happened to be in Thailand, I think, and talking to film people. They say... they told me ‘It’s terrible, this film is so fast, what are we going to do? We can’t...we have so much sunlight here’. They didn’t know they could use neutral dense... neutral filter, neutral density filters, or use a smaller opening in the shutter if their camera was adjustable... had an adjustable shutter. But nowadays it... everything has become so small and much easier and much faster. Life has become too easy almost, certainly for producers who send out a cameraman on the job without any assistant or without even a soundman. We... it was, in documentary films, it was very pleasant to work with a small crew of about four to six people, and maybe a couple of electricians, more if necessary. If I... if I had to film in a big steelworks, I needed say 10 arc lights and the cabling of the big arc lights was very, very heavy and we needed a good number of people. But, on documentary films when travelling about, you were practically married to your colleagues, you stayed in the same hotel, you ate in the same restaurant, and you were very close. But on a feature film, you had 60 to 80 people working, although the camera crew was always close, and when you watched a film unit on location outdoors, you saw five people around the camera: the cameraman, the operator, the director and the grip, who had to move the dolly and set up the tripod and so on, and the rest of the 60 people were sitting in the grass watching. Of course many of them had to get up at five o'clock to do the make-up and do the wardrobe and they had done all their jobs and were there in case there was need for the hairdresser to comb the hair or the... the wardrobe woman or man to change the wardrobe, and of course the continuity girl was always around the camera too. They call them script supervisor now.

When we started at DATA — our cooperative film unit — we were lucky to get a commission from the Coal Board — it was the Nationalised Coal Industry, in those days — to make a kind of monthly newsreel about activities around miners. New machinery, social activities like theatres or musicians, among the miners. So, I had the good luck to go down a number of coal mines to film new machinery, how to get the coal out most economically because the high seams were more exhausted than lower seam... seams. But it was very interesting, although very hard. Even if you had a helmet to walk along a lowish shaft, your head bumped the ceiling quite often, and when... if you had to work all day in this seam which was no higher than about five ft or six ft, you couldn’t stretch your legs properly, and to lift the equipment was... was very laborious. But the miners were a wonderful... group of people. They relied on each other to a great extent and they were great friends when they went up into the pub.
How did you light down there?
The only light we had at our disposal were... flameproof 500W lamps which weighed about a half a ton each, and gave very little light, but we were not allowed to use anything else because of danger of explosion, and the only camera we could use was our old clockwork camera, no batteries were allowed underground. The newsreel was shown in about 300 cinemas all over the country, mainly in the mining districts, and the families were glad to see their men at work and get at last an idea what it looks like down the coal mine. On one occasion we filmed a new machine which was an enormous Archimedean screw which dug into the coal seam, and the director said, ‘Wouldn’t it be a good idea if you were in the hole and saw that machine coming towards you’. And of course I said, ‘Of course it... it would be a good idea’. So I went into the hole already made by the machine and saw this thing coming towards me. I had no light in there, so it got dark immediately. This thing was in the hole, but I could see it outside as it came close. Luckily the man knew when to stop the machine, otherwise I would have been minced. One doesn’t think of danger if you are in the middle of a job. You... another occasion I remember was a director wanted an engine — a locomotive — 6” from the camera... end up 6” in front of the camera. So I said ‘This is very difficult to do, why don’t we do it... going away, and have the film wound backward, and it will look as if it is coming towards us’. And everybody thought it’s a good idea, and we set it up all up with the engine about a foot away from the lens, and when the director shouted action, the locomotive driver did the wrong gear and it came towards me. Luckily my assistant grabbed me and the camera in time to get away. Or when you go up a crane in a bucket, you notice that it’s held by a bit of steel the... the width of your little finger, and when you are 80’ up... 80’ up in the air, you realise — two people usually went up, the cameraman and assistant — how dangerous this... it is, to sit in the bucket like that. Of course another problem was stopping it from turning, the bucket. Once you are up, of course the crew down there said ’Well cheerio, we are going to lunch now’ and they were going to leave us up there. They didn’t really mean it. But you don’t think of any danger when you are engaged on a job.

I did a film in India on leprosy, and found that doctors there purposely shook hands with lepers, and the film was made for an English charity, called LEPRA, and the director was a chap called Richard Biggin who... and his wife was our assistant and she took care of getting the rushes away and through the customs and all that sort of thing. She could charm the customs. Usually it had to be done with bribery, but she got away with many things. Anyway, it was most interesting to see the devotion of the doctors. Two people who were really badly off, they were despised by their neighbours. It started with parents hiding children who show any signs of leprosy. Nobody knows how it’s transmitted. I don’t think they still know it, and the main damage is done that people with leprosy lose their sense of feeling, so they... they touch hot pots and pans, or coal even, and burn their fingers. The... nicest thing I remember was a... a leprosarium run by French nuns and we... they gave us a French dinner in the middle of nowhere and during the dinner, one of the nuns went into an adjoining room and came out screaming because she said, ‘I felt a snake around the switch’. So the cook was called and he brought a hatchet and he killed the snake, which was there, but that’s how they... they had to work under such conditions. We met one Swiss doctor who did operations on sinews in hands of people who lost their use of the hand, and he said he comes out every year for three months to work in the leprosarium because he could do surgery there which he — he was a general practitioner — he liked to do surgery but didn’t have the qualification to do it in Switzerland, and he did good... very good work. So I was lucky in my life, as I said before. I had opportunities which nobody really gets in other jobs to go into factories, to go down coal mines, to go into farms, to go into hospitals, all things which one normally doesn’t do. Only I had this opportunity and had the opportunity of taking pictures. One of... apropos leprosy... one of the leprosy... one of the pictures I took on that was used by the organisation who had sent us, for getting funds, and they used this picture many times in daily papers, and they collected a quarter of a million pounds with that one picture. That was very satisfying for me and for them.

When I first came to England in 1935, I was amazed to find that certain trades had a whole street to themselves, like Hatton Gardens full of jewellers and other streets full of clothing shops, and Charing Cross Road full of bookshops. They had second-hand books, out on the street where people could rummage and find something to read or find a first edition for sixpence, and it was a beautiful street, and I decided I would like to make a book on this street and the district around it, which was Soho, which was then full of prostitutes and all sorts of... and restaurants. It was full of Italian and French restaurants, and I wanted to make a book about this whole district. Unfortunately photographic books were very expensive to produce in those days, and I couldn’t find a publisher, although I had a very good writer lined up, Peter de Mendelssohn, but I started making books... making photographs in Charing Cross road, some of the people looking at the books, some windows, what they displayed in the shop, and some characters like the milkman deliver milk and presenting the weekly bill, and the street being re-plastered with wooden blocks and then tiled over. All this sort of activity, and there was a... knife grinder, a mobile one outside one of the pubs. All this gave the atmosphere of the street, and unfortunately, as I said, I couldn't find a publisher. But about 30 years later, a German publisher saw some of these pictures at some exhibition, and went through the... the pictures I had taken then and published a small little book for £3, which was called Charing Cross Road in the ‘30s. These pictures have now become a historical document really. You could see people in the café with their hats on, which they don’t often do nowadays. Some do have their hoods up when they go into a café now, but then it gives... it gives you the atmosphere of the ‘30s, and... I still have requests for these pictures and sell them prints, the Photographer’s Gallery especially, and one of their best sellers mainly with pictures from Charing Cross Road. I am getting fed up with them. They... they always choose the same pictures, and I've got thousands other pictures, and you should see the ones that got away on my travels.

I was mainly out of town, but I didn’t take many in the Blitz. I did do some fire watching on top of 21 Soho Square. We had a bucket there to put the fire bomb into it with some tongs, I believe. But luckily, it never happened to us. Others in Soho were hit, and my own flat was hit in the... in 1940, and was fire bombed and we had to move out. I... to continue the story of my luck, my wife was a wonderful mother, and wife to me, and she mainly brought up the children because I was away so often, working. But the children went to a progressive school in Fortis Green, and my younger son went to grammar school later and my older son went to comprehensive school. And my daughter went to university after school and learnt French and English, I believe. They all grew up to be wonderful people, and I’m proud of them. You didn’t have to say that... And my wife was rather frustrated because she wanted to work too, but having three children was more than a full-time job for her, and she was a wonderful cook, another bit of luck for me. She did excellent Mohnstrudel – poppy seed strudel – and nut strudel, as well as of course the usual very good Hungarian food.

Another interesting project I filmed was an attempt to rid the whole island of Sardinia of mosquitoes. So every inch of water was sprayed with DDT, every hoof print, if it contained water, every dwelling was sprayed inside and out, every cave even wherever people lived. Malaria was a great problem for Sardinia, and it was an experiment to teach other regions afterwards how to get rid of mosquitoes. Now, they drained swamps, they fished for mosquito larvae in ever river and canal, they sprayed swamps from the air, and as I said, every dwelling, every hut, every flat, every house. And I was under the spray, I swallowed a lot of DDT, but I am still here to tell the story. The malaria subsided very quickly. The mosquitoes also disappeared fairly quickly. The poor man I remember who had to disinfect, as it were, the wells and... on each farm, they embedded DDT in concrete and threw a DDT bomb into the well, but the poor man had to drink the water afterwards to show the farmer that it’s drinkable, and he went about all day doing this job and drank and drank DDT. Well, I didn’t come to any harm. It may have prolonged my life, I don’t know. The organisation was vast they had umpteen lawyers and cars and big centres for their equipment all over the island, and mosquitoes did disappear, but in a few months time afterwards they came back on the wind, I think, from North Africa.
DDT is supposed to be really bad for you, isn’t it?
Well, I don’t think anybody came to much harm. It affected birds. It affected their capacity to lay eggs which had enough shell on them to survive. I don’t... I haven’t heard of anybody really poisoned by DDT. But that was a very interesting project. It was... I went there twice, once on a sort of technical film, and once a film for the theatres — for the cinemas — a short version using some of the material we had shot before and getting some... getting some additional material for a popular film, 20 minute film for the theatres. My photographs I took during that work were discovered by an ethnographical museum in Sardinia, and I gave them all the negatives even of that period, and they want to make an exhibition of my work which I took 50 years ago, in June of this year, in Nuoro, a largish town in Sardinia where this... this lovely museum which has local costumes and handicrafts and, things like that, on view for the public. And they have a large photographic library, and also film library, and they showed me some of the films I had taken in Sardinia.

I am often asked what makes a good photograph. It’s very difficult to say, but a good photograph for one person is not interesting for another. I had half an hour’s discussion with the curator of photography at the Albertina in Vienna, which is a very prestigious collection of work on paper. They have a lot of Dürer’s work, they have a lot of Klimt and all the Austrian painters, and have... and started a new photographic department, and they sent me a catalogue of their exhibition. And I — on a recent visit — I asked her whether I could see her. Her name is Monika Farber, and she and two other assistants — other curators — had a long talk with me in the café of the museum because I maintained that about a third of the pictures in the catalogue don’t say anything to me. They are pictures of houses with no people, of factories with no people around... landscapes, which find... I find very boring. A landscape needs to have some interesting light on it and some aesthetically pleasing thing to show.
What is a good photograph is almost impossible to say. There are some people, like my sister was for instance, who had a great talent for choosing the right... the right thing to separate from the surrounding. I have a little bit of that probably, but that is necessary for a good photograph to make an aesthetically pleasing picture, in my mind. Of course, there is thousands of other uses of photography, like in science and in medicine and whatever. We couldn’t do without photography. We can’t imagine what it was like without photography, although recently I was given a book published in Edinburgh about pre-photography masks. People had their mask made to leave something to their offspring, and they had a bit of straw put in their nose and plaster put over their face, and not only living people, but they made masks of dead people too. And there is an organisation in Edinburgh which collected these masks, and it makes a wonderful book to look at. The faces look so lifelike, even the des... death masks. And it was very well photographed by a woman photographer in Edinburgh. So, anything which is done well can be a good photograph. But it needs a certain talent, I think, to see what to photograph and how to approach it and wait for the right moment, wait for the right light, to make it interesting.

I haven't talked about another series I was engaged on for two or three summers, called Worzel Gummidge. It was a series for children shot in Hampshire in beautiful country. It’s about a scarecrow which comes to life when two children talk to it and they make friends with that character. The stories were written by... very well by two famous writers, whose name I can’t remember at the moment. It won’t be on there. No. Anyway, they were lovely stories, and we had a very good time filming it, and we had good extras and good actors on it. Una Stubbs was Aunt Sally in it, and John Pertwee was the scarecrow, and two litt... the two children, one of them became an actress, but I believe she died recently. She was a very good actress, and the boy I think became a curator at the Fitzwilliam Museum which has a wonderful collection in...
What’s the difference between working for TV and films?
When I worked for television, I continued working as if I worked on films. It’s a very similar medium which needs lighting as well as film does. I did a lot of commercials, hundreds of them, and I am still living on it, on the savings I made, I managed to make, on commercials. I never got paid much on films because they weren’t big productions. On documentary films they always said, and it was true, that the films don’t make money in the cinemas, so they had to tender for the film and had to keep it as low cost as possible, and the technicians didn’t get much money. But somehow the... my family managed to survive quite well. We had some good holidays together. I couldn’t afford a proper car so I had to buy a van because it was without tax in those days, and we took a van to the continent and the children sitting in the back, and on occasion had to push when the engine conked out, and resented it that I should sit in the car and they had to push, which was quite a natural thing for them to do.

The documentary movement in the ‘30s was a very progressive movement. They showed up terrible living conditions. The first film I made was about delinquent children in Scotland called Children of the City, and I had never seen slums like that. In Dundee we filmed in a large tenement building ten floors high, and there was one lavatory on each floor, and about four or five families lived on each floor, and one tap — one cold tap – I could see on the... on the landing, on the balcony outside. And the stink of the lavatory was terrible, and the people were very, very poor, a lot of unemployment. The children were of course not delinquent children but chosen for their acting capability. It was the first film for Budge Cooper who was one of Rotha’s people and married to Donald Alexander later on, who headed our cooperative when they split up from Rotha. And she was very anxious, and I didn’t have much experience. It was my first film as a proper cameraman, but I didn’t know the grammar of film, and she was worried when somebody goes around the corner, which way should they look and so on, and had to phone Donald Alexander in London to find out how it’s done. But it turned out well, and it’s still at recent — not so recent — some years ago I had an exhibition in Edinburgh of photographs, and it happens that they could curtain off part of the hall where it was... where the exhibition was placed, and they showed this film there. It was very well attended, the exhibition, because it was on the way to a very popular cafeteria this museum... this gallery had. It was the Scottish National Portrait Gallery. So they had to walk through my exhibition to go to the... to the cafeteria, and a lot of people working around the museum were very interested to have a look at it before lunch or after.
Anyway, after the opening of the exhibition when they had shown the film and the photographs, three women came up to me and said... well, one of them said: ‘I was the wife of one of these boys you showed in the film, and these are his two daughters’. And she had a photograph I had given the boy at the end of the film, or sent it to him, of just his portrait, so I was very glad to meet them, and the boy wasn’t alive anymore, unfortunately, and sent them more prints to give to relatives. It’s nice if something like that happens after so many years. On the Charing Cross Road series, I photographed a knife grinder, and many years later I had a letter from America that she had seen my little book on Charing Cross Road, and the man pictured as the knife grinder was her father, could I send her a print, which of course I did. He had an Italian name, or she had an Italian name. She may be married to an Italian, I don’t know. Well, it’s nice if things like that happen, and I often meet people who say: Oh, you photographed me when I was a child’. That is nice if you get old if you find you have some connection with people in the past.

Another film I forgot to mention was a film just after the war. The foreign office here wanted to make a friendly gesture towards Tito who used to be an ally during the war. They sent out Randolph Churchill to advise him how to fight the Germans, and he advised Tito to give up and give in. Anyway, the foreign office sent all the Cal... all the... Calder-Marshall to write the script. Go back to anyway the foreign office. Anyway, the foreign office wanted to make a film there as a gesture towards Tito — a friendly one — and they sent my friend Jack Chambers, a director, and Aldo... what was his first name? Calder-Marshall? Alexander, no... Sorry, it won’t be in there, but it will be in a book anyway. They sent out my friend Jack Chambers and the scriptwriter Calder-Marshall to Bosnia to write the story of a film of regeneration of the country. They came back with a good script, and they had chosen a farmer there to play the main role, and his family too. When we got there we flew to Bari, from Croydon Airport then, and took the ferry across to Yugoslavia. The army gave us a jeep and trailer, and a driver. And the Yugoslavs gave us a minder. He was a... an engineer I believe, a mechanical engineer. And we went into the Bosnian mountains to a small place, a small town. When we got there we found there wasn’t a single house standing, not only in the small town in the valley, but all around the hills there were only the front steps of farms to be seen. We had to sleep in a tent on the village green, do our own cooking; we got a surprise from a British consul in Sarajevo, and we slept under a walnut tree in the... on the village green. And I had asked the Yugoslav army to give me a little generator to get at least one lamp alight for eventual interiors, but it only produced enough juice to light out... light up one lamp in our tent. And people from all around came to see the electricity, which they hadn’t seen for some time.
There was only the two of us, Jack and myself, who did the camera work and directing. No assistants at all. It was a very difficult thing to do, to go and shoot, sometimes along the... the road on a horse and cart the farmer had, and otherwise on... at the elections they had then and other events, dances and so on. It was good to see the enthusiasm of the local people with the new setup. They were glad to be rid of the monarchy. And the film was about the reconstruction of a mountain railway, which went along the mountain and where... where brooks came down the mountain the Germans had blown up all the bridges. So the Yugoslavs, the Bosnians rebuilt them with wood as a temporary measure. And they had German prisoners of war to help them. They gave them the same food they had — mainly beans — and so they... they just about survived. There were still dead horses lying around, and still dead lorries lying around. And the Germans had put down hand grenades into the funnels of locomotives, so in the railway yards there were all these dead locomotives. And they were busy cannibalising them and rebuilding some of the locomotives at least. The film was called The Bridge, and it was shown here and fairly successful.

One day making this film we came across a woman with a coffin in front of her and... on the riverbank almost. And she was waiting for the ferry to take her dead relative — husband or son — take her home, take the coffin home. That was a very moving picture to see, and I managed to get a snapshot without her noticing, I... I believe. All Souls Day was very moving there. All the women went to the cemetery and cried over the graves of the people buried there. And there was before that a procession around the church, which was also... which was also damaged, and moving to see for me.

Another film I would like to mention was a television film. It’s the first part of The Jewel in the Crown. The first volume written by a Paul Scott, made for Granada Manchester in the mountains of India – Shimla it is called now; it was Simla before, where the British officers went for their summer holidays. Because it’s high up in the mountain on a very steep hill everything has to be carried on the back. I’ve seen a piano being carried uphill. The story was touching, about a British army officer who decides it’s cheaper to live in India on his pension and the film was called... Staying On. Staying on. The cast was wonderful. It was Trevor Howard and Celia Johnson. They hadn’t played together for 20 years since Brief Encounter. Hadn’t seen each other for 20 years, and Trevor was on his best behaviour. He didn’t drink much, and Celia was such a wonderful actress. She moved us hardened technicians to tears on one or two spots. It was a beautiful place... interesting place. The only thing was that some of the crew from Manchester had never been out of Manchester, so they were very unhappy about the food they had, although it was so-called European food, and Indian food was also available. And there was a Chinese restaurant in the town. And... but one day they took over the kitchen of the hotel they made their Lancashire hotpot, and they were happy for a... for a while. The film turned out quite nicely I think, but was only shown on television and not in London at all, as far as I know.

In India I had several jobs. One of the most interesting was a film about the electrification of India. The director was an Indian who had worked for the Shell film unit in London, and whom I got to know there. His brother was a famous actor in India, who had a film studio and made feature films, very interesting ones, not the usual film with dance and... and signing. And the brother’s wife was a very beautiful woman who was one of the eight women who provided all the songs for the Indian films. Anyway we went up to Kashmir to see where the snow melts and provides water down, and gathers in rivers, and then in dams provides enough force for electricity... generating of electricity. So we travelled from right up north in Kashmir to... down to Madras, and further south, and from east to west. And I was the only European in an Indian crew, so I could ask questions all the time and they knew the answers. It was for me very interesting, and even the people I worked with like the electrician, who told me that he lives in an extended family... that the mother really ruled the house. The married offspring brought her the wages... wages they earned, and got some pocket money every week. And the women had to do the shopping and the cooking and the cleaning as requested by the mother. And there lived 16 people in one small house. And that’s how this family worked, something which quite new to me, an extended family. The Indian technicians were excellent, very good, well trained and hard working. I got on very well with them.

I had the good luck to meet interesting people in my job... interesting interviews. The Americans did a series called Wisdom Series — NBC — which first I filmed Sean O’Casey. They brought over Barry Fitzgerald who was the first Joxer in The Plough and the Stars. And they hadn’t seen each other for 20 years, and embraced. And it was so moving seeing... how pleased they were to see each other after all this time. And that is how I got to know Sean O’Casey. I had other... another opportunity. Rotha made a film about the Abbey Theatre in Dublin. We filmed it in the ruined Dublin theatre, because it had burnt down at one time, and a new one was being built opposite almost. Anyway, O’Casey was very nice, and his wife was very nice. We got to know each other very well, and his children. He had three children. Lost one unfortunately through leukaemia, which broke his heart. And Eileen O’Casey was a very good hostess, looked after us, and I kept up the friendship, went to photograph him several times. There’s a nice picture of my daughter sitting on the lap of O’Casey, when she was about 12 maybe. Well, he was one... certainly one of the highlights of my career, to get to know him. In 1939 I was asked by a weekly journal, a rival to Picture Post, called Illustrated, to photograph... photograph H.G. Wells in his home overlooking Regent's Park. And he was very willing to be photographed, and very nice to us. I went with a journalist who then wrote the story in the journal. He even made a suggestion I should photograph his hands with the script, which I did. And we spent the whole morning in his house, and on his balcony, and on the street even. He was very obliging. Other important people I came across was Fleming the discovery... discoverer of penicillin, Alexander Fleming; he wasn’t a Sir yet. We made a film about penicillin, and the group of people who developed it made it possible that it was produced on a... a large scale. The people involved were Chain — Dr Chain — who was an outstanding chemist — and I think he shared the Nobel Prize — and the Oxford five people who analysed penicillin. And I was able to take a group of the five in the professor’s office, which is now in the National Portrait Gallery among other things I have taken.

Professor Chain told me that he really wanted to be a pianist and not a chemist, but had to leave his study as the Nazis took over and came here. That was an important meeting I had and when I was ill in the hospital, St Mary’s Hospital, where Fleming had his laboratory, they were all impressed that I had shaken Fleming’s hand. Other important people were Nehru in his garden in... in Delhi. Mrs Ghandi was his daughter and... was his hostess who took care of us. The interviewer was the former ambassador — American ambassador — in Delhi who became a good friend of Nehru’s, and he came back from America to do this interview for the NBC. Nehru had a couple of red pandas in his garden in a cage... in a cage. They... lovely little brown things and he told us that he sends them up to Shimla in the summer when it’s too hot in Delhi, because they are really mountain animals and don’t like the heat. And... then when we did a film on South East Asia; I met several heads of state, the president of India Professor Radha Krishnan, and Sukarno the head of the Indonesian Republic. That was one of the first things I did for NBC. Sukarno kept us waiting for about three quarters of an hour because he wanted to play with his children. And then he told us that the only thing they learned really from the West was military, how to conduct a war, and not how to create industries. And there he was sitting in a general’s uniform, giving this interview. Another one was Burma, U Nu was his name. That was before the military took over Burma. I went there another time with... with Harry Watt to make a short film for the World Health Organisation. We stayed in Mandalay and that was the really end of the world, as far as I’m concerned. I shared a room with Harry, and there was only a commode for the two of us. And there was a night watchman circling the house, and terribly coughing and spitting all night. They’re great spitters there. Even in restaurants they spit on the floor — in those days. I’ve worked on other projects with Harry, who was a lovely man to work with. He was very enthusiastic in what he was doing. If you remember he contributed a lot to Night Mail, one of the chief... chief people who worked on it among other things. Of course he did some very good features too, in Australia a couple, and here. Other famous people, there was the president of the Czech Republic in exile here. That was Beneš who later went back, but didn’t survive very long. Who else? There is a quite a lot, Horder for instance, who was a medical officer at the Ministry of Health here, quite a number of important people I met, but you can’t talk much to them. You just shook hands and... disappeared behind your camera.

When I was filming at the zoo in London and in Whipsnade we made friends with some of the keepers who helped us to get our cameras in a favourable position. And one of them was the keeper of apes and monkeys — head keeper — and his star was Guy the gorilla at the London Zoo. I went to take some photographs and he kindly let me go across the barrier to put my lens through the bars. He had to be near with an iron bar, just in case he goes for me, because he could reach out two or three ft between those iron bars. But he was very peaceful. He just sat there and I took my pictures, and when I ran out of film I said, 'Oh, I must change my film in my Hasselblad'. And he said, 'Okay, I’ll go and get some more grapes', because he was throwing grapes to him to keep him in the background there. And this iron bar he had, had a hook on the end, and he hooked it on the fence. And while I was reloading my camera Guy came slowly and lifted it up gently, that iron bar, and took it into the cage. Now, he could have done a lot of damage with it. There was a glass plate behind him and he just... but he just put it gently down in front of him. When the keeper came back he noticed that and said to him, 'Give me that back'. No answer... no gesture. 'Give me that back', he said. And Guy goes and picks up a little bit of paper which was next to the bar and brought it to the keeper, and went back again. 'Give me that back', again nothing, but the fourth time he did pick it up and gave it to the keeper without any trouble. He was a great character.
Then it was printed in the Sunday Times, a half page. It was a huge correspondence wasn’t it?
It was... it still is quite a...quite a favourable picture. Virginia McKenna used it in a book against zoos. She and her son had a movement against zoos, and it was used in many papers and books. It’s just a shadow of the bars on his face.
At Whipsnade we went into the fields with animals, and the only time we almost got into trouble was with kangaroos. They started chasing us and we just made it to the fence, and across, the head keeper and I. He was a lovely man, the head keeper, Mr Bates. Unfortunately no longer with us. So I’ve been a zookeeper since 1937 really, and in the early days we got on very well with keepers, and they were obliging. They got a few shillings from us, which they badly needed. Those wages were rather bad, which it has improved, of course, a lot.

I don’t know how I got to know Gerald Durrell, but we made a book together about his new zoo in Jersey. It was then just a plain zoo. He lived in a kind of mansion and put me up there with... his first wife was there and his mother was there. The people who went to Corfu when they couldn’t stand British climate any more. And from that a long friendship developed with Gerald. He stopped supplying animals to zoos, and went in for breeding rare species, dying out species, in his zoo. I met the man who introduced him to zoology, to animals, the Greek professor at Corfu, and one day Gerry gave a luncheon in... in Charlotte Street, about a dozen people and this man had come over — this old man by then — to be at this luncheon, which was very nice to meet him. And his mother was very nice. I got pictures of the whole family, but not of the professor because I didn’t have a camera on me at the luncheon. And when Gerald Durrell died there was a memorial meeting at the Natural History Museum and two... 2000 people turned up. Princess Anne gave a speech after Attenborough, and she said she can’t speak as well as Attenborough, but she knew Gerry Durrell and was sad about his departure.

I’ve been out of the industry now for 20 years or so, and I... well I think it will go on showing films in cinemas. I hope so. It’s not the same thing at... at home on the small screen. The importance is also the... the rest of the public. It’s... It’s different if other people laugh with you, or sigh with you, you know, you’re not alone.

Yes, I’ve had an interesting life, I must confess. Not only that, but I was very lucky, as I said before, to escape fascism in Austria, to survive two world wars, survived the Blitz in London, to meet a wonderful wife who brought up three wonderful children. And I was lucky to be able to travel over much of the world, Southeast Asia, the Caribbean, which I haven’t mentioned in my talk, and much of Britain. And I got paid for it. So what better chances? But of course I was working hard and I couldn’t take pictures whenever I wanted to. I couldn’t stop the car when we were in a hurry to get somewhere, but you should have seen the ones that got away, the pictures. I did get quite a number of reasonably good ones, I hope. And if you have a chance to see my book you’ll find a great variety. That was my trouble in getting a book started. I tried several publishers here in London, but they all said you haven’t got a theme in your work. That’s missing. But there... I came across these Viennese publishers who specialise in books about the cinema, and they liked my pictures very much. And they thought that it’s the variety in my work which is the theme. And they managed to edit it, the hundreds of pictures to about 150, 160 pictures, and make a... a beautiful looking book, I think. There’s a great variety of subjects and also the background to my taking the pictures, which I wrote at their request. It’s in two languages, German and English. And I’m very pleased with it.

In the Caribbean I did several things. I did one time covering the test match, believe it or not. I knew nothing about cricket — still know nothing about cricket — but we were put on a hot tin roof and filmed in Trinidad, which is a fascinating island. And we went to several of the other islands where they played the test match, with the crew and everything. There were two of us. Two cameras so one could take close-ups and the other longer shot. The man who thought he had bought the sole rights for this test match soon found out that he had to let in others like Newsreels, also to take pictures of the same match. He was a singer of Caribbean folk music mainly, called Edric Conner. Very good looking man, bit of a... an actor, and through him we got to know his family there, his uncles and aunts, and nephews and so on, which was nice to get into the home of families locally. And I got some very nice portraits of one of his aunts and other people involved. People were very poor then in Trinidad. One time we stopped the car for some reason and a woman appeared knocking at the window, and said ’See this girl, would you please take her away to England, there’s no future for her’. And of course we had to comfort her and say we... sorry we can’t do that, it needs official permission, and so on. But that’s how poor they were they wanted to part with a child because there was no future for it where they lived. But I had the good luck of seeing two carnivals in Trinidad, which is quite an experience. They last for three nights. Everybody is drunk all the time, but they work on their costumes all the year round, and they spend a lot of money on them. They make some really beautiful costumes, staggering really. And of course, they make their own tin drums for the music, which is also interesting to see how they make the instruments, how they tune them. They could play almost anything on them.
We went to a couple of universities in the West Indies, and I also on one occasion got to Guyana. It was British Guiana then. I think it was for the NBC. I can’t quite remember what film it was for. But it’s a very interesting country. The capital is built almost exclusively of wood, because they have this rainforest. The real country is only a strip near the coast, and the rest is rainforest. And we went to one of the biggest waterfalls. One of the highest waterfalls, not the biggest. I think it's 300m or something, the... the third highest waterfall, Kaieteur it was called. And going there we saw gold washers in the river. There was very little but they say they do occasionally find a little bit of gold in the river. Then the only other thing they had was aluminium oxide near the coast. We got to Jamaica. We got to Barbados and Trinidad.
